                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         TRADE INDUCED STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND THE SKILL PREMIUM

                                         Javier Cravino
                                        Sebastian Sotelo

                                      Working Paper 23503
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23503


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2017




We thank Rodrigo Adao, Ariel Burstein, Alan Deardorff, Pablo Fajgelbaum, Laurien Gilbert,
Sam Kortum, Andrei Levchenko and our discussants Vanessa Alviarez and Marti Mestieri, along
with seminar and workshop participants at several institutions for very helpful comments and
suggestions. We also thank Sam Haltenhof for superb research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Javier Cravino and Sebastian Sotelo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade Induced Structural Change and the Skill Premium
Javier Cravino and Sebastian Sotelo
NBER Working Paper No. 23503
June 2017
JEL No. F16,F62,F63

                                         ABSTRACT

We study how international trade affects manufacturing employment and the relative wage of
unskilled workers when goods and services are traded with different intensities. Manufacturing
trade reduces manufacturing prices worldwide, which reduces manufacturing employment if
manufactures and services are complements. We document that manufacturing production is
unskilled-labor intensive, so that these changes increase the skill-premium. We incorporate this
mechanism in a quantitative trade model and show that trade has had a negative impact on
manufacturing employment and the relative wage of unskilled workers. The impact on the skill
premium was larger in developing countries where manufacturing is particularly unskilled-labor
intensive.


Javier Cravino
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street, Lorch Hall 365B
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
jcravino@umich.edu

Sebastian Sotelo
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
Department of Economics
611 Tappan Ave
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
ssotelo@umich.edu
1      Introduction
What is the impact of international trade on manufacturing employment and wage in-
equality? Policy makers in developed countries are increasingly concerned that compe-
tition from poor countries may be shifting manufacturing jobs overseas and hurting un-
skilled workers. These concerns are in line with the predictions of the standard Heckscher-
Ohlin model, which indicates that, as countries open up to trade, sectors where a country
has a comparative advantage will expand at the expense of other sectors, while the skill
premium will rise in skilled-labor abundant countries and fall in other countries.1 Manu-
facturing employment, however, has been falling both in countries that are net-importers
and net-exporters of manufactured goods. Moreover, as noted by Goldberg and Pavcnik
(2007), the model’s predictions for the skill premium appear to be at odds with the trade
liberalization experiences of developing, unskilled-labor abundant countries.
    This paper evaluates an alternative mechanism through which international trade can
reduce the relative size of the manufacturing sector and the relative wage of unskilled
workers simultaneously in all countries. Rapid growth in manufacturing trade lowers
the relative price of manufactured goods worldwide, and, if manufacturing and services
are complements, it also reduces the share of manufactured goods in total value added
and in total employment.2 If the production of manufacturing goods is unskilled-labor in-
tensive, increasing manufacturing trade can then raise the skill premium in all countries.
We incorporate this mechanism in a quantitative trade model and measure how changes
in trade patterns affected manufacturing employment and the skill premium across coun-
tries between 1995 and 2007.
    We first document three features of the data that are key for determining the direc-
tion and strength of this mechanism. First, we show that for a broad set of countries,
the pace of trade integration between 1995 and 2007 has been quite uneven across goods-
producing (manufacturing, agriculture and mining) and service sectors. While growth
in services trade has outpaced growth in goods trade, the share of domestically pro-
duced services in total absorption of services has remained roughly constant, whereas
the share of domestically produced goods in total absorption of goods has declined dra-
matically. Second, we document large differences in skill intensities across broad sec-
tors: goods-producing sectors are unskilled-labor intensive, as are some service sectors
    1 SeeLeamer and Levinsohn (1995) for a survey of the early Heckscher-Ohlin literature, and Goldberg
and Pavcnik (2007) for a review of the more recent literature.
    2 The effect of relative price changes on the sectoral composition of the economy was first studied by

Baumol (1967). Growth in manufacturing trade is akin to growth in manufacturing productivity, as it
allows countries to specialize in the production of manufactured goods in which they have a comparative
advantage.


                                                    1
(such as construction and retail), while other service sectors (such as FIRE and health)
are skilled-labor intensive. Third, we show that relative to skilled-labor intensive sec-
tors, unskilled-labor intensive sectors (both goods and services) use more intermediate
inputs from goods-producing sectors. The first two observations imply that, if goods
and services are complements, the changes in trade patterns between 1995 and 2007 were
skill-biased, as they induced reallocation of employment out of unskilled-labor intensive
goods and into skilled-labor intensive services (i.e. they induced structural change). The
third observation implies that the effect of a decline in the relative price of goods is mag-
nified by the intensive use of goods as intermediate inputs in unskilled-labor intensive
sectors.
    We quantify the importance of these mechanisms using a multi-country, multi-sector
model of trade. In the model, trade patterns shape the allocation of workers across sectors
that are traded with different intensities and that employ skilled and unskilled workers
in different proportions. Our model extends that of Eaton and Kortum (2002) by allowing
for a non-unitary elasticity of substitution across sectors and for aggregate imbalances,
in a context of heterogeneity in workers’ skills. When the elasticity of substitution across
sectors is less than one, the goods sector shrinks following a decline in the share of do-
mestically produced goods in absorption, as this lowers the relative price of goods. In
the model as in the data, goods-producing sectors are unskilled-labor intensive, so that
a decline in employment in these sectors increases the skill premium. In addition, as the
relative price of goods declines, so does the relative price of unskilled-labor intensive sec-
tors that use intermediate goods inputs intensively, magnifying the effects of trade on the
skill premium. Finally, as in the standard Heckscher-Ohlin model, an increase in net im-
ports in unskilled-labor intensive sectors also increases the skill premium. We highlight
that, while the Heckscher-Ohlin mechanism affects the skill premium through sectoral
differences in comparative advantage, trade also affects the skill premium in our model
through differences in the extent to which goods and services are traded.
    We show that, as in Eaton and Kortum (2002), sectoral domestic expenditure shares
are sufficient statistics for how changes in trade costs, foreign technologies, and foreign
factor supplies affect relative prices in our model. The other key statistics needed for de-
termining the impact of trade in the skill premium are sectoral net exports in skilled- and
unskilled-labor intensive sectors. We build on these results to write changes in sectoral
value added shares, employment shares, and the skill premium as functions of changes in
sectoral domestic expenditure shares, the ratio of net exports in each sector to economy-
wide revenues, domestic productivities, and domestic labor endowments. We show that
the key elasticities that determine the strength of our mechanisms are: (i) the elasticity


                                              2
of substitution across sectors, (ii) the elasticity of substitution across workers, and (iii)
the trade elasticity in each sector. We follow Herrendorf, Rogerson and Valentinyi (2013)
and estimate the elasticity of substitution across sectors from changes in relative prices
and relative expenditures using time series data for the US. We take the remaining key
elasticities (ii) and (iii) from the labor and the trade literature respectively.
    We use the calibrated model to conduct two counterfactuals to evaluate the quantita-
tive importance of the mechanisms described above. In the first counterfactual we esti-
mate changes in trade costs between 1995 and 2007 and evaluate how these changes affect
employment in the goods sector and the skill premium across countries in our model.3
We show that, as in the data, the goods sector shrinks in most countries in this counter-
factual. The employment share of the goods sector declines by about 8 percent in the
average country and by 12 percent in the US, relative to 21 and 25 percent in the data.
More importantly, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the slope of a regression be-
tween changes in sectoral employment shares in the data and those in the counterfactual
is equal to one, and the same is true when we consider changes in value-added shares.
Thus, while the counterfactual misses part of the global decline in the size of the goods
sector, the reduction in trade costs substantially contributes to understanding how this
decline has differed across countries. The skill premium in this counterfactual increases
in almost every country in our sample, by an average of 2.3 percent. Notably, the counter-
factual change in the skill premium is larger in developing countries where the goods sec-
tor is particularly unskilled labor intensive, such as Turkey, Romania, Portugal or Poland.
Finally, we provide evidence for the mechanisms in the model by decomposing changes
in the share of skilled workers in employment into within-sector skill upgrading and
between-sector labor reallocation, and show that the reduction in trade costs is important
for understanding how the contribution of each component varies across countries.
    The counterfactual described above isolates the effect of changes in trade costs on
wages and sectoral employment, and purposely abstracts from other international forces
that may affect these variables, such as productivity growth in foreign countries. A limi-
tation of the exercise is that it requires bilateral trade data to be available simultaneously
for every country, and this is only available starting in 1995.4 This is unfortunate, as
much of the changes in the skill premium in some developed countries, such as the US,
took place during the 1980’s. In our second quantitative exercise, we take a sufficient
statistic approach to conduct counterfactuals country by country (so that we only need
   3 Inparticular, we estimate changes in trade costs over this period following Head and Ries (2001)
and use the “hat-algebra” approach developed in Dekle, Eaton and Kortum (2008) to evaluate how these
changes in trade costs affect the equilibrium of our model.
   4 The main constraint is that service trade data for some of our countries is only available starting in 1995.



                                                       3
data for one country at a time), without having to take a stand on the underlying changes
in primitives driving the observed changes in trade patterns. In particular, we change a
country’s domestic expenditure shares and sectorial net exports from their observed lev-
els in 1995, or an earlier year for countries where data are available, to those observed in
2007, while keeping domestic technologies and factor endowments fixed. This counter-
factual measures, to a first-order approximation, how a country’s sectoral employment
shares and skill premium respond to all changes in technologies, endowments, and trade
costs over this period, relative to the response to these same changes, had that country
been in autarky.5 We show that in the US, in response to the observed changes in trade
patterns over the 1977-2007 period, the counterfactual generates a 20 percent decline in
the employment share of the goods sectors, relative to the 45 percent decline observed in
the data. These changes in turn affect the skill premium, which increases by 3.2 percent
in the US between 1977 and 2007 and by 3.8 percent in the average country of our sample
between 1995 and 2007.
    We repeat this last exercise under three alternative calibrations to assess the impor-
tance of the features of the data highlighted above for our results. First, we re-calibrate
the model under the assumption that there are no intermediate inputs in production. We
show that while the qualitative results remain, the changes in sectoral employment shares
and the skill premium are only half as large as in our baseline calibration. Second, we cal-
ibrate a two-sector model that does not take into account the substantial heterogeneity in
skill and input intensities that we observe across service sectors. We show that, while the
counterfactual decline in the share of the goods producing sector is roughly the same as in
the baseline three-sector model, the counterfactual increase of the skill premium is about
27 percent smaller on average. Our last alternative calibration extends our baseline model
to allow for non-homothetic preferences using the generalized CES aggregator proposed
by Comin, Lashkari and Mestieri (2015), and shows that the counterfactual changes in the
skill premium are almost identical in the homothetic and the non-homothetic models.6
    Finally, we use our model to re-evaluate measures of the effects of trade on the skill
premium that are based on the factor content of trade (FCT). The FCT measures the quan-
tity of a factor of production that is embodied in a country’s net exports. Intuitively, an
increase in the trade-adjusted supply of a factor should decrease the factor’s price. We
use data generated by our model to show that FCT based measures of the skill premium
   5A   similar interpretation to this type of counterfactual was first given by Burstein, Cravino and Vogel
(2013) and Burstein, Morales and Vogel (2015).
   6 Intuitively, this follows from the fact that the real income gains from trade in our model are relatively

small (as is typically the case in the gravity models covered by Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare
(2012)).


                                                      4
can greatly underestimate the effects of trade on the skill premium.7 In our context, trade
in goods increases the skill premium even if the factors embodied in a country’s exports
are the same as those embodied in a country’s imports.
    Our paper is related to two strands of the literature. The first is the literature that uses
multi-country quantitative general equilibrium models to assess the importance of differ-
ent channels through which trade affects the skill premium globally. Recent examples of
this literature are Parro (2013) and Burstein, Cravino and Vogel (2013), who measure the
effects of capital imports when the production function exhibits capital-skill complemen-
tarity, and Burstein and Vogel (2016), who study within-sector factor reallocation across
firms with different skill intensities.8 Our contribution to this literature is to propose and
quantify a novel mechanism through which trade can affect the skill premium: by in-
ducing reallocation of labor across sectors that are traded with different intensities. To
provide a transparent quantification of this new channel, we abstract from other forces
already discussed in the literature.
    Our work is also related to the recent literature that studies structural change in open
economies. Matsuyama (2009) shows that the growth of manufacturing productivity and
the relative size of the manufacturing sector can be decoupled in open economies. Uy,
Yi and Zhang (2013) use a two-country growth model featuring a Baumol effect and non-
homothetic preferences to study structural change in South Korea, while abstracting from
aggregate trade imbalances. Fajgelbaum and Redding (2014) study how changes in trade
costs affected structural change and spatial patterns of specialization in Argentina at the
end of the 19th century. Kehoe, Ruhl and Steinberg (2013) build a model of the US and
the rest of the world to assess the quantitative impact of U.S. borrowing on goods-sector
employment, in a context in which trade costs are fixed. Our contribution to this litera-
ture is to study how trade affects the skill premium through structural change, using a
parsimonious model that allows us to incorporate both trade imbalances and trade costs
reductions simultaneously in a setting with arbitrarily many countries.
    Finally, Buera, Kaboski and Rogerson (2015) document that increases in GDP per
capita are associated with a shift in the composition of value added towards service sec-
   7 Katz  and Murphy (1992) argue that the effects of international trade on the US skill premium are small
according to FCT measures. Burstein and Vogel (2016) point out that, if exporters and domestic producers
use different technologies, measures based on sector-level data underestimate the FCT. We show that in our
context the FCT severely understates the effect of trade on the skill premium even when perfectly measured.
    8 In other related work, Matsuyama (2007) argues that trade can increase the skill premium if the factor

intensities for supplying a good depend on where the good is sold. Basco and Mestieri (2013) study how
asymmetric globalization patterns across sectors affect wage inequality in a North-South economy. Caron,
Fally and Markusen (2014) note that differences in skill intensities across goods with different income elas-
ticities coupled with differences in skill endowments across countries can account for the excessive trade
among rich countries.


                                                     5
tors that are intensive in skilled labor. They find that these compositional changes ac-
count for roughly a quarter of the increase in the skill premium due to technical change.
Relative to Buera, Kaboski and Rogerson (2015), we document that, compared to service-
producing sectors, goods-producing sectors experienced faster trade opening in the past
decades. In our multi-country setup, this makes international trade an additional driver
of the observed reallocation of labor out of unskilled labor intensive sectors and the in-
crease in the skill premium. We also highlight the role of differences in input intensities
across sectors in magnifying the effects of changes in the price of goods on the skill pre-
mium.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reports differences in trade
patterns and in skill and input intensities across sectors for a panel of countries. Section
3 introduces our quantitative model and characterizes how trade and net exports shape
sectoral revenue shares and the skill premium in our framework. Section 4 shows how we
parameterize the model. Section 5 presents our quantitative results, and the last section
concludes.


2     Sectoral trade patterns and factor and input intensities
This section documents, for a wide set of countries, three differences across broad sec-
tors that determine the effect of recent changes in trade patterns on real wages and the
skill premium. First, we show that the share of expenditures on domestically produced
goods relative to total absorption of goods declined dramatically between 1995 and 2007,
while the share of expenditures on domestically produced services relative to total ab-
sorption of services remained roughly constant. Second, we show that goods sectors
are unskilled-labor intensive. Finally, we show that unskilled-labor intensive sectors use
more intermediate inputs from goods-producing sectors.


2.1        Sectoral changes in trade patterns
We start by documenting differences in trade patterns across goods sectors and service
sectors. Figure 1 uses data from the World Input Output Database (WIOD) to plot im-
ports of goods and services between 1995 and 2007.9 Both panels in the figure show the
dramatic increase in trade relative to GDP over this period. They also show that imports
    9 We
       classify Agriculture, Mining, and Manufacturing industries as goods-producing sectors, and the
remaining industries as services. We provide a detailed account of how we group industries in WIOD into
goods and services in Section 4 and in the data Appendix.



                                                  6
                                 Figure 1: Imports relative to total GDP (1995=1)

                      Goods imports to GDP ratio                                 Service imports to GDP ratio




                                                                    1.6
         1.4
         1.3




                                                                    1.4
         1.2




                                                                    1.2
         1.1
         1




                                                                    1
               1995       1998     2001           2004   2007             1995        1998     2001           2004   2007

                                 USA      World                                              USA      World



Notes: We classify Agriculture, Manufacturing and Mining as goods, and all other sectors as services.
Source: WIOD.


of services have grown slightly faster than imports of goods. For the US, the ratio of
service imports to GDP grew about 49 percent, while the ratio of goods imports to GDP
only by about 35 percent. Appendix Table A2 shows that this pattern is pervasive for the
sample of countries we construct based on the WIOD.
    We are interested in understanding how changes in trade patterns affected relative
prices across sectors. We define the ’domestic expenditure share’ of each sector j in coun-
                      j
try i, denoted by πii,t , as the ratio of expenditures on domestically produced goods or
services relative to total expenditures in that sector.10 Figure 2 reports domestic expendi-
ture shares in 2007 relative to 1995 for the countries in our sample (see Appendix Table A3
for the exact values). The figure reveals that domestic expenditure shares in goods sectors
declined dramatically in most countries. In contrast, domestic expenditure shares in ser-
vice sectors remained roughly constant in every country of our sample with the exception
of Denmark and Ireland. In the average country, the domestic expenditure share in goods
producing sectors declined by 18 percent, relative to only 2 percent for service sectors.
For the US these numbers are roughly 10 and 0 percent respectively. We summarize this
finding in the following observation:

Observation 1 Between 1995 and 2007, domestic expenditure shares in goods producing sectors de-
clined dramatically, while domestic expenditure shares on service producing sectors remained roughly con-
stant.
  10 The
       domestic expenditure share equals one minus the share of imports in total absorption. We focus
on changes in domestic expenditure shares because they summarize the effects of trade on relative price
movements in our model. This is a feature shared by most workhorse trade models (see Arkolakis, Costinot
and Rodriguez-Clare, 2012).



                                                                7
                           Figure 2: Changes in domestic expenditure shares




                              Domestic expenditure share 2007 relative to 1995
                                         .5   .6     .7    .8    .9      1

                                                                                         Slovakia
                                                                                         Hungary
                                                                                        Slovenia
                                                                                          Austria
                                                                                          Poland
                                                                                 Czech Republic
                                                                                        Romania
                                                                                          Greece
                                                                                        Germany
                                                                                         Belgium
                                                                                         Portugal
                                                                                          Taiwan
                                                                                 United Kingdom
                                                                                     Netherlands
                                                                                            Spain
                                                                                        Denmark
                                                                                         Sweden
                                                                                          Finland
                                                                                          France
                                                                                          Turkey
                                                                                          Mexico
                                                                                             India
                                                                                        Australia
                                                                                              Italy
                                                                                           Japan
                                                                                   United States
                                                                                           Korea
                                                                                       Indonesia
                                                                                          Russia
                                                                                            China
                                                                                            Brazil
                                                                                         Canada
                                                                                          Ireland
                                                                                       Goods           Services



Notes: We classify agriculture, manufacturing and mining as ’Goods’, and all other sectors as ’Ser-
                                                                       j         j                j
vices.’ ’Domestic expenditure shares 2007 relative to 1995’ refers to πii,2007 /πii,1995 , where πii,t ≡ 1 −
          h                              i
        j         j         j          j
Importst / Outputi + Importsi − Exportsi . Source: WIOD.


2.2    Sectoral trade patterns and skill intensities
We now report how skill intensities vary across broad sectors using data on employment
and educational attainment by sector from the WIOD Socio Economic Accounts. We clas-
sify workers with complete college education as skilled workers, and workers that have
                                                                              j       j
not completed college as unskilled workers.11 In what follows, we let Hi and Li denote
skilled and unskilled employment in country i and sector j. We refer to the ’skill intensity’
of a sector as the ratio of skilled to unskilled workers in the sector relative to the ratio of
skilled to unskilled workers in the overall economy.12
    Figure 3 plots the average skill intensities and the 1995-2007 changes in domestic ex-
penditure shares in each one-digit ISIC Rev. 3 sector across countries in our sample. The
figure reveals that sectors in which domestic expenditure shares declined the most (Agri-
culture, Manufacturing and Mining) are unskilled-labor intensive. Among the sectors in
which domestic expenditure shares remained roughly constant, some are unskilled-labor
intensive (such as Construction and Retail), while some are skilled-labor intensive (such
as FIRE and Education). Appendix Figure A.2 shows that this pattern is pervasive across
countries. We summarize these findings in the following observation:
  11 WIOD  Socio Economic Accounts sorts workers into 3 educational groups: “Low” (no college),
“Medium” (some college), and “High” (college graduate and above). We classify “Low” and “Medium”
education as unskilled workers, and classify the workers with “High” education as skilled workers.
                                                                                               j   j
  12 That                                                                                 Hi /Li                        j              j
            is, the skill intensity of a sector is given by                               Hi /Li ,      with Hi ≡ ∑ j Hi and Li ≡ ∑ j Li


                                                                                          8
                     Figure 3: Skill intensities and tradability across sectors

                                                                                                         Other Services
                                                                                                                    Public Admin      Education




                                                                           1
                                                                                         Construction                  Health




                           Domestic expenditure share 2007 relative to 1995
                                                                                            Wholesale and Retail         Finance
                                                                                                                          Real Estate
                                                                                             Transport and Communication
                                                                                                        Electricity
                                                                                    Hotels and Restaurants
                                                                               Agriculture




                                                          .9
                                                                                             Manufacturing
                             .7            .8




                                                                                                 Mining
                                                                                        .5          1              2              4        8       16
                                                                                                                     j     j
                                                                                                   Skill intensity H /H / L /L, 1995

                                                                                                                                       j       j            j
Notes: ’Domestic expenditure shares 2007 relative to 1995’ refers to πii,2007 /πii,1995 , defined in Figure 2. Hi
      j                                                                                                                                                 j
and Li denote the number of unskilled and skilled workers in country i and sector j, and Hi ≡ ∑ j Hi and
           j
Li ≡ ∑ j Li . The figure reports the average of these measures across the countries in our sample. Source:
WIOD.


Observation 2 Goods-producing sectors (Agriculture, Mining, and Manufacturing) are unskilled-
                   j   j
labor intensive, Li /Hi > Li /Hi . Within the service sectors, Finance and Insurance, Real Estate,
                                                     j    j
Health, and Education are skilled-labor intensive, Li /Hi < Li /Hi , while the remaining service
                                        j   j
sectors are unskilled-labor intensive, Li /Hi > Li /Hi .


2.3       Skill intensities and intermediate input shares
Finally, we report how the use of intermediate inputs from goods-producing sectors varies
across sectors with different skill intensities. In particular, we compute the share of inter-
mediate inputs from goods-producing sectors in total output for each one-digit ISIC Rev.
3 sector using data from the WIOD as described in Appendix E.
    Figure 4 plots skill intensities and the share of goods inputs by sector for the aver-
age country in our sample. The figure reveals that unskilled-labor intensive sectors use
more intermediate inputs from goods-producing sectors. This observation applies to both
goods-producing sectors (Agriculture, Manufacturing and Mining) and unskilled-labor
intensive service sectors (such as Construction and Hotels and Restaurants). In contrast,
skilled-labor intensive service sectors use relatively fewer inputs from the goods sector.
Appendix Figure A.3 documents the finding across countries, which is summarized in
the following observation:
Observation 3 Unskilled-labor intensive sectors use relatively more intermediate inputs from

                                                                                                              9
                            Figure 4: Use of inputs from the goods sector




                                               .5
                                                                                      Manufacturing




                          Share of goods inputs in production, 1995
                                                             .4
                                                                                    Construction



                                                   .3
                                                                      Agriculture

                                                                           Hotels and Restaurants
                                        .2                                                          Electricity
                                                                                           Mining
                                                                                                                      Health
                                                                                       Transport and Communication
                                                                                                   Other Services
                                                                                       Wholesale and Retail Public Admin
                              .1




                                                                                                                   Real Estate Education
                                                                                                                  Finance
                                               0




                                                                               .5             1              2              4    8         16
                                                                                                               j     j
                                                                                             Skill intensity H /H / L /L, 1995


Notes: ’Share of goods inputs in production’ is the share of Agriculture, Mining and Manufacturing inputs
in total production of the sector. Skill intensities are defined as in Figure 3. The figure reports the average
of these measures across the countries in our sample. Source: WIOD.


goods producing sectors than skilled-labor intensive sectors.



2.4    Summary
The data in this section show that the sectors that experienced the sharpest declines in
domestic expenditure shares between 1995 and 2007 are unskilled-labor intensive. In ad-
dition, unskilled-labor intensive sectors use relatively more highly-traded intermediate
inputs than skilled-labor intensive sectors. In the following section, we present a quan-
titive trade model in which these differences across sectors shape how trade affects the
composition of value-added and employment across sectors and the skill premium.


3     Model

3.1    Setup
Preliminaries: We consider a world economy featuring I countries indexed by i and J
sectors indexed by j. Each country is endowed with Hi and Li efficiency units of skilled
and unskilled labor. The final output of each sector can be used for consumption or as
an intermediate input in the production of any sector. Within each sector j, there are



                                                                                                       10
K j industries indexed by k.13 Heterogeneous producers use skilled and unskilled labor
to produce intermediate varieties in each of the industries. Producers differ in terms of
their productivity and the sector in which they produce. All labor and goods markets are
perfectly competitive.


Preferences:     The utility of the representative household is given by

                                            "                                                 #     ρ
                                                          j ρ1   h            i ρ −1              ρ −1

                                                ∑ φ̄i
                                                                          j       ρ
                                     Ci =                             Ci                                 ,       (1)
                                                    j

          j                                                                                                  j
where Ci denotes consumption of the final good from sector j, φ̄i controls the weight of
each sector in the aggregate consumption bundle, and ρ is the elasticity of substitution
across sectors. The household’s budget constraint is given by

                                                                 ∑ Pi Ci + NXi .
                                                                              j       j
                                   wi Li + si Hi =
                                                                  j


Here, wi and si denote the wages of unskilled and skilled workers respectively. The skill
premium in country i is defined as si /wi . NXi are net transfers from country i to the rest
of the world. Note that if NXi < 0 the country is running a trade deficit.


Sectoral output: Each sector j combines the production of its K j industries according to
a Cobb-Douglas aggregator:
                                                        Kj                        j
                                                        ∏ Yi (k)σi (k) .
                                           j                      j
                                         Yi    =                                                                 (2)
                                                        k =1

Final output from each sector is non-tradable and can be used for consumption or as
intermediates

                                                j                     j                   j
                                            Yi          = Ci + Xi ,                                              (3)
  13 While allowing for industries within sectors is not crucial for the direction of our mechanisms, the

quantitative effect of trade on relative prices does depend on the level of disaggregation at which trade
elasticities and the domestic expenditure shares are computed. Costinot and Rodriguez-clare (2014) and
Ossa (2015) show that the real wage gains from trade for the average country get larger as one moves from
a one-sector to a multi-sector model. Following the recent literature on international trade and real wages
(see for example, Costinot and Rodriguez-clare 2014, Caliendo and Parro 2015, Ossa 2015 and Levchenko
and Zhang 2016) we allow for multiple industries within sectors of our model, though we assume that all
industries within a given sector have identical factor intensities.




                                                               11
              j
where Xi denotes the quantity of the final good from sector j that is used as intermediate
inputs by any of the sectors.


Industrial output: Industry k combines a continuum of intermediate varieties, indexed
by ω ∈ [0, 1], according to a CES production function with country- and industry-specific
                            j
elasticity of substitution ηi (k ) > 1,
                                                                                               j
                                                                                             η (k)
                                                                                               i
                                                                         j
                                                                                           j
                                                                        η (k)−1             η (k)−1
                                                Z 1                      i                   i
                                  j                 j                      j
                                                                         η (k)
                                Yi    (k) =         qi (ω, k )                      dω                ,             (4)
                                                                          i
                                                                                        
                                                 0


          j
where qi (ω, k ) is consumption of intermediate variety (ω, k ) from sector j in country i.
Each intermediate variety (ω, k ) is potentially produced in every country, although the
industrial output is not traded.14


Production of intermediate varieties: Producers of intermediate variety (ω, k) in coun-
try i, sector j produce according to the following constant returns to scale production
function
                                                                                              j                   j
                          j                j          j                     j                      j
                         qi (ω, k ) = Ai (k ) zi (ω, k ) mi (ω, k)1− βi ei (ω, k ) βi ,                               (5)

where
                                                 "                                                 #     ρ
                                                      J     h          i1                   ρ −1       ρ −1

                                                     ∑
                                j                                 lj            lj            ρ
                              mi (ω, k ) ≡                      ᾱi     ρ   xi (ω, k )                        ,
                                                     l =1

and
                                h i 1                      i1             γ
                                               γ −1 h                 γ −1 γ −1
                   j                j γ j                 j  γ j
                  ei   (ω, k) ≡   µ̄i li (ω, k) γ + 1 − µ̄i hi (ω, k ) γ        .


Producers from industry k in sector j combine a bundle of skilled and unskilled work-
      j                                                            j
ers, ei (ω, k ), and a sector-specific intermediate input bundle, mi (ω, k ), according to a
Cobb-Douglas aggregator, with a constant share of value-added in gross output β j that is
  14 We follow most of the quantitative trade literature in assuming that there is no value-added in the
production of sectorial and industrial output. An interpretation for why this output is not traded is that
the aggregation of intermediate varieties may be done by the households or the firms directly, so that the
bundles in equations 2 and (4) are not traded in the market.



                                                                12
                                                                                        j
common for all industries k within each sector j. The intermediate input bundle mi (ω, k )
                                                lj
aggregates inputs from all sectors, where xi (ω, k ) denotes the use of inputs from sector
                                                                                    lj
l in the production of intermediate variety (ω, k) in sector j; the parameter ᾱi controls
the share of inputs from sector l on total input expenditures in sector j, and is common
across industries within sectors. The elasticity of substitution across inputs from different
sectors is the same as the elasticity of substitution across sectors in the consumption bun-
dle, which is given by ρ. The employment bundle combines unskilled labor, l, and skilled
                                                                           j
labor, h, with a constant elasticity of substitution γ, and the shares, µ̄i are sector but not
industry specific.
    The productivity of country i producers of variety (ω, k ) is given by the product of a
                                      j
country-industry specific term, Ai (k), shared by all industry k producers in the country,
                                                                 j
and a country-intermediate-variety specific productivity, zi (ω, k ). Note that, up to the
                      j      j
productivity terms Ai (k ) zi (ω, k ) , the parameters of the production function are common
across all industries K j within each sector j. The country-intermediate-variety specific
                            j                 j
productivity is equal to zi (ω, k) = u−θ (k) , where u is an i.i.d random variable that is
exponentially distributed with mean and variance 1. A higher value of θ j (k ) increases
the dispersion of productivities across producers within industry k.


International trade Only intermediate varieties can be traded internationally. Deliver-
ing a unit of intermediate variety (ω, k ) from country i to country n requires producing
  j                                                                          j
τin (k ) ≥ 1 of the good. We assume that trading domestically is costless, τii (k ) = 1.


Equilibrium To construct prices, we first define the unit cost of producers of intermedi-
                                                                     j
ate variety (ω, k) producing in country i and selling in country n, cin (ω, k ),

                                                                  j j
                                     j                           ci τin (k )
                                    cin   (ω, k) =           j            j
                                                                                   .
                                                          Ai (k) zi (ω, k )
      j
Here ci is the unit cost of producing industry k intermediate inputs for the domestic mar-
                                                       j    j
ket for an intermediate producer with productivity Ai (k ) zi (ω, k ) = 1, and is given by:

                                                                 j
                                 j              j
                                                    h
                                                         j
                                                             iβ
                                                                i
                                                                     h
                                                                          j
                                                                              i   j
                                ci        =   β̄i       pv,i             pb,i 1− βi ,

          j                     j              j
where β̄i is a constant, and pv,i and pb,i are the unit costs of the labor and input bun-
dles in sector j in country i. These costs are common across all industries in each sector j
since production functions are identical across industries within sectors. The price of the


                                                          13
intermediate variety (ω, k) in country n is given by
                                                                  n              o
                                             j                         j
                                            pn   (ω, k) = mini        cin   (ω, k) ,

where we have used the fact that good (ω, k ) is perfectly substitutable across all potential
source countries that can supply it to country n. The price index of sector j output in
country n is
                                  Z 1                            1j
                                                      j
                          j             j         1− ηn ( k )     1− ηn ( k )
                        Pn (k ) =      pn (ω, k )             dω              ,
                                                    0

and the share of country n’s expenditure in industry k’s goods produced in country i is

                                        1
                               Z                                                 
                                                          j                                 j
                  j                          j                   j                     j
                 πin   (k) =                pn   (ω, k)1−ηn (k) Iin   (ω, k) dω /Pn (k)1−ηn (k) ;   (6)
                                    0

        j
where Iin (ω, k ) is an indicator variable that equals one if country n purchases interme-
diate variety (ω, k) from country i, and equals zero otherwise. Under the assumption of
exponentially distributed productivities, Eaton and Kortum (2002) show that in equilib-
rium:

                     h                   i−1/θ j (k)    h                        i−1/θ j (k)
                                                     / ∑ τi0 n (k) ci0 /Ai0 (k )
             j          j      j   j                       j        j    j
            πin (k) = τin (k) ci /Ai (k)                                                     .      (7)
                                                                      i0

    A competitive equilibrium is a set of prices and quantities such that all markets clear.
Each producer satisfies worldwide demand for its output. Sectoral output must satisfy
the resource constraints (3). The demand for unskilled and skilled labor across producers
must equal the endowments Li and Hi , respectively. The total demand for intermedi-
                                            j
ate inputs from each sector must equal Xi . The household’s budget constraints must be
satisfied. We fully characterize the equilibrium in Appendix A.1.


3.2   A simplified model to illustrate the mechanism
We start by solving a simplified version of our model to clarify the new mechanisms in
the paper. Consider a version of the model with two sectors, goods and services, indexed
by G and S, with only one industry in each sector. Assume further that the production of
goods uses only low-skilled labor, (µ̄G = 1, and βG = 1) that the production of services
uses only high-skilled labor (µ̄S = 0, and βS = 1), and that the parameters θ and φ̄ are
constant across sectors. Finally, to underscore that the effects of trade on sectorial value-
added shares and the skill-premium can go in the same direction in every country, we


                                                             14
focus on the case of symmetric countries are symmetric.15
    In this version of the model, total compensation to high- and to low-skilled workers
equals value-added in the service and the goods sectors respectively. In addition, from
balanced trade (which follows from symmetry), and the assumption that there are no
intermediate inputs (β j = 1), sectorial value-added equals sectorial consumption expen-
ditures. That is:


                                                                                 1− ρ
                                       vS  PS C S                           PS
                                                                        
                                  sH
                                     = G = G G                     =                          ,    (8)
                                  wL  v   P C                               PG

where v j denotes the share of sector j in total value added, and the last equality follows
from the demand function associated with (1). As shown in Eaton and Kortum (2002)
under our same distributional assumptions, price indices for final goods are proportional
to the domestic expenditure shares:

                                                          cj j θ
                                                 Pj ∝        π .
                                                          A j ii

If µG = 1, µS = 0 and β j = 1, relative prices are given by:

                                                         θ
                                           PS   s AG π S
                                                    
                                              =             ,                                      (9)
                                           PG   w AS π G

where from the symmetry assumption the domestic expenditure shares depend only on
                                       h             −1/θ i−1
the trade costs, and are given by π j = 1 + [ I − 1] τ j        . Equation (9) shows that
more trade in goods relative to services (π G < π S or τ G < τ S ) results in a lower relative
price of goods in all countries. Combining equations (8) and (9) we can solve for the skill
premium:

                                                                                   1− ρ
                                                     1 "                   θ #
                                                            AG         πS
                                                                                  ρ
                                   s             L    ρ
                                     =                                                    .       (10)
                                   w             H          AS         πG

Finally, substituting in (8), we can write relative value added shares as:

                                                 "                    θ    # 1−ρ ρ
                                     vG                   AS       πG
                                                               
                                                     H
                                           =                                          .           (11)
                                      vS             L AG          πS
 15 We   thus drop the country subscripts in this subsection.


                                                          15
Equations (10) and (11) show that, if goods and services are complements, ρ < 1, more
trade in goods relative to services (π G < π S or τ G < τ S ) is associated with a larger skill
premium and a smaller goods sector in terms of value added in all countries.16 The intu-
ition is that more trade in goods reduces goods prices world wide, as shown in equation
(9).


3.3    International trade, structural change and the skill premium
We now examine the central forces shaping real wages, the skill premium, and the sectoral
composition of value-added and employment in the general model model described in
section 3.1, and evaluate what are the key elasticities that determine these forces. We start
by relating the skill premium to sectorial value added shares. Competitive factor markets
and equation (5) imply that
                                                          h      i
                                                               j   j
                                              si     ∑j 1 −  µ i vi Li
                                                   =        j j
                                                                        ,                            (12)
                                              wi        ∑ µ  v       Hi
                                                              j   i i

                            j
         j             wi L i                                                                    j
where µi ≡           j      j   is the share of unskilled labor in sector j’s value-added, and vi is the
                 wi Li +si Hi
share of sector j in aggregate value-added.17 From equation (12), changes in country i’s
skill premium are fully determined by changes in country i’s endowments of skilled- and
                                                                              j
unskilled-labor and by changes in sectoral value-added shares. Given µi ’s, an increase in
                                                                       j                    j
the size of the skilled labor intensive sectors (i.e. an increase in vi in sectors where µi is
low) increases the skill premium.
                                                                     j
    Changes in the skill premium will in turn affect factor shares µi ’s. To better understand
                                  j
these forces we substitute for µi and take a first-order approximation to equation (12) in
Appendix B, which yields:

                                                                                 j    j
                                                                            "           #
                                               1               1               Hi   Li
                                                                        ∑
                                                                                           j
                                s̃i − w̃i   =      L̃i − H̃i +                     −      ṽ ,       (13)
                                              γ̄i              γ̄i      j
                                                                                Hi   Li i

where variables with a tilde denote log changes, and γ̄i ≡ γχi + [1 − χi ] > 0, with
             j     j
             µ H
χi ≡ ∑ j µi Hi and µi ≡ w Lw+ i Li
                                     . Equation (13) shows that the skill premium will in-
          i  i             i i si Hi
crease when the relative supply of unskilled labor increases ( L̃i > H̃i ) or when the skilled
  16 In this example, sectoral employment shares do not depend on trade by construction (as by assumption

they are determined by H/L). The general model does not impose this restriction.
  17 Formally, v j ≡ β j         j j          j         j j
                i      i ∑n πin Pn Yn / ∑ j β i ∑n πin Pn Yn .



                                                          16
                                                                     j           j
                                          j                      H           L
labor intensive sectors grow (ṽi > 0 in sectors where Hi > Li ). The direct effects of
                                                                i      i
these changes in the skill premium are magnified or mitigated depending on whether the
elasticity of substitution between skilled- and unskilled-labor is greater than 1 (which de-
                                                                            j
termines the value of γ̄i ). If γ is greater than 1, a change in Hi /Li or vi ’s that increases the
skill premium is mitigated by an increase in the share of unskilled labor in value-added,
  j
µi ’s, while the reverse is true when γ is smaller than 1.
                                                  j
     Note that sectoral value-added shares, vi ’s, are endogenous, and depend on the en-
tire matrix of trade costs (between each pair of countries and in each sector), changes
in net transfers to each country, changes in each country-sector specific productivities,
and changes in labor endowments in each country. We can show, however, that there
is a set of sufficient statistics that fully determine the equilibrium change in the skill
premium. Appendix A.3 presents a set of 23 equations from which, given changes in
these sufficient statistics, changes in sectorial value-added shares and changes in the
skill premium (and the real wages of skilled and unskilled workers) can be calculated
for any country i. In particular, given values of the elasticities of substitution (γ and ρ),
the dispersion of productivities in each industry θ j (k ), and factor shares in the initial
equilibrium, the change in country i’s skill premium depends only on changes in: (i ) a
weighted average of the industry-level domestic expenditure shares in each sector, given
        j       Kj   j      j     j
by πii ≡ ∏k=1 πii (k ) σi (k)θ (k) ; (ii ) the ratio of sectorial net exports relative to aggregate
                            j
                j        NXi                            j   j            j           j   j     j   j
revenues, λi ≡ 1 +        Ri ,   with Ri ≡ ∑ j ∑n πin Pn Yn and NXi ≡ ∑n πin Pn Yn − ∑n πni Pi Yi ,
                                      j
(iii ) domestic technologies, Ai (k) for all j; and (iv) domestic labor endowments, Hi and
Li . Importantly, conditional on (i ) − (iv), changes in trade costs, transfers, changes in
other countries’ technologies and endowments, and changes in all other trade shares do
not affect country i’s skill premium. That is, international trade costs, foreign technolo-
                                                                                          j
gies, transfers and foreign endowments only affect country i’s skill premium through πii
        j                                 j         j
and λi . Moreover, given changes in πii and λi , we do not need to compute the multi-
country general equilibrium model to calculate the change in country i’s skill premium.
We highlight that this result does not rely on the approximation. We exploit this property
of the model when we conduct Counterfactual 2 in Section 5.


3.3.1       Trade and structural change

We now show how changes in prices and sectorial net exports shape changes in value-
added shares by log-linearizing the equilibrium equations. To facilitate the exposition, we
                                                                                  j
focus on a special case of the model in which there are no intermediate inputs, β i = 1, and
                                     j
make the approximation around λi = 1 (we relax these assumptions for the quantitive

                                                   17
exercises of Section 5, which do not rely on approximations). Appendix B shows that in
this case, first-order changes in sectoral value-added shares are given by:

                                                                                            j           j
                                                        "                         #
                                                                                          λ̃i       j λ̃i
                                                                   −∑                           −∑
                                       j                       j          j j
                                     ṽi   = [1 − ρ ]       P̃i          vi P̃i       +    j
                                                                                                   vi j ,    (14)
                                                                    j                     ri     j    ri

             j
where ri denotes the share of sector j in aggregate revenues.18 The first term in equation
(14) captures the effect of price changes on sectoral value-added shares. If the elasticity
of substitution across sectors is less than 1 (ρ < 1), sector j’s value-added share is in-
                                                                                     j j
creasing in its price relative to the price of the other sectors (summarized in ∑ j vi P̃i ). The
second term captures the effect of changes in sectoral trade deficits or surpluses. Other
                                                                                           j
things equal, an increase in a sector’s net exports relative to aggregate revenues (λ̃i > 0)
increases the sector’s share in value-added.


3.3.2    Trade, the skill premium and real wages

This section provides a first-order approximation for how changes in factor supplies, do-
mestic expenditure shares, and sectorial net exports affect the skill premium. We continue
                                          j
to abstract from intermediate inputs (β i = 1) and to approximate our results around
  j
λi = 1 to facilitate exposition. The change in the skill premium is given by:

                                             1                     h           i
                                                 L̃i − H̃i + ∑ ξ π,i π̃ii − Ãi + ∑ ξ λ,i λ̃i ,
                                                                j     j      j       j     j
                         s̃i − w̃i         =                                                                 (15)
                                             Γi              j                    j


where Γi ≡ χi γ + [1 − χi ] ρ is the aggregate elasticity of substitution between skilled-
                                                                      j     j
                                                                               
                       19                                  j     1−ρ Hi     Li       j
and unskilled labor, and the elasticities are given by ξ π,i ≡ Γ       Hi − Li and ξ λ,i =
                                                                   i
                     j
    j     j
             
 1  Hi   Li        ξ π,i
 j  H  − L     = j        .
ri Γi    i           i   r i [1− ρ ]
    Equation (15) decomposes the change in the skill premium into three components.
The first component depends on the growth of skilled labor relative to unskilled labor,
and captures the relative supply effect already present in equation (13). All else equal, an
increase in the relative supply of skilled labor reduces the skill premium with an elasticity
of 1/Γi . The last two terms show how changes in trade patterns affect the skill premium.
   18 That       j               j     j            j   j
           is, ri ≡ ∑n πin Pn Yn / ∑ j ∑n πin Pn Yn .
  19 That is, Γ ≡ − dlog[ Hi /Li ] . In the case of no intermediate inputs, this is just a weighted average of the
                 i     dlog[si /wi ]
elasticity of substitution across workers within sectors, γ, and the elasticity of substitution across sectors, ρ,
employing skilled and unskilled workers with different intensities.



                                                                    18
                                                                                          j        j
                                                                                         Hi       Li            j      j
If there are no differences in skill intensities across sectors,                         Hi   =   Li ,   then ξ π,i = ξ λ,i = 0.
                                                                                                                             j
In this case the skill premium is not affected by trade. More generally, the elasticity ξ π,i
                       j             j
                      Hi            Li
is positive if        Hi       <    Li   and ρ < 1. In this case, increased trade in unskilled-labor intensive
                                                                                     j
sectors (i.e. a decline in the domestic expenditure share π ii in these sectors) results in an
increase in the skill premium. Finally, the last term in equation (15) shows how changes
in sectoral deficits affect sectoral revenue shares directly and indirectly, as explained in
equation (14) above. It shows that a decline in net exports in low skill intensive sectors
                                                     j        j
             j                                      Hi       Li
(that is, λ̃i < 0 in sectors where                  Hi   <   Li )   increases the skill premium.


Real wages We now show how changes in domestic expenditure shares and sectorial
net exports shape changes in real wages for skilled and unskilled workers. Real wages
of skilled and unskilled workers are simply si /PiC and wi /PiC respectively, where PiC is
the consumption price index associated with the bundle in equation (1). We show in
Appendix B that changes in real skilled and unskilled wages are, to a first-order approxi-
mation, given by:

                    µi                   h            ih           i
                         L̃i − H̃i + ∑ µi ξ π,i − φi π̃ii − Ãi + µi ∑ ξ λ,i λ̃i
                                              j      j      j     j          j j
   s̃i − P̃iC =
                                  
                                                                                                   (16)
                    Γi                  j                               j
                    µ −1                     h                   ih         i
                              L̃i − H̃i + ∑ µi ξ π,i − ξ π,i − φi π̃ii − Ãi + [µi − 1] ∑ ξ λ,i λ̃i(17)
                                                 j        j     j     j    j                j      j
  w̃i − P̃iC      = i
                                       
                                                                                                     ,
                       Γi                   j                                           j

                           j   j
         j            Pi Ci
where φi ≡              j j         is the share of sector j in total consumption. Equations (16) and (17)
                  ∑ j Pi Ci
show how real wages respond to small changes in trade patterns in our model when we
abstract from intermediate inputs. Note that, as established in the previous section, if
                 HG            LG
                            G < 0 and ξ G < 0. In this case, real wages increase for skilled
ρ < 1 and Hi < Li , then ξ π,i           i,λ
             i     i
                                                                            G − φ G < 0, but
workers in response to an increase in trade in the goods sector, since µi ξ i,π    i
may increase or decrease for unskilled workers, depending on whether µi ξ i,π  G − φG < ξ G .
                                                                                     i    i,π
In contrast, a decline in the ratio of net exports to revenues in sector G unambiguously
increases real wages for skilled workers and reduces real wages for unskilled workers,
                        j
because a decline in λ̃ii reduces the size of the sector j without directly affecting the ag-
gregate price index.


3.3.3   Trade and structural change

We conclude this section by relating changes in employment and value-added shares
across sectors to changes in trade patters. Appendix B shows that, to a first order ap-

                                                                      19
proximation, changes in sectorial value-added shares can be written as:

                                                                                                                                         j            j
                                                   "                                                                           #
                                                       h                    i                    h                         i           λ̃i        l λ̃i
                                                                                −∑                                                           −∑
                     j                                       j          j
                   ṽi    = [1 − ρ ]                       π̃ii   −   Ãi                vil         π̃iil   −      Ãil           +    j
                                                                                                                                                 vi l
                                                                                     l                                                 ri      l    ri
                                   h        i
                                          j
                          + [1 − ρ] µi − µi [s̃i − w̃i ] .                                                                                                         (18)

In addition, changes in sectorial employment shares are given by:

                                                                                                                               j
                                "                                                                               #
                                                                                                                           λ̃i                 l
                                                                                                                                          l λ̃i
                                    h                      i                     h                          i
                                                               −∑                                                                  −∑
         j                                j          j                     l
       ω̃E,i   = [1 − ρ ]               π̃ii   −   Ãi                    ωE,i       π̃iil   −       Ãil           +          j
                                                                                                                                         ωE,i l                    (19)
                                                                      l                                                    ri          l     ri
                                                                                             j
                   ""                                  #                        "                                                              # #
                                                                                         Li                                            Lil
                              − ∑ ωE,i                                                                  − ∑ ωE,i
                          j        l
               +         µi            µil [ρ − γ] +                                 j            j
                                                                                                             l
                                                                                                                                                γ [s̃i − w̃i ] .
                                 l                                                  Li   +       Hi                 l              Lil + Hil

Equations (18) and (19) state that, if ρ is less than one, sectorial value-added and employ-
ment shares are increasing in the sector’s domestic expenditure shares and decreasing
in the sector’s productivity. In addition, sectorial shares are increasing the sectorial net
                         j
exports, summarize in λi . In the following sections, we calibrate the model and conduct
two counterfactual exercises to quantify the impact of international trade on structural
change, real wages, and the skill premium.


4     Data and parameterization
To conduct the counterfactual exercises of the next section we need data on trade flows
and we need to assign values to our model’s parameters. In what follows, we first de-
scribe our data sources and discuss how we map them to the model. We then compute the
sectoral factor intensities, which according to equation (15) determine whether changes
in trade patterns are skilled biased. Next, we show how we pick values for the param-
eters and input shares in the model. Finally, we describe how we construct changes in
domestic expenditure shares and net exports to total revenue ratios.


4.1   Taking the model to sectoral data
We take the model to the data focusing on 3 sectors motivated by our observations from
Section 2: a goods-producing sector, j = G; and two service sectors, one that is skilled
labor intensive, j = F, and one that is unskilled labor intensive, j = S. We start by briefly
discussing how we aggregate industries to match the sectors in the model. Our main sam-


                                                                                    20
ple combines input-output data from the WIOD with data on employment and compen-
sations from the WIOD Socio Economic Accounts. We follow Costinot and Rodriguez-
clare (2014) and include seven small economies in WIOD into the “Rest of the World”
category, so that we are left with a sample of 34 countries.20 While WIOD data covers
the 1995-2011 period, we mainly focus on the 1995-2007 to exclude the great trade col-
lapse and the great recession from our sample.21 We classify the sectors of the IO tables
into the three sectors of our model as follows: i) goods G (including Agriculture, Mining,
and Manufacturing), ii) skilled-labor intensive services F (including Finance and Insur-
ance, Real Estate, Health, and Education), and iii) unskilled-labor intensive services S
(including the remaining services).22 Within sector G industries k correspond to the most
disaggregated industrial classification available in WIOD (see Table A1).


Trade data We use the IO tables to compute bilateral trade shares and the ratios of sec-
                                                                 j
torial net exports to aggregate revenue ratio. The trade shares πin (k ) are the spending of
country n in imports from country i relative to total absorption in industry k in sector j,
where absorption is defined as gross output plus imports minus exports. To calculate the
                                 j
net export to revenue ratios, λi , we measure revenues as gross output, and net exports at
the level of the broad sector j.


4.2    Parameterization
According to equations (A.18)-(A.23), the key moments and parameters that determine
how changes in trade patterns affect the skill premium are: (i) the sectoral factor inten-
         j              j
sities Hi /Hi and Li /Li in the initial equilibrium, (ii) the share of unskilled labor in total
labor payments in the initial equilibrium, µi , (iii) the industrial shares in aggregate ab-
                                     j                                            j
sorption in the goods sector, σi (k ), (iv) the sectoral value-added shares, β i , (v) the shares
                                                                                 lj
of inputs from each sector that are used in the sectoral input bundles, αi , (vi) the trade
elasticities θ j (k), (vii) the elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled labor, γ,
and (viii) the elasticity of substitution across sectors, ρ. We describe how we assign these
values below.23
  20 Following   Costinot and Rodriguez-clare (2014), we include Bulgaria, Cyprus, Estonia, Latvia, Lithua-
nia, Luxembourg, and Malta in the expanded ROW category.
   21 We exclude the trade collapse and the recession as the model is not designed to measure how high

frequency shocks affect labor market outcomes.
   22 That is, Utilities, Construction, Wholesale and Retail Trade, Hotels and Restaurants, Transport and

Communications, and Other Community, Social and Personal Services.
   23 From these, one can infer other initial shares, such as φ j and µ j .
                                                               i       i




                                                    21
Factor and input shares We follow the skill classification described in Section 2 and use
                                                                                          j
data from WIOD Socio Economic Accounts to compute the sectoral skill intensities Hi /Hi
        j
and Li /Li , which we report in Appendix Table A5. We measure the share of unskilled
labor in total labor payments, µi , as the ratio of labor compensation to unskilled workers
relative to total labor compensation. We use data from IO tables (WIOD) to compute
σiG (k ) as industry k’s share in total absorption in the goods sector in the initial year. We
                                                j
calculate the sectoral value-added shares, β i , as the ratio of value-added to gross output
in each sector, also using the Input-Output Tables. We construct the input shares in each
                           lj
sector’s input bundle, αi , as the share of expenditures in intermediate inputs from sector
l relative total input expenditures by sector j. The resulting value-added and input shares
are reported Appendix Table A6.


Elasticities Finally, we calibrate the trade elasticities, 1/θ j (k ), and the elasticities of sub-
stitution across workers and across sectors, γ and ρ. The first two elasticities are taken
directly from the literature. We take the industry-level trade elasticities 1/θ j (k ) from
Caliendo and Parro (2015) (see Appendix Table A1). We set γ = 1.51, to match an aggre-
gate elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled workers of Γ = 1.42 in the
US, following Katz and Murphy (1992).
    While an extensive literature has studied how low elasticities of substitution across
sectors can shape structural change, there are three important differences between the
structural parameter ρ in our model and most estimates of the elasticity of substitution
across sectors in this literature.24 First, while the structural transformation literature typi-
cally breaks sectors into agriculture, manufacturing and services, the sectoral breakdown
in our model is across goods, low-skilled services, and high-skilled services. Second,
while the elasticity is typically estimated from consumption data, the parameter ρ in our
model simultaneously governs the elasticity of substitution in the consumption- and in
                                                                                j j
the input-bundles. Finally, the definition of consumption expenditures Pi Ci in our model
cannot be mapped directly to either the ’final-expenditure’ nor to the ’value-added’ data
described in Herrendorf, Rogerson and Valentinyi (2013), a point we discuss in detail
below.
    With this in mind, we estimate ρ from time series data on prices and expenditure
shares in the US in a way that is consistent with our model, following the macro-approach
  24 For example, Buera, Kaboski and Rogerson (2015) use an elasticity of 0.2. Kehoe, Ruhl and Steinberg
(2013) use an elasticity 0.5 in the consumption bundle, and a Leontief input bundle. Comin, Lashkari and
Mestieri (2015) estimate an elasticity around 0.65. Herrendorf, Rogerson and Valentinyi (2013) estimate
an elasticity of 0.85 using final consumption expenditure data, and of roughly 0 when using value-added
expenditure data.


                                                  22
in Herrendorf, Rogerson and Valentinyi (2013) and Comin, Lashkari and Mestieri (2015).
For our baseline estimation, we allow for non-homotheticities in consumption demand
using a generalized CES aggregator, as in Comin, Lashkari and Mestieri (2015).25 In par-
ticular, Appendix F derives the following demand system:

                      j    j                   j                              j
                                !                  !                               !
                    Pi Ci                   φ̄i                          Pi                      0
                                                                                                    
            log      j0    j0
                                    = log     j0
                                                         + (1 − ρ) log    j0
                                                                                       + e j − e j logCi ,   (20)
                   Pi Ci                    φ̄i                          Pi
                     j jl                     jl                              j
                                !                    !                             !
                   Pi xi                    ᾱi                          Pi
            log     j0 j0 l
                                    = log     j0 l
                                                         + (1 − ρ) log        j0
                                                                                       .                     (21)
                   Pi xi                    ᾱi                          Pi

Here e j is a parameter that governs the income elasticity of consumption of goods from
                j jl
sector j, and Pi xi denotes expenditures on inputs from sector j by producers in sector
l = S, G, F.
    Herrendorf, Rogerson and Valentinyi (2013) note that elasticity estimates based on fi-
nal expenditure data are higher than estimates based on value-added data, as final expen-
ditures are produced using intermediate inputs that contain value-added from multiple
sectors. As noted above, the expenditure shares and relative prices in our model cannot
be measured directly with either final consumption expenditure data nor with the con-
sumption value-added data constructed by Herrendorf, Rogerson and Valentinyi (2013).
On the one hand, data on final consumption expenditures includes distribution margins,
but our model does not have a distribution sector (note that consumption in retail, whole-
sale trade, and transport are all included in the unskilled labor intensive service sector in
our parameterization). On the other hand, while consumption value-added data as mea-
sured by Herrendorf, Rogerson and Valentinyi (2013) subtracts the input content from
consumption expenditures, the value of intermediate inputs is included in the sectoral
                                              j j
consumption expenditures in our model, Pi Ci .26 Measuring expenditure shares in a way
that is consistent with our model thus requires measuring how the gross output of each
sector, valued at producer prices (i.e. before distribution margins are applied), is used in
the economy. Appendix F describes in detail how we construct expenditure shares at pro-
ducer prices using the Input-Output Use Tables for the US, and how we construct sectoral
producer price indexes using the Chain-Type Price Indexes for Gross Output published
  25 We note that this aggregator nests the CES aggregator in our baseline model, so that we can estimate
the elasticity of substitution while allowing for non-homotheticities without loss of generality. Our model
can be easily extended to allow for non-homotheticities as shown in Appendix C. We opted to keep the
baseline model homothetic to facilitate exposition, since as shown in the next section, allowing for non-
homotheticies does not affect our main results.
  26 That is, while the value of intermediate inputs is not counted in the consumption value-added data, the

sectoral production functions in our model are not value-added production functions.


                                                            23
by the BEA.
    Figure A.4 plots the relative prices and relative expenditure shares in consumption-
and each of the input-bundles. Both the price and the expenditure shares of skilled la-
bor intensive services relative to goods rose during this period, which is consistent with
an elasticity of substitution smaller than 1. These changes in relative expenditure shares
are similar for the consumption and all of the input bundles. In addition, a similar pat-
tern arises also for the relative price and relative expenditure shares of unskilled labor
intensive services vs goods. Overall, the strong positive comovements of prices and ex-
penditure shares are indicative of strong complementarities across sectors.
    Columns 1 to 4 of Table A7 report the results of estimating equations (20) and (21)
for l = S, G, F using iterated feasible generalized nonlinear least square estimation, as
Herrendorf, Rogerson and Valentinyi (2013). To constrain the elasticity of substitution to
be positive, we make the transformation ρ = eb0 and estimate the unconstrained param-
eter b0 ∈ (−∞, +∞). The estimate for ρ is statistically less than 1 in all of the columns,
and indicates an elasticity of substitution of 0.59 when estimated using the consumption
bundle and of roughly 0 when estimated using the input bundles. The last column simul-
taneously estimates the 4 equations for the consumption and input bundles, imposing
the restriction that the elasticity of substitution should be the same across the equations.
The resulting elasticity of substitution suggest a Leontief aggregator. With these results
in mind, we pick a value within the range of our estimates and set ρ = 0.2 in our baseline
calibration.


5     Quantitative results
This section quantifies how international trade affects sectorial employment, value-added,
real wages and the skill premium in our model. We conduct two counterfactual exercises
to measure these effects, compare the implications of the model to the data, provide ev-
idence of the mechanisms in the paper, and show how our quantitative results change
under alternative parameterizations. We then show that measures based on the factor
content of trade greatly underestimate the effect of trade on the skill premium in our
model.


5.1   Counterfactual 1: Changes in trade costs between 1995 and 2007
Our first counterfactual directly evaluates the effect of changes in trade costs between
1995 and 2007 on the sectorial composition of the economy and on the skill premium


                                            24
across countries. We begin by measuring changes in bilateral trade costs from changes in
bilateral expenditure shares, following the approach in Head and Ries (2001). In particu-
lar, we use equation (7) to write the change in trade costs between two periods as

                                                      "     j         j
                                                                                  #−θ j (k)
                               j        j                 π̂in (k) π̂ni     (k)
                              τ̂ni (k ) τ̂in (k ) =         j           j
                                                                                              ,       (22)
                                                          π̂nn (k ) π̂ii    (k)

where a hat over a variable denotes the ratio of the variable between the final and initial
                                                              j           j
year, that is, x̂ ≡ xx01 . Assuming symmetric trade costs, τ̂ni (k ) = τ̂in (k) , and given values
for the trade elasticities θ j (k), we use equation (22) to estimate the changes in trade costs
                                                            j
from observed changes in bilateral trade patterns, π̂ni (k). We then follow the “exact
hat algebra” approach in Dekle, Eaton and Kortum (2008) to compute the equilibrium
response to these changes in trade costs.27


5.1.1   Changes in trade shares
                                                                                        j
We begin by reporting how domestic expenditure shares πii change in response to the
changes in trade costs we estimate. Figure 5 shows that the counterfactual changes in
domestic expenditure shares line up well with those observed in the 1995-2007 data. In
the goods sector, regressing the changes in expenditure shares in the data on those gen-
erated by the counterfactual generates an R-squared of 0.8 and a slope that is close to 1.
The changes in trade costs also do a good job in accounting for the observed changes in
domestic expenditure shares in the service sectors for most countries, with the notable
exceptions of Hungary and Slovakia, where expenditure shares decline dramatically in
the counterfactual equilibrium but increase in the data. We show below that our results
are not driven by these two countries. Crucially, in the counterfactual equilibrium as in
the data, the decline in domestic expenditure shares is much larger in the goods sector
than in the services sectors for all countries with the exception of Ireland.


5.1.2   Structural change

Figures 6 and 7 compare the counterfactual changes in value-added and employment
shares to those observed in the data.28 As explained in Section 3.3, the declines in do-
  27 Appendix    A.3 characterizes the changes in the equilibrium of our model as a function of changes in
the model’s fundamentals (trade cost, endowments, productivities and transfers). Counterfactual 1 is com-
puted by feeding in the changes in trade costs implied by equation (22), and keeping the other fundamentals
fixed.
   28 The exact numbers behind this figure are listed in Appendix Table A8.




                                                           25
                        Figure 5: Changes in domestic expenditure shares, Counterfactual 1
                                                                              (a) Goods
                                                                                                                          CHN KOR
                                          0

                                                                                                                                 BRA
                                                                                                                               IDN
                                                                                                                    CAN            JPN
                                                  Slope = .78 (.09)                                                         IND
                                                   2                                                                   SWEITAUSA
                                                                                                                      IRL
                                                  R = .78                                                                  AUS RUS
                                                                                                               MEX FIN
                                          −10




                                                                                      CZE                              TWN
                                                                                                                     ESP
                                                                                                                     NLD
                                                                                                                  DEUFRA     BEL
                                                                                                                      GBR
                                                                                                 ROU                    GRC
                                                                                                                 DNK
                                                                                           POL
                                                                                                   PRT
                                                                       SVK
                                        Data
                                        −20




                                                                                          AUT

                                                                                    TUR

                                                                    HUN
                                          −30




                                                             SVN
                                          −40




                                                −40                 −30            −20                    −10                     0
                                                                              Conterfactual 1


            (b) Unskilled-labor intensive services                                                 (c) Skilled-labor intensive services
                                                                  CZE                                                     HUN
                                                ROU                       IND
                                                                         RUS CAN
                                                                 PRT      MEX IDN
                                                                             FIN
          0




                                        SVK                   TUR CHN AUS  USA
                                                                          BRA                                                         SVK                          AUT
                                                                                                                                                                         AUS
                                                                     ESP    ITA                                                                            CZE PRTCAN MEX
                                                                                                                                                                       RUS
                                                                                                                                                                        FRA
                                                                                            0




                                                                  TWN      FRA
                                                                         JPN                                                                                       TWN USA
                                                                                                                                                                      JPN
                                                                              NLD                                                                                GBRTUR
                                                                                                                                                                     ITA
                                                                                                                                                                      BRA
                                                                   GBR
                                                                             BEL                                                                     POLROU NLD
                                                                                                                                                    CHN       KORDEU
                                                                                                                                                                     BEL
                                                 POL                                                                                          SVN IND           GRC
                                                                      KOR                                                                                   FINSWE           IDN
                                SVN                                 DEU                                                                                 DNK ESP
                                                        AUT
                                                              SWE
                                                       GRC
          −5




                                                                                            −10
   Data




                                                                                          Data




                 IRL
                       HUN
                                                  Slope
                                                   2
                                                        = .42 (.09)
                                                  R = .5                                                                                         Slope = .21 (.23)
                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                 R = .18
          −10




                                                                                                         IRL
                                                                                            −20




                               DNK
          −15




                                                                                            −30




                −15           −10             −5                          0                       −30                       −20               −10                   0
                                 Conterfactual 1                                                                                   Conterfactual 1


Notes: The figure reports the percent change in the domestic expenditure shares in Counterfactual 1 on the
x-axis, and the percent change in domestic expenditure shares between 1995-2007 in the WIOD data on the
y-axis.




                                                                                 26
mestic expenditure shares in the goods sector reported in Figure 5 lead to a decline of the
goods sector relative to the service sectors. As a result, the counterfactual share of the
goods sector in value-added falls in most countries, by 8.5 percent in the average country,
and by 12.3 percent in the US. Likewise, the counterfactual share of employment in the
goods sector also declines in most countries, by an average of 8.2 percent. The figures
reveal a great deal of heterogeneity in these counterfactual changes across sectors and
countries, ranging from -20 to 5 percent for goods, and from about -10 to 20 in skilled-
labor intensive services. In most countries, skilled-labor intensive services expand faster
than unskilled-labor intensive services, because in the model, as in the data, the later uses
relatively more intermediate inputs from the goods sector.
    Figures 6 and 7 show that, as in the data, the goods sector shrinks in most coun-
tries, although the contraction in the data is larger. This is not surprising given that the
counterfactual abstracts from other forces that could have generated structural change,
such as productivity growth in the goods sector (see equations 18 and 19). More im-
portantly, there is a statistically significant relation between the changes in the counter-
factual and those in the data, and we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the slope of
a regression between the observed and counterfactual changes in value-added shares is
equal to one (this is also true when we consider changes in employment shares). Thus,
while the counterfactual misses part of the global decline in employment in the goods
sector (which could be attributed to global changes in productivity, AG ), the reduction in
trade costs substantially contributes to understanding how the goods-sector decline has
differed across countries.29 Note that an important fraction of the heterogeneity is not
captured by the changes in trade costs, reflecting the reality that countries differ along
multiple dimensions in addition to the ones emphasized in the counterfactual (such as
                                               j
country-specific changes in productivity, Ãi ). Appendix Figure A.1 shows that the model
can also account for the global decline in employment in the goods sector in a counterfac-
tual where we change both trade costs and global productivity in the goods sector, AG ,
where the change in global productivity is calibrated to match the decline in the goods
sector employment share in the US (see Appendix G).


5.1.3   Changes in net exports vs price effects

As discussed in Section 3.3, changes in trade costs affect the equilibrium both through
                               j                                         j
domestic expenditure shares, πii ’s, and through sectorial net exports, λi ’s. In this section
  29 These findings are robust to excluding Hungary and Slovakia from the sample, countries for which
our trade costs estimates imply a large counterfactual decline in the domestic expenditure share in skilled
services.


                                                    27
               Figure 6: Changes in sectorial value-added shares, Counterfactual 1
                                                                                   (a) Goods
                                                   10




                                                                                                  DEU
                                                                                          AUT
                                                           Slope = .89 (.34)                                    BRA
                                                   0




                                                            2                                                      IDN
                                                           R = .17                          RUS CZE

                                                                                                           CAN
                                                                                                            FIN
                                                                                             MEX
                                                                                            KOR                                              HUN
                                               −20 −10




                                                          DNK                                               JPN
                                                                                                                          TWN
                                                 Data




                                                                                        SWE
                                                                                         AUS                                    SVK
                                                                                   USA FRA                         CHN
                                                                                    SVN    ITA     NLD
                                                                          BEL
                                                                                                                  IND

                                                                                      POL
                                                                                            ESP
                                                                                    PRT
                                                   −30




                                                                                      TUR
                                                                                       IRL
                                                                                         ROU
                                                                GRC
                                                   −40




                                                                             GBR


                                                         −20           −15           −10       −5                         0              5
                                                                                    Counterfactual 1


        (b) Unskilled-labor intensive services                                                              (c) Skilled-labor intensive services
         60




                                                                                                          60




                                                                                                                                                                                              TUR

                                                                                      ROU
                                                                                                                                               RUS
         40




                                                                                                          40




                              Slope
                               2
                                    = 1.15 (.85)                                                                                                                  POL
                              R = .19                                                                                                                             CHN                   IRL
                                                                                                                    Slope
                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                          = 1.02 (.55)
                                                                                                                    R = .15                                 GBR
       Data




                                                                                                   Data
        20




                                                                                                                                                      KOR
                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                                              IND
                                               CHN
                                                 IND                                                                                       JPN   AUSITA
                                      SVK                 GRC                                                                                    USA                  PRT
                                         MEX       SVN
                                                                 TUR                                                                      NLDTWNFRAESP
                                                                                                                                                     AUT
                                                                                                                  HUN                           SWEBEL
                    IRL         IDN                                                                                                      DNK   DEU
                                                                                                                                               FIN
                               BRA ESP     PRT
                              CAN                                                                                                                                                 SVN
                          TWNGBR                                         POL                                                                             CZE
                                                                                                                                                          GRC
                                     BELCZE
         0




                                     SWE
                                                                                                          0




                               FIN NLD
                               HUN                                DNK                                                                           CAN                         ROU
                                     ITA
                                 USA
                               AUSJPN
                                   FRA                                                                                   SVK
                                             KOR                                                                                                                      MEX
                                         AUT                                                                                                       BRA
                                   DEU                                  RUS
                                                                                                                                                                IDN
         −20




                                                                                                          −20




               −5         0            5            10                        15                                −10                      0                             10                     20
                                   Counterfactual 1                                                                                           Counterfactual 1




Notes: The x-axis shows the percent change in the sector’s share of value-added in Counterfactual 1. The
y-axis shows the percent change in the sector’s share of value-added between 1995-2007 in the WIOD data.




                                                                                          28
                Figure 7: Changes in sectorial employment shares, Counterfactual 1
                                                                                                     (a) Goods
                                                                 10



                                                                                                                                IDN

                                                                            Slope = .95 (.29)
                                                                 0




                                                                             2
                                                                            R = .3
                                                              −20 −10




                                                                                                                                 IND   TWN
                                                                                                                   CZE          CHN
                                                                Data




                                                                                                               ITA DEU   JPN
                                                                                                           SWE
                                                                                                             ROU                                     HUN
                                                                                                                          FIN
                                                                                                                        CAN
                                                                                                           AUT
                                                                                                             RUS     NLD      BRA            SVK
                                                                                               BEL          AUSMEX
                                                                                                          FRA
                                                                                                     USA PRT
                                                                                                          POL
                                                                           DNK                           SVNTUR
                                                                                                              ESP
                                                                 −30




                                                                                   GRC                        KOR


                                                                                               GBR
                                                                 −40




                                                                                                             IRL


                                                                        −20              −15           −10        −5                   0             5
                                                                                                      Counterfactual 1


         (b) Unskilled-labor intensive services                                                                           (c) Skilled-labor intensive services
                                                                                                                         80




                                                                                               ROU
          40




                          Slope
                           2
                                = 2.04 (.42)                                                                                                                                                              TUR
                          R = .51                                            RUS
                                                                           TUR
          30




                                                                                                                         60




                                                                                                                                                                 KOR
                                                                                 POL
           20




                                             CHN                                                                                Slope = 1.28 (.54)         TWN
                                                     IND                                                                         2                                                         INDSVN
        Data




                                                                                                                    Data




                                                                                                                                                                 GRC
                IRL              SVK                                                                                            R = .19
                                                                                                                     40




                                                        SVN
                                                                                                                                                                       AUT     PRT
                                         MEX
          10




                                BRA                                                                                                                            DEU
                                                                                                                                                         JPN                     MEX
                           HUN    ESP          PRT                                                                                                                       POL
                                                               GRC                                                                                                  BEL                             IRL
                              FIN                                                                                                                                   ITA
                             CAN              KOR                                                                                                        NLD
                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                               HUN                             BRACZE
                              AUS                                    DNK                                                                             DNK           ESPGBR
                             GBRUSA
                                  FRAITACZE                                                                                                                     SWE
                                                                                                                                                                FRA
          0




                                                                                                                                                                 USA
                                                                                                                                                                 AUS
                                        AUT                                                                                                                    FIN
                                JPN SWE
                      TWN          BEL
                                 NLD                                                                                                                       CAN
                                                                                                                                                                           CHN       ROU
                               IDN
                                 DEU                                                                                                   SVK
          −10




                                                                                                                                                                         IDN
                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                           RUS

                      0                  5            10                          15                 20                       −10                    0               10                                   20
                                              Counterfactual 1                                                                                       Counterfactual 1


Notes: The x-axis shows the percent change in the sector’s share in employment in Counterfactual 1. The
y-axis reports the percent change in the sector’s share in employment between 1995-2007 in the WIOD data.




                                                                                                          29
Figure 8: Counterfactual change in the goods sector share in value-added and employ-
ment, with no price effects
           10                    (a) Value-Added                                                                          (b) Employment




                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                                             IDN
                                         DEU
                                                  AUT
                                  BRA                           Slope = .29 (.15)                                                                     Slope = .19 (.12)
           0




                                                                                                   0
                                   IDN                           2                                                                                     2
                         RUS                            CZE     R = .06                                                                               R = .03
                                          CAN
                                          FIN
                            KOR          MEX                                             HUN
        −20 −10




                                                                                                −20 −10
                              JPN                                                                                            IND        TWN
                   DNK                                                                                                        CHN
                                                  TWN                                                                                         CZE
          Data




                                                                                                  Data
                              AUSSWE                                          SVK
                          USA     FRA                                                                                  JPN
                              ITA CHNNLD                      SVN                                                      ITA     DEU
                         BEL                                                                                              SWE
                                 IND                                                                                      ROU
                                                                                                                                 FIN                                          HUN
                                                                                                                                CAN
                                                                                                                 RUS           NLD
                                                                                                                           BRA MEX      AUT                        SVK
                                      POL                                                                              AUS
                                                                                                                 BEL       FRAPOL PRT
                                    ESP                                                                           USA
                                            PRT                                                                                 TUR
                                                                                                           DNK              ESP                 SVN
           −30




                                                                                                   −30
                                                                                                          GRC        KOR
                                         TUR
                               IRL ROU
                  GRC
                                                                                                                    GBR
           −40




                                                                                                   −40
                           GBR                                                                                         IRL


                  −10               0           10          20                      30                    −10                0             10          20                 30
                                        Counterfactual 1, ρ=1                                                                    Counterfactual 1, ρ=1


Notes: The x-axes reports the percent change in the goods sector’s share in value-added and employment
in a version of Counterfactual 1 where we set ρ = 1. The y-axes report the percent change in the goods
sector share in value-added and employment between 1995-2007 in the WIOD data.


we disentangle the contribution of these two effects to the results presented above. To do
so, we re-compute Counterfactual 1 in a calibration where the elasticity of substitution
across sectors is set to ρ = 1, so that sectorial absorption shares are constant. As noted
in equations (18) and (19), in this case trade only affects value-added and employment
                                                        j
shares through sectorial net exports, summarized in λi .
    Figure 8 presents the counterfactual changes in the share of the goods sector in value-
added and employment in this calibration. The goods sector grows for about half of the
countries: on average it increases by 1.1 percent in terms of its share in value-added,
and by 0.9 percent in terms of its share in employment. This stands in contrast to the
results in Figures 6 and 7, where the goods sector shrinks in most countries. In addition,
both the slope and the R-squared of the regression between the counterfactual predictions
and the data fall dramatically relative to the baseline calibration. We conclude that price
effects play an important role in shaping how the sectorial composition of the economy is
affected by trade.


5.1.4   Changes in the skill premium and within-sector skill-upgrading

Figure 9 and Table A9 present the changes in the skill premium and real wages in Coun-
terfactual 1. The figure relates the counterfactual change in the skill premium, wsˆi , to the
                                                                                                                                                                          i
                                                                                                                                      LiG      HiG
skill intensity in the goods sector in each country, measured by    −      The reduction in                                           Li       Hi .
trade costs increases the skill premium for almost all countries in the sample, by an aver-


                                                                                           30
                    Figure 9: Change in the skill premium, Counterfactual 1




                                         10
                                                                                                                        TUR


                                                                                                                        ROU




                             Change in Skill premium
                                                                              IRL
                                                                                                   SVN
                                                                                                   PRT            IND




                                               5
                                                                                                         POL
                                                                                            GRC

                                                                                           MEX                      CHN
                                                                                    ITA
                                                                                                           IDN
                                                                GBR AUS ESPAUT
                                                                           SWECZE          BRA
                                                                BEL FRA
                                                                      KORFIN                 RUS
                                                             USA
                                                              DEUJPN CANDNK
                                                                        NLD          TWN


                                 0                                           SVK

                                                                                HUN
                                         −5



                                                       0        .1        .2        .3      .4       .5                       .6
                                                                                                 G      G
                                                           Skill intensity in the goods sector: L /L − H /H

Notes: The figure reports the percent change in the skill premium in Counterfactual 1 in the y-axis, and the
                                                                                     LiG         HiG
relative skill intensity of the goods sector, given by                               Li    −     Hi ,    in 1995 on the x-axis.


age of 3.2 percent. The notable exceptions are Slovakia and Hungary, countries for which
the high-skill intensive sector shrinks in the counterfactual equilibrium. The change in
the skill premium is especially large in developing countries where the goods sector is
particularly unskilled-labor intensive, such as Turkey, Romania, Portugal or Poland. In
the US, the counterfactual generates a modest increase in the skill premium of 0.8 percent.
Columns 2 and 3 in first panel of Table A9 report the predicted changes in real wages for
skilled and unskilled workers in this Counterfactual. Note that, while in most countries
the counterfactual skill premium increases, unskilled workers gain from the reduction in
trade costs in all countries.
    To understand the size of the change of the skill premium in this counterfactual, con-
sider equation (15) again. The change in the skill premium depends on the sectoral skill
intensities in the initial equilibrium and the changes in domestic expenditure shares. Fig-
ure 9 reflects this result, showing that skill intensity in 1995 is positively correlated with
the counterfactual changes in the skill premium. Since by 1995 the fraction of both types
of workers in the goods sectors was already very small in most developed countries, the
decline of the goods sector on wages in those countries has a limited effect. Unfortunately,
we cannot extend this counterfactual back in time, since bilateral data on service trade for
many of our countries is only available starting in 1995. In the next section, we build on
the theoretical results from Section 3 and take a sufficient statistic approach for measuring
the effects of trade on the skill premium.




                                                                                     31
5.1.5       Inspecting the mechanisms: within-sector skill upgrading vs between-sector re-
            allocation

We conclude this section by providing additional evidence on the mechanisms through
which changes in trade patterns affect the skill premium in the model. As in the Heckscher-
Ohlin model, trade affects the skill premium in our model by inducing reallocation of la-
bor from unskilled labor intensive sectors to skilled labor intensive sectors. If trade were
the only driver of the observed changes in the skill premium, we should expect to see
labor reallocating from unskilled labor intensive sectors to skilled labor intensive sectors,
coupled skill downgrading within each sector (due to the rise in the skill premium). A
large and influential literature has measured the extent of within-sector skill upgrading
and between-sector factor reallocation and argued that, since most of the shift in demand
for skilled labor is accounted for by within sector skill upgrading, the increase in the
skill premium is likely to be driven by skill biased technical change.30 While this view
is consistent with a version of our model that incorporates global skill biased technical
change, we ask instead: can trade account for the observed differences in within-sector
skill upgrading across countries? The answer speaks directly to our mechanism, since the
model predicts that, other things equal, between reallocation should be larger the larger
the change in trade costs in the goods sector (and hence the contribution of within skill
upgrading should be smaller).
    With this objective in mind, we decompose changes in the share of skilled labor in
employment, HE,i ≡ H H+i L , into changes in skilled labor shares within each industry,
                                     i   i
                  j
 j            Hi                                                             j
HE,i    ≡     j       j   , and changes in employment shares ωE,i between industries. That is:
            Hi + Li




                                                   ∑ ∆HE,i ω̄E,i + ∑ ∆ωE,i H̄E,i ,
                                                           j     j                  j      j
                                         ∆HE,i =                                                       (23)
                                                    j                    j
                                                   |     {z          }   |         {z          }
                                                        within                   between

where ∆x ≡ xt1 − xt0 denotes the change of a variable between periods t1 and t0 , and
     xt + xt
x̄ ≡ 1 2 0 is the average value of the variable across periods. We compare the outcomes
of this decomposition in the data and in a version of the counterfactual that incorporates
changes in factor supplies.
    Figure 10 shows the contribution of within-sector reallocation to the change in the
  30 See e.g.     Berman, Bound and Griliches (1994), Attanasio, Goldberg and Pavcnik (2004) and Haltiwanger
et al. (2004).




                                                               32
Figure 10: Contribution of within sector skill upgrading to changes in the high skilled
labor demand
                         (a) With changes in trade costs                                                               (b) Without changes in trade costs
                                                                         IDN                                                                                                            IDN



                        1




                                                                                                                           1
                                                                   RUS    CAN                                                                                                        RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                    CAN
                                                                                                         SVK                                                                                         SVK
                                                                       SWEKORJPN
                                                                 ESP CHN
                                                                      GBR                                                                                             ESP   SWECHN
                                                                                                                                                                               GBR    JPN
                                                                         FRA                                                                                                   FRA KOR
                                  IRL                                       USA                                                       IRL                                                USA
                                                                       AUS                                                                                                             AUS
                        .8




                                                                                                                           .8
                                                                        NLD                                                                                       NLD
                                                         POL       ITA TWN       FIN                                                                         POL            ITA                   FIN
                                                                                                                                                                 TWN
                 Data




                                                                                                                    Data
                                                                             DNK                                                                                                 DNK
                                                                     AUT    CZE
                                                                             BRA                   HUN                                                                        HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                AUT        CZE BRA
                                    ROU                                                                                                                               ROU
                                                                               BEL                                                                                                                   BEL

                                        IND        SVN                          DEU                                                                                   SVN   IND               DEU
                                                         TUR                                                                                                                                   TUR
                        .6




                                                                                                                           .6
                                                   GRC                                                                                                          GRC

                                                          PRT                      Slope
                                                                                    2
                                                                                         = .39 (.18)                                                                              PRT   Slope
                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                              = .08 (.46)
                                                                                   R = .12                                                                                              R =0
                        .4




                                                                                                                           .4
                             .7               .8                .9             1             1.1             1.2                .85                .9           .95                     1                  1.05
                                              Counterfactual with changes in H/L                                                                Counterfactual with changes in H/L



Notes: The first panel reports the observed within contribution, defined in footnote 31 in the y-axis, and
the within contribution in a counterfactual that incorporates changes in labor supplies and changes in trade
costs in the x-axis. The second panel reports the observed within contribution in the y-axis, and the within
contribution in a counterfactual that incorporates changes in labor supplies and but does not incorporate
changes in trade costs in the x-axis.


skilled share of total employment.31 The first panel of the figure shows a positive relation
between the contribution of within-sector skill upgrading in the counterfactual and in
the data. The second panel shows that, if we simulate the model without changes in
trade costs, the correlation between the counterfactual and the data falls dramatically.
We conclude that reductions in trade costs are an important factor in accounting for the
cross-country variation in the contribution of within-sector skill upgrading.


5.2       Counterfactual 2: Using observed changes in trade patterns as suf-
          ficient statistics
Our second counterfactual uses the analytical results from Section 3 and equations (A.18)-
(A.23) in the Appendix to calculate how the skill premium and sectoral value-added and
employment shares change in response to a given change in domestic expenditure shares
                                        j        j
and changes in sectorial net exports, π̂ii and λ̂i . We conduct this counterfactual country
  31 We   define the contribution of within-sector reallocation as the first term in the following expression:
                                                                                                   j     j                                  j      j
                                                                                     ∑ j ∆HE,i ω̄E,i   ∑ j ∆ωE,i H̄E,i
                                                                     1=                              +                 ,
                                                                                         ∆HE,i             ∆HE,i
                                                                                     |    {z       }   |    {z       }
                                                                                within contribution                 between contribution

which we obtain by dividing both sides of decomposition (23) by the total change in the skill labor share. For
this exercise, we simulate changes in the factors supplies along with changes in trade costs, and compute
the contribution of within and between reallocation in the model and in the data.


                                                                                                               33
                                                   j         j
by country, using observed changes in π̂ii and λ̂i between 1995 and 2007. Importantly, in
this counterfactual, we do not require a balanced panel because we do not need data for
other countries n 6= i when solving for the change in the skill premium in country i. This
allows us to explore a broader notion of the impact of trade on structural change and the
skill premium, as well as to extend time period for a subset of countries for which data
on services trade is available prior to 1995.
      A disadvantage of this counterfactual relative to our first exercise is that changes
        j          j
in π̂ii and λ̂i depend not only on international factors, but also potentially depend on
changes domestic fundamentals. We note however that this exercise quantifies the im-
pact of international trade and trade imbalances on sectoral revenue shares and real
wages
n          over a giveno period in the following specific
                                                     n       way.32 Fix othe model’s parameters
     j           j lj                                    j      j        j
  σi (k ) , ρ, β i , αi , sectoral factor intensities Hi /Hi , Li /Li , µi , and sectoral revenue
           n o
              j
shares ri . Suppose that between two years the primitives of the model –trade costs,
technologies, factor endowments and transfers– change in some unobserved manner.
These
n o changes in primitives will       n o  cause changes in domestic sectoral
                                                                           n expenditure
                                                                                o          shares,
      j                                 j                                     j
  π̃ ii , sectorial net-exports, λ̃i , sectoral value-added shares ṽi , factor payments
                            n o
                               j
{s̃i , w̃i } and prices P̃i . Now consider a counterfactual environment in which coun-
try i is in autarky. Suppose that the same changes in the unobserved primitives occur,
excluding the changes in trade costs and transfers (which are always set to infinity and
zero respectively in this autarky scenario). The changes in primitives will cause changes
                 0
n country i s sectoral
in                          o revenue shares, factor payments and prices which we denote by
     A,j    A      A    A,j
  ṽi , s̃i , w̃i , P̃i      . Then, the difference in the change in the skill premium between
the environment in which country i trades and the counterfactual environment in which
it is in autarky is given by


                                                        ∑ ξ i,π π̃ii + ∑ ξ i,λ λ̃i .
                                         A
                                         ^   A =             j    j          j    j
                                i /wi − si /wi
                               s]                                                                   (24)
                                                         j               j


    Equation (24) answers the question: What are the additional effects of changes in prim-
itives on the skill premium and real wages in an open economy relative to the effects in a
closed economy? From equation (24), we can answer this question (to a first order approx-
imation) using observable changes in domestic sectoral expenditure shares and revenue
to absorption ratios, with no need to observe the underlying changes in primitives. Table
A4 presents the changes in πiiG and λiG used to conduct this quantitative exercise.
  32 The   discussion that follows is based on Corollary 1 in Burstein, Cravino and Vogel (2013).




                                                       34
                                                                           Figure 11: Trade and structural change, Counterfactual 2
                                                                              (a) Value-added                                                                                                                               (b) Employment
                                                         10




                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
          Pct. change in value added share, goods sector




                                                                                                                                                          Pct. change in employment share, goods sector
                                                                                                                                           KOR                                                                                                                                           KOR
                                                                                                                                        IDN
                                                                                                                                          BRA                                                                                                                                         IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BRA
                                                                                                                      CZE                                                                                                                                         CZE
                                                                                                                                                CHN                                                                                                                                           CHN
                                                                                                                      DEU                                                                                                                                         DEU
                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                        TWN                                                                                                                                         TWN
                                                                                                                       NLD            JPN                                                                                                                          NLD
                                                                                                                             RUS                                                                                                                                          RUS    INDJPN
                                                                                                                                   IND
                                                                                                                                ITA
                                                                                                                               SWE                                                                                                                                          ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SWE
                                                                                                                        FIN          CAN                                                                                                                            FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MEX       CAN
                                −10




                                                                                                                          MEX




                                                                                                                                                                               −10
                                                                                                                            AUS                                                                                                                                         AUS
                                                                                                       POL                                                                                                                                            POL ROU
                                                                                                             ROU                                                                                                                  TUR     AUT
                                                                                           AUT   SVK                FRA                                                                                                                         SVK              FRA
                                                                                   TUR                                        USA                                                                                                                                          USA
                                                                                                                   BEL        IRL                                                                                                                               BEL        IRL
                                                                                                                     ESP                                                                                                                                          ESP
                   −20




                                                                                                                                                                   −20
                                                                                                             DNK                                                                                                                                         DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PRT
                                                                                                   PRT                                                                                                                    HUN
                                                                           HUN
                                                                                                                GBR                                                                                                                                       GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GBR
                                                                                                              GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                             SVN
        −30




                                                                                                                                                       −30
                                                              SVN

                                                                    −30                 −20                   −10                           0                                                                      −30                 −20                   −10                          0
                                                                      Pct. change in domestic expenditure share, goods sector                                                                                        Pct. change in domestic expenditure share, goods sector




Notes: The figures report the percent change in the share of value-added and employment in the goods
sector in Counterfactual 2. The x-axis reports the weighted change in domestic expenditure shares for each
                                                                                                     j
country, π̂iiG , and the y-axis reports the change in value-added and employment shares, v̂iG and ω̂ i,E .


5.2.1   Observed changes in trade patterns, structural change and the skill premium
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    j
We start by showing the results of the counterfactual when we use the changes in π̂ii
         j
and λ̂i we observe between 1995 and 2007 for each country. The predictions of the sec-
                                                        j       j
ond counterfactual in response to the changes in πii and λi are summarized in Figure
11. Dots in the figure relate the counterfactual changes in sectoral value-added shares,
  j
v̂i , to the counterfactual changes in the domestic expenditure shares in the goods sector.
For the average country in our sample, the counterfactual share of the goods sector in
value-added declines by approximately a 10 percent. Larger declines in the domestic ex-
penditure shares in the goods sector are associated with larger declines of the size of the
goods sector. The decline of the goods sector is larger for those countries that experienced
a large increase in their goods-trade deficits, such as the US.
      The counterfactual changes in the skill premium are summarized in Figure 12. For
the average country in our sample, the model generates a 3.8 percent increase in the skill
premium in response to the observed changes in trade patterns. Note that the increase is
larger in countries with large declines in domestic expenditure shares, such as Hungary,
Turkey and Slovenia. The change in the skill premium is especially large in developing
countries where the good producing sectors are particularly unskilled labor intensive,
with the exception of China and Indonesia, where domestic expenditure shares are con-
stant or mildly increase. For most countries, international factors summarized in these
changes either increased the skill premium or had a negligible effect on it. For the skill
premium, these changes are larger on average than those in the first counterfactual. For


                                                                                                                                                  35
                    Figure 12: Change in the skill premium, Counterfactual 2

                                                                                               SVN

                                                                                                                     ROU
                                                                                                                      TUR




                         Change in Skill premium
                                                                             HUN               PRT             IND




                                             10
                                                                                        GRC           POL




                                    5
                                                                       AUTSVK
                                                                           IRL
                                                            GBR       ESP              MEX
                                                                    DNK
                                                            BEL FRA             ITA
                                                                 AUSNLDSWE
                                                                     FIN                RUS
                                                         USA     CAN             TWN
                                                          DEUJPN
                           0


                                                                          CZE                                    CHN
                                                                 KOR
                                                                                       BRA

                                                                                                       IDN
                                     −5




                                                   0        .1        .2        .3      .4       .5                         .6
                                                                                             G      G
                                                       Skill intensity in the goods sector: L /L − H /H

Notes: The figure reports the percent change in the skill premium in Counterfactual 2 in the y-axis, and the
                                                                                 LiG         HiG
relative skill intensity of the goods sector, given by                           Li    −     Hi ,   in 1995.


structural change, the difference depends on the country. The reason is that this counter-
factual takes into account all the effects of changes in trade patterns, rather than focusing
on those that arise from changes in trade costs. For example, even with constant trade
costs, cross-country changes in productivity can increase or decrease net exports. In the
next section, we further extend this exercise to go back in time for countries in which data
on both IO tables and employment shares are available.


5.2.2     Trade patterns, structural change and the skill premium over longer horizons

We conclude this section by extending the second counterfactual to go further back in
time.33 Given the large reallocation of activity away from the goods sectors in developed
countries in the decades before 1995 (e.g. in the US and the UK), our previous exercise
might underestimate the role that trade has played in those countries. With the sufficient
statistic approach, we can conduct the second counterfactual for individual countries for
which the required data are available.
    Table 1 reports the results of this exercise. Not surprisingly, for these countries, the
decline in domestic expenditure shares is larger over this longer period. As a consequence
the associated decline in value-added and employment shares in the goods sector are
  33 We  bring in Input-Output data from the OECD, for which the start year ranges from 1977 to 1990,
depending on the country. We combine it with data on employment and compensation from KLEMS. We
process these data in the same way as described in Section 4. Only 6 countries contain data from both
sources.

                                                                                  36
Table 1: Percent changes in trade patterns, structural change and the skill premium, 1977-
2007


 Country          Initial      Domestic          Value added     Employment        Skill      Gains from
                  Year      Expenditure share       share          share         Premium      trade ratio
 Australia        1986            -6.32               1.78          1.83            0.49         1.10
 Canada           1981           -22.22             -15.61         -15.22           4.38         1.31
 Denmark          1980           -30.71             -25.53         -25.26           6.89         1.26
 Great Britain    1979           -20.10             -23.89         -23.54           6.59         1.38
 Italy            1985            -7.80              -0.77          -0.67           2.02         1.25
 Japan            1980            -2.58               1.35          1.33           -0.09         0.97
 Netherlands      1981           -34.54             -20.18         -19.75           6.61         1.27
 United States    1977           -10.80             -20.09         -19.65           3.14         1.45
Notes: The table reports counterfactual change in Counterfactual 2, starting as indicated in the column
“Initial Year”. The first three columns refer to the goods-producing sector.


larger than those in Figure 11. In the US, the manufacturing employment share declines
by 20 percent in this counterfactual, relative to the 45 percent that we see over this period.
In addition, since for these countries the share of employment in the goods sector was
larger at the beginning of this sample than in 1995, the elasticity of the skill premium
with respect to changes in domestic expenditure shares in the goods sector is larger than
in the previous counterfactual (see equation 15). Therefore, the associated increase in
the skill-premium is also larger for all countries. Although the increase of 3.1 percent in
the US skill premium over this period is now is much larger than before, it is still small
relative to the 40 percent estimated by Krueger et al. (2010) for the 1980-2006 period.


5.3    Alternative parameterizations
This section evaluates the importance of our modeling choices for our quantitative re-
sults. First, we evaluate the quantitative importance of incorporating intermediate inputs
into the model. Second, we evaluate the importance of the differences in skill and in-
put intensities across the service sectors by simulating a two sector model in which the
skilled and unskilled labor intensive services are aggregated into a single sector. Finally,
we evaluate how our results change if we allow for non-unitary income elasticities in
consumption demand. Under these alternative calibrations, we perform the same type of
sufficient statistic exercise as in Counterfactual 2.


No intermediate inputs We start by evaluating the importance of incorporating inter-
mediate inputs for our quantitative results. To do so, we recalibrate the model imposing

                                                  37
                                                                                            j
that the share of the employment bundle is equal to one in each sector, β i = 1, and re-
calculate the change in the skill premium under Counterfactual 2. The resulting changes
in the skill premium are compared to those under the baseline parameterization in Figure
13a. The figure shows that the skill premium increases in most countries under the two
calibrations. However, the increase in the skill premium is smaller in the model with no
intermediates relative to the baseline in all countries, and about half of that in the base-
line calibration for in the average country, which reveals that accounting for intermediate
inputs is important for establishing the magnitude of our quantitative results.


Two sector model We now evaluate the importance of incorporating differences in skill
intensities across services in our model by calibrating an economy with just two sectors:
goods and services. Note that this is equivalent to a three sector economy in which the
two service sectors are identical. Hence, we re-calibrate all the sectoral shares in the ser-
vice sectors to match the aggregate service shares in each economy. We then conduct
Counterfactual 2 in this economy and compare the results to those obtained from our
baseline calibration. The resulting changes in the skill premium are reported in Figure
13b. For the average country, the increase in the skill premium is 29 percent smaller in
the two sector model than in our baseline calibration. Note, however, that the two mod-
els predict roughly the same decline in the employment share of the goods sector. The
differences in the models arise from the fact that, in the baseline model, sector F grows
by more than sector S, since it uses relatively more intermediate inputs from the goods
sector. Since sector F uses skilled labor more intensively, this magnifies the increase in
the skill premium. This extra effect is not present when the service sectors are identical.
We conclude that accounting for the differences in factor intensities across service sectors
is important for quantifying the effects of trade integration on structural change and the
skill premium.


Non-homothetic Preferences Finally, we extend our baseline model to allow for non-
homotheticities in demand. In particular, we assume that consumers aggregate goods
from different sectors with the generalized CES aggregator used by Comin, Lashkari and
Mestieri (2015). Appendix C shows how the equilibrium conditions of our model are
changed with this extension, and discusses how we parameterize the income elastici-
ties of the different sectors following Comin, Lashkari and Mestieri (2015).34 Figure 13c
  34 In particular, to give the non-homothetic model the biggest chance to have a differential impact on the
skill premium, we calibrate the income elasticities e j using the values reported in the first column of Table
A7 (this is the specification that gives the largest differences in the income elasticities across sectors).



                                                     38
Figure 13: Change in the skill premium, Counterfactual 2. Baseline vs. alternative param-
eterizations
                                                                                                                   (a) No intermediate inputs




                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                                                           ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                          TUR

                                                                                                                                                                                 IND              SVN




                                                                                                No imputs
                                                                                                                                                                                 PRT
                                                                                                                                                                    GRC




                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                     POL         HUN


                                                                                                                                              GBR
                                                                                                                                              ESP   AUT
                                                                                                                                               IRL SVK
                                                                                                                                             MEX
                                                                                                                                            DNK
                                                                                                                                          ITA
                                                                                                                                         FRA
                                                                                                                                       SWE
                                                                                                                                      RUS
                                                                                                                                      AUS
                                                                                                                                      FINBEL
                                                                                                                                    CAN
                                                                                                                                   USA NLD
                                                                                                                                 JPN
                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                  DEU
                                                                                                                              CHN TWN
                                                                                                                            KOR
                                                                                                                          BRACZE
                                                                                                                   IDN
                                                                                                      −5



                                                                                                            −5                  0                5                         10                    15
                                                                                                                                              Baseline


                                                                       (b) Two sector model                                                                              (c) Non-Homothetic demand
                                                       15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TUR
           Pct. change in the skill premium (2 sect)




                                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                        SVN
                                                                                                                                TUR
                                                                                                                                 ROU
                                                       10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PRT
                                                                                                                                                   Non−homothetic

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      POL        IND
                                                                                                                                                            10

                                                                                                            GRC          PRT
                                                                                                             POL                                                                                                      GRC
                                                                                                                         IND
                                                                                                                          HUN
                                                       5




                                                                                                                                                                                                               SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                AUT
                                                                                                                                                       5




                                                                                            IRL                                                                                                          IRL
                                                                                           ESP SVK
                                                                                          MEX
                                                                                         DNK    AUT                                                                                                     ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                       MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                      DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                        GBR
                                                                                   RUS ITA GBR                                                                                                      ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                   FRA
                                                                                   FINFRA
                                                                                    SWE                                                                                                         RUSBEL
                                                                                   AUS
                                                                                 CAN  BEL                                                                                                        SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                 NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                AUS
                                                                                USA
                                                                              JPNTWNNLD                                                                                                       CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                              TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                             USA
                                                       0




                                                                               DEU
                                                                          CZE                                                                                                               DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                           JPN
                                                                                                                                                          0




                                                                         KOR
                                                                       BRA CHN                                                                                                          CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                       CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                       KOR
                                                                 IDN                                                                                                              BRA
                                                                                                                                                                           IDN
                                                       −5




                                                                                                                                                          −5




                                                            −5            0                5                       10                  15                           −5                   0                 5                10                 15
                                                                                        Baseline                                                                                                        Baseline


Notes: This figure compares the change in the skill premium under alternative parameterizations with
the change in the skill premium under our baseline parameterization (x-axis) in Counterfactual 2. The
alternative parameterizations are described in Section 5.3.


compares the results of conducting our Counterfactual 2 in the homothetic vs the non-
homothetic model. The figure shows that the restricting preferences to be homothetic
does not greatly affect the results for the skill premium.




5.4    Measuring the skill premium using the factor content of trade
We conclude this section by assessing, in the context of our model, an alternative ap-
proach that has been used in the literature to measure the impact of trade on factor prices:
the factor content of trade (FCT).35 The FCT measures the quantity of a factor that is em-
  35 See   e.g. Katz and Murphy (1992).


                                                                                                                                            39
bodied in a country’s net exports. Intuitively, an increase in the trade-adjusted supply of
a factor should decrease the factor’s price. We first use our model to measure changes in
the FCT implied by Counterfactuals 1 and 2. Then we show that these measured changes
greatly underestimate the model’s predictions for the changes in the skill premium.
    We start by deriving an expression that formally links the FCT to the skill premium.
Appendix D shows that we can write the skill premium as:

                                        si   Li − FCTiL
                                           =            × Φi ,                                             (25)
                                        wi   Hi − FCTiH
                                  h         i                                 h         i
                    1         j j   j     j                   1             j   j j     j
where FCTiL ≡       wi   ∑ j µi βi Ri − Yi and FCTiH ≡        si   ∑ j 1 − µi βi Ri − Yi are the FCT
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                     j   j j
                                                                                              ∑ j 1−µi βi Yi
for unskilled and skilled labor respectively, and where we defined Φi ≡                              j j   j   .
                                                                                                ∑ j µi βi Yi
Deardorff and Staiger (1988) and Burstein and Vogel (2011) show in a class of models that,
                   j                                                              j
if factor shares, µi , are fixed in each sector and sectoral absorption shares, Yi , are constant,
then Φi is constant and changes in the skill premium are proportional to changes in factor
supplies and the FCT, captured by Li − FCTiL / Hi − FCTiH . In that context, changes
                                                                    

in the FCT are sufficient statistics for the effect of trade on the skill premium. Clearly,
these conditions are not satisfied in our model, where both sectoral absorption shares
and factor shares change in response to changes in trade patterns.36 The FCT approach,
therefore, does not capture all of the effects of trade on the skill premium.
     Figure 14 compares the counterfactual change in the skill premium to the changes in
the skill premium that we measure from the counterfactual changes in the first term of
equation (25).37 The figures show that the change in the FCT greatly underestimates the
counterfactual changes in the skill premium in our model in almost every country. In
fact, the FCT-based measure moves in the opposite direction to the counterfactual skill
premium for about half the countries in Counterfactual 1, and for about fifteen percent of
the countries in Counterfactual 2.
  36 Burstein and Vogel (2016) also note that the FCT cannot be measured from sectoral data if exporters and

domestic firms use different technologies. While the FCT is not a sufficient statistic for the skill premium
in their context (the term Φi is not constant in their framework), they show that if measured accurately, the
FCT does provide a good approximation to the effect of trade on the skill premium. This not the case in our
context, even if the FCT is perfectly measured.
  37 That is, we use data generated in the counterfactuals to measure how L − FCT L / H − FCT H
                                                                                                           
                                                                                   i       i       i      i
changes, while keeping Φi constant. See Appendix 3.3 for details.




                                                     40
                                                             Figure 14: Predictions based on the factor content of trade

                                                                 Counterfactual 1                                                                                                           Counterfactual 2

                               10




                                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                 TUR                                                                                                SVK

                                                                                          ROU                                                                                                                                 ROU
           Model−based change in the skill premium




                                                                                                                                    Model−based change in the skill premium
                                                                                                                                                                                                          SWE
                                                                         SVN                    PRT                      IRL
                                              5

                                                                                         POL                   IND                                                                                        HUN PRT                        IND
                                                                                                        GRC




                                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                                             RoW MEXITA  CHN
                                                                                                         IDN
                                                                                         CZE AUT     ESPGBR
                                                                                                      AUS
                                                                                                       BRA
                                                                                                      RUS
                                                                                                     SWE
                                                                                                    FRAKOR
                                                                                                       BEL
                                                                                                  CAN                                                                                                      POL
                                                                                                                                                                                                           GRC
                                                                                              DNK  FIN
                                                                                              TWNNLD  USA
                                                                                                    DEU
                                                                                                     JPN
                                  0




                                                                   SVK




                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                                                                          AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                        RoW
                                                           HUN                                                                                                                                                        IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ESP GBR
                       −5




                                                                                                                                                                                                      DNKMEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                          FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                          BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                        NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                       AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                   RUSFIN  SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                             TUR        CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                       TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                                   DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                     JPN




                                                                                                                                          0
             −10




                                                                                                                                                                                         CZE       CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                                 KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                               BRA

                                                                                                                                                                                   IDN
                               −15




                                                                                                                                                        −5
                                                     −15         −10                −5                 0             5                                                        −5                    0                       5       10
                                                                          Prediction based on FCT                                                                                                       Prediction based on FCT



Notes: This figure compares the change in the skill premium implied by each of our counterfactuals (y-axis)
to the change in the skill premium implied by the right hand side of equation (25) (x-axis).



6    Conclusion
Goods-producing sectors are intensive in unskilled labor. In this paper we used a quan-
titative model to study how increased trade integration in these sectors affects the skill
premium by inducing a reallocation of labor towards service sectors in all countries.
Changes in trade costs between 1995 and 2007 generate an 8.5 percent decline in the size
of the goods sector in our model, and account well for the cross-country differences in the
changes in the size of the goods sector. The observed changes in trade patterns of the past
three decades can generate roughly half of the observed decline in the value added share
of the goods-producing sector. These changes can in turn generate sizable increases in the
skill premium in all countries (2.3 percent on average). The increase in the skill premium
is larger in developing countries where the goods sector is particularly unskilled-labor
intensive.




                                                                                                                               41
References
Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andres Rodriguez-Clare. 2012. “New Trade
  Models, Same Old Gains?” American Economic Review, 102(1): 94–130.

Attanasio, Orazio, Pinelopi Goldberg, and Nina Pavcnik. 2004. “Trade reforms and
  wage inequality in Colombia.” Journal of Development Economics, 74(2): 331–366.

Basco, Sergi, and Marti Mestieri. 2013. “Heterogeneous trade costs and wage inequality:
  A model of two globalizations.” Journal of International Economics, 89(2): 393–406.

Baumol, William J. 1967. “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of
  Urban Crisis.” American Economc Review, 57(3): 415–426.

Berman, Eli, John Bound, and Zvi Griliches. 1994. “Changes in the Demand for Skilled
  Labor within U. S. Manufacturing: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufac-
  tures.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(2): 367–397.

Buera, Francisco, Joseph Kaboski, and Richard Rogerson. 2015. “Skill Biased Structural
  Change.” NBER Working Paper No. 21165.

Burstein, Ariel, and Jonathan Vogel. 2011. “International Trade Patterns, the Skill Pre-
  mium, and Heterogeneous Firms.” Working Paper 2011 1247.

Burstein, Ariel, and Jonathan Vogel. 2016. “International trade, technology, and the skill
  premium.” Journal of Political Economy, , (Forthcoming).

Burstein, Ariel, Eduardo Morales, and Jonathan Vogel. 2015. “Accounting for Changes
  in Between-Group Inequality.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc NBER
  Working Papers 20855.

Burstein, Ariel, Javier Cravino, and Jonathan Vogel. 2013. “Importing Skill-Biased Tech-
  nology.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(2): 32–71.

Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Fernando Parro. 2015. “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Ef-
  fects of NAFTA.” 82.

Caron, Justin, Thibault Fally, and James R. Markusen. 2014. “International Trade Puz-
  zles: A Solution Linking Production and Preferences *.” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 129(3): 1501.



                                           42
Comin, Diego A., Danial Lashkari, and Martí Mestieri. 2015. “Structural Change with
 Long-run Income and Price Effects.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc NBER
 Working Papers 21595.

Costinot, Arnaud, and Andres Rodriguez-clare. 2014. “Trade Theory with Numbers:
 Quantifying the Consequences of Globalization.” Vol. 4 of Handbook of International Eco-
 nomics, Chapter 4, 197–261. Elsevier.

Deardorff, Alan V., and Robert W. Staiger. 1988. “An interpretation of the factor content
 of trade.” Journal of International Economics, 24(1-2): 93–107.

Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel Kortum. 2008. “Global Rebalancing with
 Gravity: Measuring the Burden of Adjustment.” IMF Staff Papers, 55(3): 511–540.

Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum. 2002. “Technology, Geography, and Trade.” Econo-
  metrica, 70(5): 1741–1779.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo, and Stephen J. Redding. 2014. “External Integration, Structural
  Transformation and Economic Development: Evidence From Argentina.” Centre for
  Economic Performance, LSE CEP Discussion Papers dp1273.

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou, and Nina Pavcnik. 2007. “Distributional Effects of Glob-
 alization in Developing Countries.” Journal of Economic Literature, 45(1): 39–82.

Haltiwanger, John, Adriana Kugler, Maurice Kugler, Alejandro Micco, and Carmen
 Pages. 2004. “Effects of tariffs and real exchange rates on job reallocation: evidence
 from Latin America.” Economics Division, School of Social Sciences, University of
 Southampton Discussion Paper Series In Economics And Econometrics 0410.

Head, Keith, and John Ries. 2001. “Increasing Returns versus National Product Differ-
 entiation as an Explanation for the Pattern of U.S.-Canada Trade.” American Economic
 Review, 91(4): 858–876.

Herrendorf, Berthold, Richard Rogerson, and Ákos Valentinyi. 2013. “Two Perspectives
 on Preferences and Structural Transformation.” American Economic Review, 103(7): 2752–
 89.

Katz, Lawrence F, and Kevin M Murphy. 1992. “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987:
 Supply and Demand Factors.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1): 35–78.




                                           43
Kehoe, Timothy J., Kim J. Ruhl, and Joseph B. Steinberg. 2013. “Global Imbalances and
 Structural Change in the United States.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc
 NBER Working Papers 19339.

Krueger, Dirk, Fabrizio Perri, Luigi Pistaferri, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2010. “Cross
  Sectional Facts for Macroeconomists.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 13(1): 1–14.

Leamer, Edward E., and James Levinsohn. 1995. “International trade theory: The evi-
  dence.” Vol. 3 of Handbook of International Economics, Chapter 26, 1339 – 1394. Elsevier.

Levchenko, Andrei A., and Jing Zhang. 2016. “The Evolution of Comparative Advan-
  tage: Measurement and Welfare Implications.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 78: 48–66.

Matsuyama, Kiminori. 2007. “Beyond Icebergs: Towards a Theory of Biased Globaliza-
 tion.” Review of Economic Studies, 74(1): 237–253.

Matsuyama, Kiminori. 2009. “Structural Change in an Interdependent World: A Global
 View of Manufacturing Decline.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 7(2-
 3): 478–486.

Ossa, Ralph. 2015. “Why trade matters after all.” Journal of International Economics, –.

Parro, Fernando. 2013. “Capital-Skill Complementarity and the Skill Premium in a Quan-
  titative Model of Trade.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(2): 72–117.

Uy, Timothy, Kei-Mu Yi, and Jing Zhang. 2013. “Structural change in an open economy.”
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(6): 667 – 682.




                                             44
  ONLINE APPENDIX
(NOT FOR PUBLICATION)




          45
Appendix A                       Equilibrium
This Appendix characterizes the equilibrium of the model, and shows how to solve for
                                                                             j
the key variables of interest as a function of domestic expenditure shares, πii (k ), and
                                                                                        j
ratios of net exports to aggregate revenues in each sector, λi . In addition, we provide the
system of equations that we use for computing our counterfactual exercises.


A.1      Equilibrium
                                                                             n                      o
                                                                                 j j j         j
An equilibrium is a set of aggregate prices { Pi, wi , si }i∈ I , and Pi , ci , pv,i , pb,i                      , aggre-
               n              o               n        o                                   n          i ∈ I,j
                                                                                                           o∈ J
                   j   j    j                   j j                                              j
gate quantities Ci , Xi , Yi               and Hi , Li              , and trade shares πin (k )                                   ,
                                i ∈ I,j∈ J               i ∈ I,j∈ J        n       o                          i,n∈ I,k ∈K j ,j∈ J
                                                                               j
such that, given factor supplies { Hi , Li }i∈ I , technologies Ai (k )                                 , trade costs
n          o                                                                         i ∈ I,k ∈K j ,j∈ J
    j
  τin (k )       j
                     , and net exports { NXi }i∈ I , the following are satisfied:
             i,n∈ I,k ∈K ,j∈ J

    i. Households maximize utility subject to their budget constraints. This implies
       demands:
                                    j j
                                                " j # 1− ρ
                                  Pi Ci        j Pi
                                          = φ̄i            ,                   (A.1)
                                      j j
                                ∑ j Pi Ci        PiC

       where PiC consumption price index in country i, and the budget constraint:

                                                                     ∑ Pi Ci + NXi .
                                                                            j   j
                                               wi Li + si Hi =                                                          (A.2)
                                                                      j


   ii. Producers of intermediate varieties minimize costs. Cost minimization implies
       that the prices of the input bundles are given by:
                                            h i           h i
                                   j      j   j    1− β j   j
                                 ci = β̄ i pb,i            pv,i β j            (A.3)
                                        h              h         i   i 1
                                            j 1− γ
                                                    + 1 − µ̄i s1i −γ
                                 j                             j      1− γ
                                pv,i = µ̄i wi                                  (A.4)
                                        "                 # 1
                                                         J                  1− ρ

                                                       ∑
                                         j                      lj
                                        pb,i    =             ᾱi Pil 1−ρ           .                                   (A.5)
                                                       l =1




                                                               46
   Given these definitions, factor demands are given by:
                                        
                                           j     γ −1
                                                   
                 j                   j   p v,i                        j j                      j                       j
           wi lin (ω, k ) =        µ̄i                            β i pn (ω, k) qin (ω, k ) Iin (ω, k)
                                         wi
                                                                   γ −1
                                                               j
                 j
                                   h
                                             j
                                                i          pv,i                         j j                     j                    j
           si hin (ω, k ) =            1 − µ̄i                                   β i pn (ω, k ) qin (ω, k) Iin (ω, k )
                                                            si
                                                            ρ −1
                                                      j
                                                   pb,i                     h           i
                                   ∑
                                          lj                                          j   j         j           j
           Pil xin
                l
                     (ω, k) =           ᾱi                                   1 − β i pn (ω, k ) qin (ω, k ) Iin (ω, k ) .
                                    j                Pil

iii. Cost minimization by producers of final goods. Cost minimization implies that
     demand for variety (ω, k ) is given by:

                                                                   "    j
                                                                                              #1−ηij (k)
                              j          j                             pi       (ω, k)                              j            j   j
                            pi (ω, k ) qi (ω, k) =                            j
                                                                                                                σi (k) Pi Yi .
                                                                            Pi    (k)

   As shown in Eaton and Kortum (2002) under our same distributional assumptions,
   price indices for final goods are given by

                                                                        Kj
                                                                   "                                    #
                                                                                                j
                                                                       ∏
                                                 j             j                    j         σi (k )
                                               Pi    =      σ̄i                   Pi    (k)                 .                                (A.6)
                                                                       k =1

   where
                                                                                               #−1/θ j (k)                 −θ j (k)
                                                                                           j
                                                                   "
                                                           I                              cl
                            Pi (k) = Ξi (k )  ∑ τli (k )
                             j           j                              j
                                                                                         j
                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                          l =1                          Al (k )
             j          j
   where σ̄i and Ξi (k ) are constants. Trade shares between any pair of countries are
   given by equation (7).

iv. Aggregate factor market clearing. Integrating factor demands across producers,
    adding across all destination countries n, substituting for the demand for each va-
           j
    riety qi (ω, k), using equation (6), and adding across industries and across sectors,
    factor market clearing requires that the total payments to each type of labor in coun-




                                                                    47
      try i equal total demand:
                                                      
                                                      j     γ −1
                                                              
                                     j          j   p v,i                             j       j
                                  wi L i =    µ̄i                                β i Ri                           (A.7)
                                                    wi
                                                                                   γ −1
                                                                              j
                                     j
                                              h
                                                        j
                                                              i       pv,i                              j   j
                                  si Hi =         1 − µ̄i                                        β i Ri ,        (A.8)
                                                                          si

              j               j          j        j
      where Ri = ∑n ∑k∈K j πin (k ) Pn (k ) Yn (k ) are aggregate revenues accruing from sales
      in sector j, and the demand for intermediate inputs in each sector l are given by:

                                                      j   ρ −1
                                                                     
                                                    p          h                                           i
                                             ∑
                                                 lj   b,i                                                j   j
                              Pil Xil =        ᾱi  l          1−                                    β i Ri .    (A.9)
                                             j      P  i


  v. Labor market clearing.

                                             ∑ Hi                                      ∑ Li .
                                                          j               j                        j
                                      Hi =                    ; Li =                                              (A.10)
                                              j                                            j


 vi. Final goods market clearing.
                                              j                   j                j
                                             Yi       = Ci + Xi .                                                 (A.11)

Note that, after choosing a numeraire, (30 × I − 1 + I × I × (K S + K G + K F )) aggregate
variables must be determined in equilibrium. Equations (A.1)-(A.11) and (7) give a sys-
tem of (30 × I − 1 + I × I × (K S + K G + K F )) independent equations, since the market
clearing conditions together with the budget constraints and the definition of revenues
make one budget constraint redundant.


A.2    Solving in terms of domestic expenditure shares and sectorial net
       exports
In this section we show how to solve for domestic variables as functions of industrial
                                j                                                      j
domestic expenditure shares, πii (k), and net exports relative to aggregate revenues, λi .
From equations, (7) and (A.6) we can write the industry-level price indices as functions
of domestic expenditure shares:
                                                               j
                                         h           i
                           j        j      j   j       j
                         Pi (k) = Ξi (k ) ci /Ai (k ) πii (k )θ (k) ,




                                                      48
and the sectoral price indexes as:

                                                  Kj     h         h           ii              j
                                                  ∏
                                   j          j               j      j   j        j
                                 Pi    =   σ̄i               Ξi (k) ci /Ai (k ) πii (k )σj (k)θ (k) .                                                                    (A.12)
                                                  k =1

Using equations (A.7) and (A.8) we can write
                                         h        ih i
                                                j    j             j j
                        γ
                         si   Hi      ∑ j 1 − µ̄i pv,i γ−1 β i ri
                                   =         j
                                               h i
                                                   j
                                                                       ,                                                                                                 (A.13)
                        wi    Li         ∑ µ̄ p       γ −1 β j r j
                                                                                         j       i           v,i                  i i

        j            j                                                                                                                                                        j
where ri ≡ Ri /Ri is the share of sector j in aggregate revenues. From the definition of λi ,
                         j
we can write ri as:
                                                                                                             j       j
                                                                  j            j      PY
                                                                 ri   =       λi   −1+ i i .                                                                             (A.14)
                                                                                       Ri

Equation (A.11) implies
                                                                 j    j              j       j                   j       j
                                                             Pi Yi  PC    PX
                                                                   = i i + i i.                                                                                          (A.15)
                                                              Ri     Ri    Ri
                                                                                                     j
Combining (A.1), (A.11), and the definition of λi , we obtain

                       j j
                                  " j # 1− ρ                   j j
                                                                    
                     Pi Ci       j P
                                                     3     ∑  P  X
                           = φ̄i i           4 − ∑ λ j − j i i  ,                                                                                                      (A.16)
                      Ri            Pi                  i     Ri
                                                   j =1


where (A.9) implies:
                                                                                                         ρ −1
                                              j     j                                            j
                                       ∑ j Pi Xi                                             pb,i                        h              i
                                                                      ∑
                                                                                lj                                                 j             j
                                                             =                ᾱi                                          1−   βi        ri .                         (A.17)
                                           Ri                             j                  Pil

                             j                      j
Given values for πii (k) and λi , equations (A.3), (A.5), (A.4), and (A.12), -(A.17) give a
system of 23 equations that can be used to solve for the 13 relative prices in the economy
                                            j
together with the sectorial revenue shares ri , the ratios of sectorial absorption to aggregate
             j   j                                                                                                                           j       j
            Pi Yi                                                                                                                       Pi Ci
revenues     Ri      , the ratios of sectorial consumption to revenues                                                                   Ri ,            and the ratio of inputs
                                                   j j
                                             ∑ j Pi Xi
to revenues in the economy                         Ri        .




                                                                                     49
A.3     Solving for price changes
We now combine equations (A.3), (A.4), (A.5), (A.12), and (A.13) to solve for changes in
sectorial value-added shares and the skill premium as a function of changes in domestic
expenditure shares and the ratio of sectorial net exports relative to GDP. We solve for all
the variables in changes following Dekle, Eaton and Kortum (2008). Define x̂ ≡ x1 /x0 .
We can characterize the change in the skill premium as:
                                                                                    j
                                                                                   Hi j γ−1 j
                                                                         ∑j        Hi v̂i  r̂i
                                         γ
                                    ŝi            Ĥi
                                                                =                   j
                                                                                                                                           (A.18)
                                    ŵi            L̂i                         L j        j
                                                                        ∑ j Lii v̂i γ−1 r̂i
                                                                        h           i Kj                                       j
                                                                                                 ∏
                                                        j                   j     j         j                                      j
                                                   P̂i          =         ĉi / Âi       π̂ii                     (k) σi (k)θ (k)         (A.19)
                                                                                     k =1
                                                                                                     j                 j
                                                                                j 1− β i
                                                                        h           i                    h         iβ
                                                      j                                                        j      i
                                                    ĉi         =             p̂b,i                          p̂v,i                         (A.20)
                                                                        "                                          #    1
                                                                                             h i 1− ρ                  1− ρ

                                                                              ∑
                                                    j                                lj
                                                  p̂b,i         =                   αi        P̂il                                         (A.21)
                                                                               l
                                                                        h                 h       i       i 1
                                                    j                          j                j          1− γ
                                                  p̂v,i =                     µi ŵi 1−γ + 1 − µi ŝi 1−γ                                  (A.22)

and
                                j                               j   j
                   j       λi        j                      Yi Ŷ i
                 r̂i =       λ̂ − 1 +
                            j i      j
                                           .                                                                                               (A.23)
                           ri       Ri R̂i
                                                       
                   j                j j               j j
                Ŷ i             i PdC             P    X
                         h                          d
                               j               j
                       = 1 − ψi  i i  + ψi  i i                                                                                        (A.24)
                R̂i                 Ri                Ri
                            1− ρ          h j j              j j
                                                                     i                
                j j
              Pi Ci
              d             cj
                            P                ∑
                                     Yi  j i i  r r̂   + 1 − λ   λ̂
                                                                i i      Y l      l
                                                                                 PX
                                                                                 d   l
                       = = i                    h                i − ∑ i ψil  i i                                                     (A.25)
               Ri           Pi      Pi Ci             j          j       Yi       Ri
                                               ∑ r +1−λ                l                j        i                         i
                                                            ρ −1
                l l                                 j
                                                  p̂b,i
                                                  d
              Pd
               i Xi
                           ∑ Φi
                                         lj                               j
                       =                                              r̂i                                                                (A.26)
               Ri           j                     Pil

                       j  ρ −1
         lj        lj bi
where   αi    ≡ ᾱi       j      is the share of sector l 0 s inputs in total sector j0 s input                                        usage, and
                        Pi
             h     i
          lj      j j
 lj    α i 1− β i r i
Φi =         lj
                h
                     j j , is the share of good l intermediate inputs used by sector j.
                      i
      ∑ j α i 1− β i r i
   Equations (A.18)-(A.26) give a system of 25 equations that can be used to solve for the
changes in the 13 relative prices in the economy, together with the changes in sectorial


                                                                                            50
                                                                                j j
                  j                                                           PY
                                                                              d
revenue shares r̂i , the ratios of sectorial absorption to aggregate revenues Ri i , the ratios
                                                                                 i
                                           j j
                                          PC
                                          d
of sectorial consumption to revenues Ri i , and the ratio of inputs to revenues in the econ-
                                            i
      P l Xl
      d                                                           j
omy iR i , as a function of changes in domestic technologies, Âi (k ), domestic expenditure
        i
            j                                                                                                                        j
shares, π̂ii (k ) and sectoral transfers λ̂il , and of sectoral factor shares µi , the skilled and
                                          j                     j
                                        Hi                  Li                                                                            j
unskilled labor shares, shares          Hi ,   and          Li ,    the share of value-added in each sector, β i , the
                                                                                                                            j   lj
share of absorption used as intermediate inputs in each sector ψi , Φi , and the elasticities
of substitution ρ and γ.

Changes in value-added and employment shares The change in the share of value-
added in sector j in total value-added is given by
                                                                                   j
                                                    j                          r̂i
                                               v̂i =                               j
                                                                                               .                                         (A.27)
                                                                               β i ril
                                                                                  j
                                                                     ∑l     j l r̂i
                                                                        ∑l i i
                                                                          β  r

   Finally, note that we can write the change in the share of skilled and unskilled workers
                                    j                                      j
                         j         Li                   j              Hi
employed in sector j, ω L,i ≡      Li ,   and ω H,i ≡                  Hi ,    as:

                                                                       j
                                            j                       µ̂i r̂il
                                          ω L,i =
                                          d
                                                        l µ̂ r̂ l              j
                                                  ∑ j ω L,i i i
                                                                 
                                                          \j l
                                                         1 − µi r̂i
                                            j
                                          ω H,i =
                                          d
                                                                   
                                                        j     \j l
                                                  ∑ j ω H,i 1 − µi r̂i

with:
                                                "                                                                    # −1
                                                                              s 1− γ
                                                                           i c
                                                        h                       
                                          j                            j               i                         j
                                        µ̂i =               1 − µi                                     + µi
                                                                                wi
                                        "   γ −1 h       i −1
                                                            #
                                 \j          si
                                           j c            j
                                 1 − µi = µi       + 1 − µi      .
                                             wi

                                                                                                      j      j
                                                                                     j             Li + Hi
Changes in total sectorial employment shares, ωE,i ≡                                               Li + Hi           are given by:

                                                            j                                     j
                                   j                    Li            j                       Hi             j
                                  ωE,i =                             ω +                                   ω H,i .
                                  d                                  d                                     d
                                                j                   j L,i                 j            j
                                               Li       + Hi                             Li   +       Hi



                                                                     51
Appendix B               Proofs
In this section we log-linearize the equilibrium conditions around the initial equilibrium
and derive equations (13), (14), (15), (16), (17), (18) and (19) in the paper.

Derivation of Equation (13)
We start by deriving equation (13). To a first order approximation, equation (12) can be
written as:
                              " j      j
                                         #
                               Hi    Li              1 Lj j 
               s̃i − w̃i = ∑               ṽi − ∑
                                             j                              
                                   −                         µ̃i − H̃i − L̃i .      (B.1)
                            j
                                Hi   L i         j
                                                   1 − µ i L

                         j
Log-differentiating µi we obtain:
                                                          
                                         j       gj
                               j si Hi           si Hi        h       i
                     j                                    = − 1 − µ j [1 − γ] [s̃i − w̃i ] ,
                   µ̃i   = − µi          j
                                             
                                                       j            i                                                          (B.2)
                                    wi L i       wi L i

where the second equality follows from the factor demand equations. Substituting in
equation (B.1) and solving for s̃i − w̃i we obtain equation (13) in the text.

Derivation of Equation (14)
                                                                                                               j
To derive equation (14), we start by differentiating (A.23) around λi = 1.
                                                                                     j
                                                       h                   i    λ̃i
                                                                                         − ∑ λ̃il .
                                j                             j
                              r̃i   = [1 − ρ ]             P̃i    − P̃i +         j
                                                                                                                               (B.3)
                                                                                 ri          l

                                                                                                    j j
                                                                                         j        β i ri
Noting that we can write the value-added shares as vi =                                               j j   we obtain the changes in
                                                                                                 ∑ β i ri
these shares as:

                                                 ṽi = r̃i − ∑ vi r̃i .
                                                   j              j            j j

                                                                           j

                   j
Substituting for r̃i we obtain equation (14) in the text.




                                                                      52
Derivation of equation (15)
                                                                                                                           j
We now derive equation (15) in the text in the special version of the model with β i = 1.
Substituting equation (14) into (13) we can write:
                                              " j     j
                                                        #"                j
                                                                            #
                                               Hi    Li                 λ̃i
              [s̃i − w̃i ] γ̄ = H̃i − L̃i − ∑
                                                                    j
                                                   −       [1 − ρ] P̃i + j .         (B.4)
                                            j
                                               Hi    Li                 r                                             i

                                                                                       j
Log-linearizing equations (A.3)-(A.5) in the case of β i = 1, we obtain:
                                h        i
                          j            j                     j    j
                       P̃i = 1 − µi [s̃i − w̃i ] + w̃i − Ãi + π̃ii .                                                          (B.5)

Substituting back in equation (B.4) and solving for s̃i − w̃i gives the expression in the text.

Derivation of equations (16) and (17)
The expression in the text follows from noting that the consumer price index can be writ-
ten as P˜iC = ∑ φi P̃i , and using expression (B.5).
                 j j



Derivation of equations (18) and (19)
We start by deriving equation (18). Log-linearizing equation (A.27) and combining with
(B.3) we obtain:

                                                                                              j
                                            "                                  #
                                                                                            λ̃i        vil
                                                       −∑                                         −∑
                          j                        j             j j
                        ṽi   = [1 − ρ ]        P̃i             vi P̃i                 +     j
                                                                                                             λ̃il .
                                                           j                                ri     l   ril

Substituting with equation (B.5) we obtain equation (18) in the text.
                                                              j     j j
   To obtain equation (19), define sectorial employment by Ei ≡ Li + Hi and note that

                                    ωE,i = Ẽi − ∑ ωE,i
                                        j           l      j
                                                        Ẽil .                                                                 (B.6)
                                                                       l

Log-linearizing sectorial employment we obtain:
                                                       j                           j
                                    j             Li   j                       Hi            j
                                  Ẽi   =         j L̃         +           j           j   H̃i ,
                                            Li + Hi i                  Li + Hi

which can be written as:
                     j  h                    i                                 j       h                         i
             j     L      j                j                           Hi                    j                 j     j
           Ẽi = j i j L̃i + w̃i − w̃i − ṽi +                     j               j       H̃i + s̃i − s̃i − ṽi + ṽi .
                   Li + Hi                                       Li + Hi




                                                           53
or:
                                                                                    "                #
                                   j       h             i              j               h^i
                     j            Li             j                     Hi                     j           j
                   Ẽi   =    j        j       µ̃i   − w̃i +       j            j        1 − µi − s̃i + ṽi .                   (B.7)
                             Li + Hi                           Li + Hi

                                                   h^i                                                    j
                                                         j                                              µi       j
Combining equations (B.7), (18), (B.2), noting that 1 − µi = −                                              j   µ̃i , and substituting
                                                                                                       1− µ i
into equation (B.6) gives expression (19) in the text.


Appendix C               Non-homothetic preferences
This section characterizes the equilibrium of our model with the generalized CES con-
sumption aggregator given by:


                                            h i ρ1 e j −ρ h i ρ−1
                                           ∑ φ̄i Ci Ci
                                               j       ρ    j ρ
                                                                  = 1.                                                          (C.1)
                                           j


Note that in the special case of e j = 1, for all j, the aggregator collapses to the standard
CES aggregator in equation (1), in which there are no income effects. Under these pref-
erences the equilibrium conditions are given by equations (7), (A.2)-(A.11) and by the
sectoral consumption demands associated with (C.1), given by:
                                                                   "        j
                                                                                # 1− ρ
                                                j    j         j       Pi                       j
                                            Pi Ci = φ̄i                                   Pi Cie .                              (C.2)
                                                                       Pi

This implies that equation A.1 is now written as:

                      j j
                                  " j #1− ρ      
                                                                  j j
                                                                      
                    Pi Ci       j P
                                                       3    ∑ j Pi Xi
                                            Cie 4 − ∑ λi −
                                               j          j
                           = φ̄i i                                    ,                                                        (C.3)
                     Ri            Pi                j =1
                                                                R i


    We use the hat algebra in the system of equations above to conduct our alternative
parameterization exercise in Section (5.3). To give the non-homothetic model the biggest
chance to have a differential impact on the skill premium, we calibrate the income elas-
ticities e j using the values reported in the first column of Table A7 (this is the specifi-
cation that gives the largest differences in the income elasticities across sectors). Our
results in the main body show that even in this parameterization, accounting for non-
homotheticities has small effects on our quantitative results.


Appendix D               The factor content of trade
This section shows how the skill premium can be written as a function of the factor content of

                                                                   54
trade in our model. We start by writing equations (A.7) and (A.8), summing over j, as:
                                     h          i                         h          i
                                ∑                             ∑
                                              j   j j                              j   j j
                     si Hi =             1 − µi βi Ri =                       1 − µi βi Yi + si FCTiH
                                 j                                j

                                ∑ µi βi Ri = ∑ µi βi Yi + wi FCTiL ,
                                         j j   j            j j       j
                     wi L i =
                                 j                      j


where  we defined
               h the skilled-
                          i     and unskilled-laborhcontent iof trade as FCTiH ≡
1           j   j  j    j             L  1      j j     j       j
si ∑ j 1 − µi βi Ri − Yi and FCTi ≡ wi ∑ j µi βi Ri − Yi . Solving for the wages si and
wi and taking ratios we can write the skill premium as:
                                                              
                                                             j    j j
                            si    Li − FCTiL    ∑ j   1 −  µ i βi Yi
                               =             ×                        .
                           wi    Hi − FCTiH               j j j
                                                     ∑j µ β Y                         i i i

                                                                                                            j
Deardorff and Staiger (1988) and Burstein and Vogel (2011) show that if factor shares µi
do not change across equilibria, and sectoral absorption
                                                      shares are a constant fraction of
                     j      j                                                     j      j    j   j j   j
total absorption Yi = κ̄i Yi , then the term ∑ j 1 − µi βi Yi / ∑ j µi βi Yi is constant. This
implies that changes in the skill premium are determined by changes in FCTiL and FCTiH .
   We next show how we measure changes in the FCT in the model, starting with the
expression above in changes:

                                                                      FCT L FCT
                                                                            \L
                                              L L̂ 1 −
                                                           i    i
                                     si sbi
                                            =              L L̂
                                                                   Φi Φ̂i
                                     wi wi    H Ĥ     FCTiH FCT
                                                             \   H
                                                   1−     H Ĥ
                                                                i



, where Φi is defined as in the main body of the paper. We next impose that Φ̂i = 1, to
obtain                                                      
                                       FCTiL FCT
                                             \L          FCTiL
                                   1−           i
                                                    / 1− L
                         sbi FC           L L̂
                                =                             .
                        wi
                                                    
                                      FCTiH FCT
                                             \   H       FCT H
                                   1−    H Ĥ
                                                i
                                                    / 1 − Hi

Now, since
                                                        j               j
                                                          "      #
                                FCTiL                  Li      1       Li 1
                                 L
                                      =        ∑       L
                                                            1− j = 1−∑
                                                                       L λj
                                                   j          λi     j     i
and
                                   ˆj                        ˆj
                                                               
                                j                         j
             FCTiL   \
                     FCTiL     L L           1         L L     1 
                           = ∑ i  i  1 −        = 1−∑ i  i         ,
              L       L        L L           j ˆj        L   L   j ˆj
                             j              λi λi      j        λi λi
we finally obtain



                                                             55
                                                                       " #                     !
                                                                        Lˆ
                                                j
                                                                  j      j
                                            H                     L
                              FC
                                        ∑ j Hi 1j        ×    ∑ j Li       L
                                                                             i          1
                                                                                        j ˆj
                         si
                         c                     λi                                      λi λi
                                   =                                  "           #           !.
                         wi                 L
                                             j
                                                     
                                                                  H
                                                                   j
                                                                           Hˆi
                                                                               j
                                        ∑ j Li 1j        ×    ∑ j Hi       H
                                                                                        1
                                                                                        j ˆj
                                               λi                                      λi λi



Appendix E           Data and Parameterization
This section first describes our data sources and then explains how these are combined to
parameterize our model.


E.1   Data Sources
Our main sample combines two data sources. We use the IO tables from the World In-
put Output Database (WIOD) to construct changes in domestic expenditure shares, net
export to aggregate revenue ratios, intermediate input shares β j and αij , and sectorial
value-added shares. We use the Socio Economic Accounts included in the WIOD (SEA)
                                                 j         j
to calculate baseline employment shares, Hi /Hi and Li /Li , aggregate payments to skilled
relative to unskilled labor, si Hi /wi Li , and aggregate employment shares.
    In Section 5.2.2, to extend our sample backward in time, we also bring in data on IO
tables from the OECD IO tables (1995 version) and data on employment and labor com-
pensation from KLEMS. We use these data in the same way as described in the previous
paragraph.
    Table A1 provides our own concordance to aggregate industries across datasets and
levels of aggregation, and the trade elasticity in each industry and sector. We use different
levels of aggregation in the paper, depending on the calculation. The column “Category”
lists our most disaggregated industries, which correspond with the index k in the paper.
The next column, “One Digit”, aggregates the sector G industries that correspond to man-
ufacturing; we use this classification for illustration purposes in Figures 1 and 3. Finally,
the column “Sector” classifies industries into goods, unskilled and skilled labor intensive
services.
    In the following sub-sections, we describe the datasets and their use in detail.

World Input-Output Tables For each year between 1995 and 2007, we observe the input
output tables and bilateral trade shares from the World Input-Output Tables Database
(WIOD), with industries disaggregated according to ISIC rev 3. These data are available
at http://www.wiod.org/new_site/database/niots.htm. Column “WIOD code” in Table
A1 lists the original industrial classification of the dataset and how we use it to compute
industry and sector aggregates. We exclude “Private Households with Employed Persons
(P)” from the calculations.
    The WIOD also extends the labor and compensation data from KLEMS in its own
Socio Economic Accounts module. For each year, we observe the share of total hours em-

                                                         56
ployed in each industry, corresponding to the hours of each skill type in {Low, Medium,
High}, where “High” includes workers with a college degree. We also observe, for each
industry, the total hours employed, which allows us to calculate, for each labor type, the
total hours of employment. We also observe total compensation for {Low, Medium, High}
skills, which we use to compute the ratio sH/wL.

OECD Input-Output Tables We download the data from http://www.oecd.org/trade/input-
outputtables.htm, 1995 edition (ISIC Rev 2). Coverage is sparse until the 1990s. The ear-
liest observations we use are for the year 1977, but the beginning of the sample varies
by country. Column “OECD Description” in Table A1 lists all disaggregated industries
in this dataset and shows how we aggregate them into the sectors and industries of our
model. We exclude the categories “Other producers” , “Statistical discrepancies”, and
“Private household activities” from the analysis.
    One limitation of this dataset is that Education and Health are aggregated into the cat-
egory “Community, social & personal services.” Since we interpret Education as skilled
labor intensive and Other services as unskilled labor intensive, we split this category into
sectors S and F according to the 1995 share of Education in Education + Other Services
for the US, 0.75, from WIOD.

KLEMS We downloaded data at http://www.euklems.net/, March 08 release: (i) Labour
input files and (ii) Country basic files. For Canada we repeat the same steps, but we use
separate files (also available in the KLEMS webpage). KLEMS provides yearly data from
1970 to 2005, disaggregated by ISIC Rev. 3 industries. We treat these data just as the
WIOD SEA data. Finally, we also obtain data on total revenue and absorption. Column
“KLEMS Code” in Table A1 relates the original industrial classification in KLEMS to ours.
We drop Private Households with Employed Persons (P).

E.2     Data construction
In this section, we discuss details on data construction not contained in the main body of
the paper.

E.2.1   Sample
Table A2 reports the countries in our main sample, all of them starting in 1995 and ending
in 2007. For Section 5.2.2, we strived to maximize coverage across countries and time. The
resulting sample is the largest possible panel for which we could obtain data on both em-
ployment shares and input-output data. We provide next the details of the construction
of our variables and the splicing across datasets.

E.2.2   Constructing sectoral changes in trade shares and net exports to total revenue
        ratios
Table A1 shows the correspondence between the classification in the OECD IO data and
the classification in the WIOD data. The table also reports the classification we con-

                                           57
structed to bridge the different levels of aggregation of these two classifications (which
correspond to k in our model), and how we associated industries to the trade elastici-
ties from Caliendo and Parro (2015). The calculation of the sectoral trade shares requires
choosing a single elasticity for the “Auto and Other Transport” and “Electrical, Commu-
nication and Medical”, and “Basic Metals and Metal Products” categories. In these cases,
we chose the average elasticity.

        Share of intermediate inputs in total revenue 1 − β j and share of each sector
                                                             
E.2.3
        in the intermediate input bundle αlj
                                             

For each country and sector, we calculate at the beginning of the sample,

                                             Sector j’s Total Intermediate Use
          1 − βj =                                                                         ,
                     Sector        j0 s   Total Intermediate Use + Sector j0 s Value Added

where Sector j0 s Total Intermediate Use is measured as Total Intermediate Use of S, G,
and F (Imported and Domestic). Sector j0 s value-added is measured as Sector j0 s Total
Output less all inputs purchased by aggregate sector j.
   We measure the share of sector l in the intermediate input bundle used in sector j,
which we denote by αlj , as

                                          Sector j’s Total Intermediate Use of l
                             αlj =
                                            Sector j’s Total Intermediate Use


Appendix F               Estimating the elasticity of substitution across
                         sectors
This section provides details for our estimation of the elasticity ρ in Section 4. Equation
(20) in the paper follows from taking ratios and logs in the demand functions in equa-
tion (C.2) for sectors j and j0 . Equation (21) follows from aggregating the input demand
functions across producers and industries,
                                                                      "     j
                                                                                # ρ −1
                                                                          bi
                         Z                                                               h           i
                Pil ∑
                              lj                         lj      lj                                j   j
                             xin (ω, k ) dω = Pil xin = ᾱi                                  1 − β i Ri ,
                     k                                                    Pil

and then taking logs and differences across inputs l.
    To estimate equations (20) and (21), we measure expenditure shares in a way that is
consistent with our model, which requires measuring how gross output of each sector, val-
ued at producer prices (i.e. before distribution margins are applied), is used in the economy.
We measure expenditure shares at producer prices using the US Input-Output Use Tables
for every year in the 1977-2012 period. In particular, we group the sectors in the Input-
Output Tables into the sectors of our model following the definitions from Appendix E
and compute the share of each sector in total consumption expenditures and in total in-
termediate inputs used by the goods, unskilled and skilled intensive service sectors. We

                                                        58
Figure A.1: Changes in goods employment shares (Counterfactual 1 with global produc-
tivity growth)

                                                                                         IDN




                                     0 −10
                                                                                                TWN IND
                                                                              CZE              CHN




                                  Data
                                                                              JPN
                                                                       ITA
                                                                        DEU
                                                                 SWE




                                −20
                                                                               ROU                          HUN
                                                                            CAN    FIN
                                                                   AUTNLD MEX
                                                                           RUS     BRA           SVK
                                                              AUS
                                                            BEL
                                                         USA    FRA PRT    POL
                                                                          SVN    TUR
                                             DNK                     ESP

                                     −30
                                                   GRC                         KOR


                                                   GBR

                                                                       IRL

                                             −30     −25      −20       −15      −10                   −5
                                                   Counterfactual 1, Global change in AT


Notes: The x-axis shows the percent change in the sector’s share in employment in a version of Counter-
factual 1 that includes productivity growth. The y-axis reports the percent change in the sector’s share in
employment between 1995-2007 in the WIOD data.


construct sector specific price indexes from the Chain-Type Price Indexes for Gross Out-
put by NAICS 2-digit Industry published by the BEA. We aggregate these prices using
the yearly expenditure shares of the US Input-Output Tables to construct chain-weighted
price indexes for the three broad sectors in our model. We compute aggregate consump-
tion expenditures per capita, Ci , from the Input-Output data Chain-Type Price index data.
In particular, we aggregate final private consumption at producer prices and aggregate
the Chain-Type Price Indexes using the consumption expenditure shares to construct an
aggregate price index for consumption at producers prices that is consistent with our
other data. We compute Ci,t as final consumption divided by the price index, divided by
population.


Appendix G                Global productivity growth in the goods sec-
                          tor
In this counterfactual we augment Counterfactual 1 with global productivity growth.
That is, in addition to declines in trade costs obtained from (22), we assign ÂiG = ÂG
to every country i, and we calibrate ÂG such that the model exactly replicates the decline
in the US employment share in the goods sector between 1995 and 2007.
    Figure A.1 compares the results of this counterfactual to the data, with a 45-degree
line as a reference. The figure shows that once we allow for global productivity change
to account for the changes in good employment in the US, then the counterfactual can
account quite well for the decline in the share of employment in the goods sector in most
countries.




                                                                   59
Appendix H                      Tables and Figures

             Figure A.2: Skill and trade intensities across industries by countries




                                                                         1.5
                           Domestic expenditure share 2007 relative to 1995
                             0              .5            1




                        .012                                                     .0625          .25             1                  4          16            64
                                                                                                                     j        j
                                                                                                   Skill intensity Hi /Hi / Li /Li, 1995

                                                                               Unskilled−labor intensive serv       Goods         Skilled−labor intensive serv



Notes: Each point is a country, one-digit industry pair. ’Domestic expenditure shares 2007 relative to 1995’
           j         j
refers to πii,2007 /πii,1995 defined in Figure 2. Skill intensities are defined as in Figure 3. Source: WIOD.



Figure A.3: Intermediate use of inputs from the goods-producing sector, by industries
and countries
                                                                     .6
                           Share of goods inputs in production, 1995
                                       .2          0  .4




                        .012                                                     .0625          .25             1                  4          16            64
                                                                                                                     j        j
                                                                                                   Skill intensity Hi /Hi / Li /Li, 1995

                                                                               Unskilled−labor intensive serv       Goods         Skilled−labor intensive serv



Notes: Each point is a country-industry pair. Share of goods inputs in production is the share of agriculture,
mining and manufacturing inputs in total production of the sector. Skill intensities are defined as in Figure
3. Source: WIOD.




                                                                                                                60
                           Figure A.4: Relative prices vs. relative expenditure shares
                                                                                                            (a) Consumption bundle
                Skilled-labor intensive services vs goods                                                                                  Unskilled-labor intensive vs goods




                                                                                                                                1.8




                                                                                                                                            2.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.3
                           3




                                                                                                                                1.6
                           2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.2
                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                1.4




                                                                                                                                            1.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.1
                           2




                                                                                                                                1.2




                                                                                                                                            1.6
                           1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                1




                                                                                                                                            1.4
                                                                                                                                .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .9
                           1




                                                      relative share −left axis−                  relative price −right axis−                                   relative share −left axis−            relative price −right axis−
                                 1977      1982         1987          1992         1997       2002         2007        2012                       1977   1982     1987        1992           1997   2002      2007         2012




                           (b) Input bundle used in the unskilled labor intensive service sector
                Skilled-labor intensive services vs goods                                                                                  Unskilled-labor intensive vs goods
                           1.5




                                                                                                                                1.8




                                                                                                                                            1.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.3
                                                                                                                                1.6




                                                                                                                                            1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.2
                                                                                                                                1.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.1
                           1




                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                1.2




                                                                                                                                            .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                1
                           .5




                                                                                                                                .8




                                                                                                                                            .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .9
                                                      relative share −left axis−                  relative price −right axis−                                   relative share −left axis−            relative price −right axis−
                                 1977      1982         1987          1992         1997       2002         2007        2012                       1977   1982     1987        1992           1997   2002      2007         2012




                                                                             (c) Input bundle used in the goods sector
                Skilled-labor intensive services vs goods                                                                                  Unskilled-labor intensive vs goods
                           .25




                                                                                                                                1.8




                                                                                                                                            .35




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.3
                                                                                                                                1.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.2
                           .2




                                                                                                                                            .3
                                                                                                                                1.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.1
                                                                                                                                1.2
                           .15




                                                                                                                                            .25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                1
                           .1




                                                                                                                                .8




                                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .9




                                                      relative share −left axis−                  relative price −right axis−                                   relative share −left axis−            relative price −right axis−
                                 1977      1982         1987          1992         1997       2002         2007        2012                       1977   1982     1987        1992           1997   2002      2007         2012




                                 (d) Input bundle used in the skilled labor intensive service sector
            Skilled-labor intensive services vs goods                                                                                  Unskilled-labor intensive services vs goods
                                                                                                                         1.8




                                                                                                                                            2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.3
                7




                                                                                                                         1.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.2
                6




                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                         1.4
                5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.1
                                                                                                                         1.2
                4




                                                                                                                                            1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                         1
                3




                                                                                                                         .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .9
                2




                                                                                                                                            1




                                        relative share −left axis−                  relative price −right axis−                                                 relative share −left axis−            relative price −right axis−
                    1977     1982         1987        1992           1997      2002         2007         2012                                     1977   1982     1987        1992           1997   2002      2007         2012




Notes: The figures plots the change in sectoral relative prices, and relative expenditures for (a) consump-
tion, and total inputs in (b) the unskilled-labor intensive service sector, (c) the goods sector, and (d) the
skilled- labor service sector. Source: Authors calculations based on data from the USE Input-Output Tables
for the US, and the Chain-Type Price Indexes for Gross Output published by the BEA.
                                                                                                                                      61
                                    Figure A.5: Actual vs. predicted expenditure shares
                                                                          (a) Independent estimation
                                Consumption Bundle                                          Unskilled-labor intensive services input bundle




                                                                                                 .5
           1




                                                                          HS Services
                                                                                                                                                             HS Services


                                                                                                                                                             LS Services
           .8




                                                                                                 0
                                                                          LS Services
           .6




                                                                                                 −.5
           .4
           .2




                                                                                                 −1
                                                Data         Fit                                                                   Data         Fit
                  1977   1982     1987   1992      1997   2002     2007      2012                      1977   1982   1987   1992      1997   2002     2007      2012




                                Goods input bundle                                            Skilled-labor intensive services input bundle




                                                                                                 2
           −1.2




                                                                                                                                                             HS Services
           −1.4




                                                                                                 1.5
           −1.6




                                                                          LS Services


                                                                                                 1
                                                                          HS Services
           −1.8




                                                                                                                                                             LS Services
                                                                                                 .5
           −2
           −2.2




                                                                                                 0




                                                Data         Fit                                                                   Data         Fit
                  1977   1982     1987   1992      1997   2002     2007      2012                      1977   1982   1987   1992      1997   2002     2007      2012




                                                                                    (b) Joint estimation
                                Consumption Bundle                                          Unskilled-labor intensive services input bundle
                                                                                                 .5
           1




                                                                          HS Services
                                                                                                                                                             HS Services


                                                                                                                                                             LS Services
           .8




                                                                                                 0




                                                                          LS Services
           .6




                                                                                                 −.5
           .4
           .2




                                                                                                 −1




                                                Data         Fit                                                                   Data         Fit
                  1977   1982     1987   1992      1997   2002     2007      2012                      1977   1982   1987   1992      1997   2002     2007      2012




                                Goods input bundle                                            Skilled-labor intensive services input bundle
                                                                                                 2
           −1.2




                                                                                                                                                             HS Services
           −1.4




                                                                                                 1.5
           −1.6




                                                                          LS Services
                                                                                                 1




                                                                          HS Services
           −1.8




                                                                                                                                                             LS Services
                                                                                                 .5
           −2
           −2.2




                                                                                                 0




                                                Data         Fit                                                                   Data         Fit
                  1977   1982     1987   1992      1997   2002     2007      2012                      1977   1982   1987   1992      1997   2002     2007      2012




Notes: The figures report the expenditure shares in the data an the fitted values obtained from estimating
equations (20) and (21).


                                                                                            62
                                             Table A1: Concordance across datasets and sectoral aggregation
     Category                             One Digit   Sector   OECD Description                        WIOD code   KLEMS code   IPUMS   CP Elasticity   Agg. Elasticity
     Agriculture                          AtB         G        Agriculture, forestry & fishing         AtB         AtB          10          8.11             8.11
     Mining                               C           G        Mining & quarrying                      C           C            20         15.72            15.72
     Food                                 D           G        Food, beverages & tobacco               15t16       15t16        30          2.55             2.55
     Textile                              D           G        Textiles, apparel & leather             19          17t19        30          5.56             5.56
     Textile                              D           G        Textiles, apparel & leather             17t18       17t19        30          5.56             5.56
     Wood                                 D           G        Wood products & furniture               20          20           30         10.83            10.83
     Paper                                D           G        Paper, paper products & printing        21t22       21t22        30          9.07             9.07
     Chemicals                            D           G        Industrial chemicals                    24          24           30          4.75             4.75
     Chemicals                            D           G        Drugs & medicines                                                30          4.75             4.75
     Petroleum                            D           G        Petroleum & coal products               23          23           30         51.08            51.08
     Plastic                              D           G        Rubber & plastic products               25          25           30          1.66             1.66
     Minerals                             D           G        Non-metallic mineral products           26          26           30          2.76             2.76
     Basic metals and Metal Products      D           G        Iron & steel                            27t28       27t28        30          7.99             6.76
     Basic metals and Metal Products      D           G        Non-ferrous metals                      27t28       27t28        30          7.99             6.76
     Basic metals and Metal Products      D           G        Metal products                                                   30           4.3             6.76
     Machinery nec                        D           G        Non-electrical machinery                29          29           30          1.52             1.52
     Electrical, Communication, Medical   D           G        Office & computing machinery                                     30         12.79            10.11
     Electrical, Communication, Medical   D           G        Electrical apparatus, nec               30t33       30t33        30          10.6            10.11
     Electrical, Communication, Medical   D           G        Radio, TV & communication equipment                              30          7.07            10.11
     Auto and Other Transport             D           G        Shipbuilding & repairing                34t35       34t35        30          .37              .53
     Auto and Other Transport             D           G        Other transport                         34t35       34t35        30          .37              .53




63
     Auto and Other Transport             D           G        Motor vehicles                                                   30          1.01             .53
     Auto and Other Transport             D           G        Aircraft                                34t35       34t35        30          .37              .53
     Electrical, Communication, Medical   D           G        Professional goods                                               30          9.98            10.11
     Other                                D           G        Other manufacturing                     36t37       36t37        30            5               5
     Electricity                          E           S        Electricity, gas & water                E           E            40
     Construction                         F           S        Construction                            F           F            50
     Wholesale and Retail                 G           S        Wholesale & retail trade                52          52           60
     Wholesale and Retail                 G           S        Wholesale & retail trade                51          51           60
     Wholesale and Retail                 G           S        Wholesale & retail trade                50          50           60
     Hotels and Restaurants               H           S        Restaurants & hotels                    H           H            70
     Transport and Communication          I           S        Transport & storage                     62          I            80
     Transport and Communication          I           S        Transport & storage                     63          I            80
     Transport and Communication          I           S        Transport & storage                     61          I            80
     Transport and Communication          I           S        Transport & storage                     60          I            80
     Transport and Communication          I           S        Communication                           64          I            80
     Finance                              J           F        Finance & insurance                     J           J            90
     Real Estate                          K           F        Real estate & business services         71t74       71t74        111
     Real Estate                          K           F        Real estate & business services         70          70           111
     Health                               N           F        Community, social & personal services   N           N            113
     Other Services                       O           S        Community, social & personal services   O           O            114
     Education                            M           F        Community, social & personal services   M           M            112
     Public Admin                         L           S        Producers of government services        L           L            100
     Private Households                   P           S        Other producers                         P           P            120
           Table A2: Changes in goods and service imports relative to total GDP

                Country          Goods Services Country                   Goods Services
                Australia          1.23     1.02    Italy                   1.33    1.47
                Austria            1.51     1.25    Japan                   2.16    2.05
                Belgium            1.13     1.29    Korea                   1.32    1.83
                Brazil             1.35     1.43    Mexico                  1.24    0.71
                Canada             0.98     0.91    Netherlands             0.97    1.26
                China              1.39     1.72    Poland                  2.12    1.90
                Czech Republic     1.55     0.92    Portugal                1.22    1.04
                Germany            1.73     1.91    Romania                 1.56    1.18
                Denmark            1.15     3.18    Russia                  1.07    0.68
                Spain              1.44     2.00    Rest of the World       1.22    1.43
                Finland            1.42     1.30    Slovakia                1.69    0.99
                France             1.33     1.18    Slovenia                1.29    1.71
                Great Britain      0.93     1.67    Sweden                  1.26    1.59
                Greece             1.39     2.57    Turkey                  1.62    1.74
                Hungary            1.99     1.29    Taiwan                  1.47    1.23
                Indonesia          1.05     1.18    United States           1.35    1.49
                India              2.15     1.03    World                   1.44    1.60
                Ireland            0.75     2.23    Average                 1.39    1.48
Notes: This table reports imports to total GDP in 2007 relative to 1995 using data from the WIOD. The
classification of WIOD industries into Goods and Services is detailed in Section 4.



                 Table A3: Sectoral changes in domestic-expenditure shares
              Country           Goods    Services    Country             Goods   Services
              Australia          0.88      1.00      Italy                0.89     0.99
              Austria            0.66      0.99      Japan                0.90     0.99
              Belgium            0.76      0.98      Korea                0.94     0.98
              Brazil             0.97      0.99      Mexico               0.87     1.01
              Canada             0.97      1.01      Netherlands          0.81     0.98
              China              0.97      0.99      Poland               0.72     0.98
              Czech Republic     0.72      1.01      Portugal             0.77     1.00
              Germany            0.76      0.98      Romania              0.74     1.00
              Denmark            0.83      0.92      Russia               0.97     1.01
              Spain              0.81      0.98      Rest of the World    0.89     0.96
              Finland            0.84      0.99      Slovakia             0.53     1.00
              France             0.85      1.00      Slovenia             0.64     0.97
              Great Britain      0.80      0.99      Sweden               0.83     0.97
              Greece             0.75      0.96      Turkey               0.86     1.00
              Hungary            0.54      0.98      Taiwan               0.78     0.99
              Indonesia          0.96      1.00      United States        0.90     1.00
              India              0.88      1.00      World                0.90     0.98
              Ireland            1.04      0.87      Average              0.82     0.98
Notes: This Table reports the ratio of the 2007 domestic expenditure shares relative to those in 1995 and
2007. Domestic expenditure shares are computed as the ratio of production minus exports to production
plus imports minus exports in each sector using data from the WIOD. The grouping of WIOD industries
into Goods and Services is detailed in Section 4.



                                                    64
Table A4: Observed changes in domestic expenditure shares and net exports to aggregate
revenue ratios

         Country                Weighted change in Change in Sectoral Net Exports
                               domestic expenditure   to Aggregate Revenues
                                      share                    ratio
         Australia                     0.93                     1.01
         Austria                       0.80                     0.97
         Belgium                       0.90                     1.01
         Brazil                        1.00                     0.98
         Canada                        0.97                     1.01
         China                         1.00                     0.98
         Czech Republic                0.91                     0.95
         Germany                       0.91                     0.97
         Denmark                       0.87                     1.02
         Spain                         0.91                     1.03
         Finland                       0.92                     1.01
         France                        0.91                     1.01
         Great Britain                 0.89                     1.03
         Greece                        0.88                     1.05
         Hungary                       0.72                     0.97
         Indonesia                     0.99                     0.97
         India                         0.96                     1.03
         Ireland                       0.95                     1.04
         Italy                         0.95                     1.01
         Japan                         0.97                     1.00
         Korea                         1.00                     0.98
         Mexico                        0.92                     1.01
         Netherlands                   0.91                     0.99
         Poland                        0.85                     1.02
         Portugal                      0.84                     1.02
         Romania                       0.87                     1.07
         Russia                        0.94                     1.00
         Slovakia                      0.83                     0.99
         Slovenia                      0.66                     1.00
         Sweden                        0.95                     1.01
         Turkey                        0.76                     1.01
         Taiwan                        0.91                     0.97
         United States                 0.94                     1.02
         Average                       0.90                     1.00
                                                                                       Kj    j     j   j
Notes: The weighted change in domestic expenditure shares is defined as π̂ ii ≡ ∏k=1 π̂ii (k ) σi (k)θ (k) . The
change in the revenue to absorption ratio is given by λ̂iT .




                                                      65
                                                           Table A5: Sectoral factor intensities

                     Country             H S /H    LS /L    Difference    H G /H    LG /L    Difference     H F /H    L F /L   Difference
                     Australia            0.29     0.53        -0.24       0.11      0.23       -0.13        0.60     0.24        0.37
                     Austria              0.31     0.50        -0.20       0.17      0.34       -0.17        0.52     0.15        0.37
                     Belgium              0.29     0.51        -0.22       0.15      0.23       -0.08        0.57     0.26        0.31
                     Brazil               0.32     0.49        -0.17       0.13      0.40       -0.27        0.55     0.11        0.44
                     Canada               0.43     0.57        -0.14       0.11      0.24       -0.13        0.45     0.19        0.26
                     China                0.61     0.31         0.29       0.14      0.64       -0.50        0.25     0.04        0.21
                     Czech Republic       0.34     0.48        -0.14       0.18      0.38       -0.20        0.48     0.15        0.34
                     Germany              0.38     0.51        -0.13       0.22      0.28       -0.06        0.40     0.21        0.19
                     Denmark              0.30     0.48        -0.18       0.12      0.27       -0.15        0.58     0.25        0.33
                     Spain                0.39     0.57        -0.19       0.14      0.31       -0.17        0.47     0.11        0.36
                     Finland              0.38     0.44        -0.06       0.19      0.35       -0.16        0.43     0.21        0.22
                     France               0.28     0.50        -0.23       0.14      0.25       -0.12        0.59     0.24        0.34
                     Great Britain        0.30     0.53        -0.23       0.12      0.20       -0.08        0.58     0.27        0.31
                     Greece               0.44     0.56        -0.12       0.09      0.37       -0.29        0.48     0.07        0.41
                     Hungary              0.33     0.46        -0.13       0.19      0.41       -0.22        0.49     0.13        0.35
                     Indonesia            0.53     0.41         0.11       0.11      0.50       -0.39        0.36     0.09        0.28
                     India                0.38     0.23         0.15       0.27      0.75       -0.48        0.35     0.02        0.33




66
                     Ireland              0.28     0.46        -0.18       0.18      0.39       -0.21        0.54     0.15        0.39
                     Italy                0.24     0.50        -0.26       0.11      0.33       -0.23        0.65     0.16        0.49
                     Japan                0.48     0.54        -0.06       0.20      0.29       -0.09        0.32     0.17        0.15
                     Korea                0.51     0.49         0.02       0.27      0.40       -0.13        0.22     0.11        0.11
                     Mexico               0.52     0.45         0.07       0.17      0.44       -0.27        0.30     0.11        0.20
                     Netherlands          0.30     0.51        -0.21       0.09      0.24       -0.15        0.61     0.25        0.36
                     Poland               0.32     0.32        -0.01       0.19      0.57       -0.38        0.49     0.11        0.38
                     Portugal             0.29     0.48        -0.20       0.08      0.41       -0.33        0.63     0.11        0.53
                     Romania              0.19     0.27        -0.07       0.15      0.65       -0.51        0.66     0.08        0.58
                     Russia               0.21     0.33        -0.12       0.22      0.51       -0.29        0.57     0.16        0.41
                     Slovakia             0.29     0.43        -0.14       0.19      0.38       -0.20        0.52     0.18        0.34
                     Slovenia             0.34     0.35        -0.01       0.21      0.53       -0.33        0.46     0.12        0.34
                     Sweden               0.31     0.45        -0.14       0.11      0.28       -0.17        0.59     0.27        0.31
                     Turkey               0.56     0.31         0.24       0.11      0.63       -0.52        0.33     0.06        0.27
                     Taiwan               0.51     0.49         0.02       0.18      0.42       -0.24        0.31     0.08        0.23
                     United States        0.41     0.58        -0.16       0.15      0.21       -0.06        0.44     0.22        0.22
                     Average              0.36     0.46        -0.09       0.16      0.39       -0.23        0.48     0.15        0.32
     Notes: H j /H measures the fraction of total skilled labor employed in sector j = S, G, F. L J /L is defined analogously. Difference measures H j /H −
     L j /L for each sector j.
                                Table A6: Intermediate input shares

 Country                βSi    βG
                                i     β iF   αiSS   αiGS   αiFS   αiSG   αiGG   αiFG   αiSF   αiGF   αiFF
 Australia             0.46   0.41   0.63    0.40   0.31   0.29   0.32   0.57   0.11   0.34   0.11   0.55
 Austria               0.61   0.42   0.68    0.43   0.31   0.26   0.27   0.60   0.13   0.36   0.17   0.48
 Belgium               0.51   0.33   0.64    0.52   0.22   0.26   0.28   0.63   0.09   0.24   0.16   0.60
 Brazil                0.65   0.41   0.73    0.37   0.35   0.27   0.21   0.69   0.10   0.39   0.23   0.37
 Canada                0.59   0.40   0.73    0.39   0.32   0.28   0.26   0.65   0.09   0.46   0.12   0.42
 China                 0.43   0.35   0.57    0.25   0.65   0.10   0.15   0.81   0.05   0.28   0.45   0.27
 Czech Republic        0.43   0.32   0.54    0.51   0.33   0.16   0.24   0.69   0.07   0.37   0.29   0.34
 Germany               0.59   0.41   0.70    0.39   0.31   0.30   0.24   0.59   0.17   0.26   0.12   0.62
 Denmark               0.56   0.41   0.72    0.49   0.27   0.24   0.30   0.60   0.10   0.42   0.16   0.42
 Spain                 0.54   0.35   0.69    0.44   0.36   0.20   0.26   0.65   0.09   0.41   0.18   0.41
 Finland               0.56   0.38   0.68    0.39   0.40   0.21   0.24   0.65   0.10   0.43   0.26   0.31
 France                0.56   0.34   0.68    0.47   0.24   0.29   0.26   0.58   0.15   0.28   0.13   0.59
 Great Britain         0.52   0.42   0.66    0.45   0.29   0.26   0.25   0.63   0.13   0.34   0.17   0.49
 Greece                0.61   0.39   0.77    0.35   0.45   0.21   0.22   0.70   0.08   0.45   0.15   0.40
 Hungary               0.51   0.33   0.66    0.35   0.38   0.27   0.20   0.71   0.09   0.29   0.30   0.42
 Indonesia             0.55   0.49   0.72    0.33   0.55   0.12   0.17   0.78   0.06   0.33   0.24   0.43
 India                 0.60   0.41   0.79    0.35   0.53   0.12   0.25   0.69   0.06   0.34   0.39   0.27
 Ireland               0.48   0.37   0.64    0.52   0.29   0.20   0.23   0.64   0.14   0.29   0.15   0.57
 Italy                 0.53   0.35   0.74    0.44   0.33   0.23   0.29   0.63   0.08   0.29   0.16   0.56
 Japan                 0.57   0.37   0.70    0.40   0.35   0.25   0.23   0.69   0.08   0.39   0.20   0.42
 Korea                 0.55   0.33   0.70    0.24   0.45   0.31   0.10   0.81   0.08   0.36   0.24   0.39
 Mexico                0.64   0.41   0.79    0.29   0.41   0.30   0.17   0.74   0.09   0.23   0.26   0.51
 Netherlands           0.53   0.38   0.65    0.43   0.27   0.30   0.27   0.57   0.16   0.32   0.15   0.53
 Poland                0.55   0.39   0.66    0.48   0.41   0.11   0.26   0.67   0.07   0.38   0.22   0.40
 Portugal              0.53   0.35   0.68    0.46   0.33   0.21   0.22   0.69   0.10   0.33   0.20   0.47
 Romania               0.48   0.39   0.69    0.38   0.51   0.11   0.19   0.72   0.08   0.29   0.53   0.18
 Russia                0.62   0.43   0.58    0.50   0.43   0.07   0.33   0.65   0.02   0.51   0.29   0.20
 Slovakia              0.42   0.33   0.64    0.53   0.34   0.13   0.27   0.67   0.06   0.39   0.27   0.35
 Slovenia              0.49   0.38   0.67    0.45   0.33   0.23   0.22   0.69   0.09   0.30   0.29   0.41
 Sweden                0.53   0.40   0.64    0.44   0.28   0.28   0.27   0.61   0.12   0.39   0.17   0.44
 Turkey                0.68   0.49   0.72    0.27   0.54   0.19   0.27   0.65   0.08   0.33   0.40   0.27
 Taiwan                0.58   0.31   0.73    0.29   0.42   0.29   0.18   0.74   0.08   0.18   0.21   0.61
 United States         0.62   0.35   0.66    0.36   0.32   0.32   0.19   0.68   0.13   0.25   0.14   0.61
 Average               0.55   0.38   0.68    0.40   0.37   0.22   0.24   0.67   0.09   0.34   0.23   0.43
                       j
Notes: We calculate β i from Input-Output data as the share of value-added in sector j’s total revenues.
                  lj
The input share αi is the share of expenditure in inputs produced in sector l, as a fraction of total input
expenditure in sector j.




                                                     67
                               Table A7: Generalized CES estimates

              Consumption       Unskilled Services       Skilled Services   Goods      Joint Estimation
     ρ           0.597***               0.000                0.237*          0.000            0.000
                  (0.099)                 (.)                (0.102)           (.)              (.)
 e F − eG        0.831***                                                                     0.017
                  (0.092)                                                                    (0.015)
 eS − e G        0.429***                                                                   0.113***
                  (0.037)                                                                    (0.017)
  # Years            36                  36                     36             36               36
Notes: The table reports the results of estimating equations (20) and (21). ’Consumption’, ’Unskilled Ser-
vices’, ’Skilled Services’ and ’Goods’ correspond to the results of estimating equations (20), and (21) for
l = S, G, F respectively. The last column reports the results to estimating the 4 equations simultaneously.




                                                    68
                          Table A8: Changes in value added and employment shares: Counterfactual 1 vs. Data

                                                  Value Added                                                       Employment
                               Counterfactual 1                      Data                        Counterfactual 1                    Data
                       Unskilled Goods Skilled Unskilled             Goods     Skilled   Unskilled Goods Skilled Unskilled           Goods     Skilled
      Country           services             services     services            services    services             services   services            services
      Australia            1.71      -9.72       3.71       -6.04    -13.03     15.85        1.97      -9.47       3.69      2.25    -23.06     13.32
      Austria              4.15     -10.19       5.29       -8.82      2.22     11.81        4.49      -9.89       5.23     -1.34    -21.74     38.66
      Belgium              3.28     -14.36       4.71        0.35    -17.30     10.73        3.48     -14.20       4.72     -5.30    -23.40     25.23
      Brazil               1.76      -4.66       2.30        5.78      0.33     -7.35        2.39      -4.10       2.67    11.09     -22.09     19.89
      Canada               1.42      -5.80       1.78        3.82     -6.04      0.09        1.50      -5.70       1.74      5.39    -20.48      6.25
      China                5.50      -3.46       7.31       16.06    -15.27     34.07        5.50      -3.35       7.04    19.53     -10.28      3.63
      Czech Republic       4.22      -8.17       4.07       -0.02     -2.56      3.66        4.48      -7.92       4.05      0.64    -10.88     19.46
      Germany              2.59      -7.70       2.96      -11.09      4.73      8.28        2.68      -7.61       2.98     -7.59    -16.42     31.97
      Denmark            11.09      -20.34      -0.11       -1.05     -9.43      6.92      11.20      -20.24      -0.17      1.71    -27.95     17.83
      Spain                2.63      -9.58       4.57        5.56    -24.62     13.18        3.14      -9.07       4.40      8.02    -27.95     18.24
      Finland              1.69      -5.29       2.86       -0.87     -6.43      7.29        1.81      -5.10       2.81      6.39    -19.72     11.80
      France               2.60     -10.52       3.16       -6.16    -14.14     12.71        2.91     -10.25       3.18      1.10    -24.12     15.68
      Great Britain        1.00     -14.20       5.55        1.48    -38.40     26.70        1.40     -13.88       5.55      1.07    -35.35     17.61
      Greece               8.75     -18.66       4.54       13.20    -33.66      3.15        9.81     -17.68       3.70      7.37    -29.90     43.83
      Hungary              1.64       5.25     -10.74       -1.28     -7.08     10.19        0.85       4.35     -10.65      8.37    -19.42     19.34
      Indonesia            1.99      -3.50       6.21        5.96     -0.86    -14.90        2.24      -3.25       6.37     -7.41      6.28     0.76




69
      India                6.26      -3.97      12.96       14.47    -18.42     21.00        7.34      -3.04      12.42    18.74      -8.40     44.07
      Ireland             -2.54     -10.55     17.27         6.29    -31.92     33.50       -1.38      -9.34     16.28     17.55     -38.72     24.94
      Italy                3.32      -9.14       5.06       -2.45    -16.01     17.08        3.66      -8.82       4.94      0.15    -15.81     23.97
      Japan                2.39      -5.41       0.91       -5.51     -8.59     15.63        2.44      -5.35       0.92     -2.87    -14.98     28.73
      Korea                5.29      -9.25       3.52       -6.68     -7.88     21.78        5.55      -8.95       3.59      4.58    -29.66     60.36
      Mexico               4.07      -9.03       8.55       10.49     -7.04     -5.51        4.79      -8.27       8.94    11.20     -22.15     29.56
      Netherlands          2.73      -7.01       0.45       -0.92    -15.91     12.30        2.80      -6.93       0.42     -5.64    -21.52     22.45
      Poland             13.30      -10.97       7.49        1.68    -22.44     36.21      13.80      -10.39       6.92    28.17     -24.88     27.19
      Portugal             4.94     -11.64       8.34        5.67    -26.15     14.32        6.09     -10.66       8.54      8.17    -24.29     37.89
      Romania            16.60      -10.04      11.40       49.39    -31.97     -0.05      17.43       -9.28      10.15    41.71     -18.59      5.00
      Russia             12.94       -9.60       1.72      -11.00     -2.12     45.17      13.18       -9.39       1.67    34.14     -22.08     -0.81
      Slovakia             3.10       1.37      -6.87       13.14    -12.51     -4.12        2.81       1.05      -6.77    17.28     -21.86      2.92
      Slovenia             6.98     -11.76      13.49       10.07    -16.18      5.19        8.22     -10.50      13.43    16.32     -27.09     44.84
      Sweden               3.24     -10.12       3.05       -0.39    -12.97     10.02        3.45      -9.88       2.98     -2.18    -17.41     15.73
      Turkey             10.74      -10.81      19.06       11.77    -30.94     57.46      12.44       -9.30      19.67    32.04     -26.42     70.25
      Taiwan              -0.16      -0.50       1.66        1.56    -10.69     11.96       -0.10      -0.41       1.64     -5.57     -8.23     46.68
      United States        2.28     -12.30       3.65       -5.11    -14.97     14.15        2.46     -12.15       3.68      1.24    -24.73     14.80
      Average              4.59      -8.53       4.84        3.31    -14.19     13.59        4.99      -8.15       4.75      8.07    -21.01     24.30
     Notes: The Table reports the change in sectoral value added and employment shares in Counterfactual 1 under our baseline calibration and the
     changes observed in the data.
Table A9: Changes in skill premium and gains from trade ratio, Counterfactuals 1 and 2

                              Counterfactual 1                           Counterfactual 2
                        Skill    Skilled    Unskilled              Skill    Skilled    Unskilled
 Country              premium real wage real wage                premium real wage real wage
 Australia               1.52      3.72         2.16                1.67      4.64         2.93
 Austria                 2.00     18.98        16.64                4.95     22.07        16.32
 Belgium                 1.31      3.46         2.12                2.19      8.29         5.98
 Brazil                  1.42      2.75         1.31               -1.70     -0.66         1.05
 Canada                  0.68      4.17         3.47                1.07      1.93         0.85
 China                   3.29     14.31        10.67               -0.53     -1.02        -0.50
 Czech Republic          1.66     28.74        26.64               -0.85      9.89        10.84
 Germany                 0.49      6.45         5.94                0.41      6.87         6.44
 Denmark                 0.68      8.32         7.60                2.86     11.64         8.54
 Spain                   1.95      7.76         5.70                3.27      9.43         5.96
 Finland                 0.94      5.77         4.79                1.53      6.59         4.98
 France                  1.18      5.50         4.27                2.26      7.57         5.19
 Great Britain           1.79      4.97         3.13                3.27      7.62         4.21
 Greece                  4.48      9.95         5.24                7.56     18.56        10.23
 Hungary                -3.56     47.47        52.91               10.95     48.81        34.12
 Indonesia               2.28      4.73         2.40               -3.51     -2.09         1.48
 India                   5.24     12.35         6.76               10.88     15.55         4.22
 Ireland                 6.65     16.62         9.34                3.65      9.30         5.45
 Italy                   2.60      6.23         3.54                2.37      6.31         3.85
 Japan                   0.32      0.94         0.62                0.28      2.24         1.95
 Korea                   1.16      4.29         3.10               -1.01      0.00         1.03
 Mexico                  3.04     13.13         9.79                3.09      9.53         6.25
 Netherlands             0.41      4.01         3.58                1.72      5.66         3.88
 Poland                  4.81     35.42        29.20                7.86     30.56        21.05
 Portugal                5.29     22.68        16.51               10.78     28.26        15.78
 Romania                 7.68     41.70        31.59               13.15     37.16        21.21
 Russia                  1.36      3.00         1.62                1.50      8.66         7.05
 Slovakia               -2.06     38.32        41.23                4.61     23.69        18.25
 Slovenia                5.89     66.86        57.58               14.80     70.19        48.26
 Sweden                  1.55      5.36         3.76                1.79      5.05         3.20
 Turkey                  9.55     40.66        28.40               12.77     46.61        30.01
 Taiwan                  0.34      8.17         7.80                0.93     10.63         9.61
 United States           0.76      2.52         1.74                0.81      3.86         3.02
 Average                 2.32     15.13        12.46                3.80     14.35         9.78
Notes: This table reports the predicted change in skill premium and real wages under our baseline calibra-
tion, in Counterfactuals 1 and 2.




                                                   70
