NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A GOODNESS OF FIT TEST
OF DUAL LABOR MARKET THEORY

William T. Dickens
Kevin Lang

Working Paper No. 2350

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1987

This study was supported in part by Lang's Olin Fellowship at the NBER and by
NSF grant number SES-86O6139. Dickens thanks the Institute of Industrial Relations
at Berkeley for generous research support. Conversations with James Heckman and
Larry Summers who, despite very different perspectives encouraged us to pursue
a similar avenue of investigation, were instrumental in motivating this paper.
We are grateful to them for their encouragement and criticism. Paul Hunt provided
able research assistance. The usual caveat applies. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2350
August 1987

A

Goodness of Fit Test of alal Labor Market Theory

ABSTRACT

subject our dual labor market model to a goodness of test fit and ccmpare
the results with those obtained using a single equation model with a carplex
error structure. The dual labor market does an excellent job of predicting
we

the wage distribution except for failing to explain bnching at
$10.00 per hour. The null hypothesis that the

rejected

$7 .50 and

model is correct cannot be

at the .05 level. In contrast, the wage distribution predicted by

the single labor market model differs significantly fran the observed
distribution.

T. Dickens
Department of Econanics
Wiflian

University of California
Berkeley, C 94720

Kevin Lang

Deparhient of Econanics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston,

MP 02215

I. Introduction

In a recent

paper (Dickens and Lang, 1985), we tested the dual labor

market view by estimating an endogenous switching model of wage setting with

unknown regimes. While the paper has been well received, certain criticisms

have led us to undertake additional tests of the model. In the next section
we surrrnarize our initial results and outline the maj or criticisms -- the
most important being that our results were artifacts of our distribotional

assumptions. In the third section, we describe the results of a goodness of
fit test of our distribjtional assumptions. The paper ends with a brief
conclusion.

II. Results and

Criticisms

In our 1985 paper we assumed that there were two sectors of the labor
market,

the primary and

secondary sectors, with the wage of worker i

given

by

j=p,s.

(1) lnw=XjBj÷ejj

Sector of nployrrent was determined by a "switching" equation given

(2)

by

y*XB+e1>O

if and

if the individual is iiployed in

primary sector. Sector of
ployment was not assumed to be known. Instead, under the assumption that
only

the

the error terms were jointly normally distrihited, the three equations (1 ) (2) were estimated by

CIr

results were

maximum liicelihood.

very suportive

of

the dual

labor

market view. The

2

dual labor market rrrx3el significantly outperformed a standard log wage

equation with a haToskedastic error term.' The wage equation coefficients

corresponded closely to the predictions of the dual labor market mcx1el. In
addition, we showed

that

given assumptions about between group differences

in the disutility of secondary sector ployment, it was possible to test
whether blacks face nonprice barriers to primary sector anployment. The

results

were

supportive of the existence of nonprice barriers.

Critics have raised two important

feel merit

and

closely related points

which we

ftirther investigation. The first view can be surrrnarized as

follows: ui always knew that the standard OLS wage equation specification

was too simple and that the true error terms were heteroskedastic. When you
take account of this heteroskedasticity, your results are exactly what I

expect

to find."

In our original paper, we recognized that

our model was

equivalent to assuming a particular (bet probably bizarre) distribetion for
the error term in the single equation model bet argued that in the absence

of our results, such a distribetion would not be suggested. We still
maintain

this position. Although all of the people who have made variants

of the above ccnments have estimated numerous OLS wage equations, none makes

a practice of assuming a heteroskedastic error term. Nevertheless, we
recognize that sare of our critics may have better intuition than ours even

if they have failed to act on it. We therefore carpare our model with a
single equation model which assumes a quite ccnplex heteroskedastic
structure

below.

The related view can be suitmarized as "Your results rest on restrictive
assumptions about ftnctional form. If your equations are misspecified
for example if there are more than two sectors

or the error terms are

not

3

normally distributed, your tests are incorrect." This argument was made
most

clearly in Heckman

and Hotz (1986). While in our paper, we were quite

specific about recognizing the limitations of our test, in retrospect,
may

we

not have anphasized the potential probls sufficiently. We are not

particularly concerned that the degree of labor market segmentation may

exceed that posited in our work. There is a sense in which dualism as

opposed to more general segntation is unlikely to be more than a useful
simplification.

However,

it is true that our test of nonprice

sensitive to assumptions about functional

above

form.

Any

of

barriers is

the problaiis listed

could account for our rejection of the null hypothesis of no nonprice

barriers.
To a certain extent this is a criticism of all sophisticated
econa-netric testing of econcrnic theories. More generally, the argument

takes the following form. All models are wrong not just because they are

approxiiiiations to a caiiplicated reality but also because the extent of our

knowledge is inherently limited. Therefore any tests of econanic theories
which rely on models are based on assumptions which we know to be false, and

it is irrpossible to tell whether we are rejecting the false assumptions or
the theory we claim to reject. Hec1uian and Hotz caie close to athracing

this position in their recognition that human capital theory is no more
testable than dual labor market theory (p530). Sunuiers (1987) makes
essentially this argument.

To the extent that our critics take this nihilistic position, we have
considerable sympathy with their carments and are undertaking new tests

which rely less heavily on a constrained model. Nevertheless, we believe

that sane light can be cast on the usefulness of the test by subjecting the

4

model on which it is based to a standard test of specification to determine

whether the model is clearly incanpatible with the data. The results are
presented below.

II. Goodness of Fit Tests

The strategy we use in this paper is qpite simple. We begin by

calculating the Moore (1977) goodness of fit test statistic and by visually
ccmparing the predicted and npirical wage distrib.itions for the
unrestricted dual market model using the PSID data set extract fran our 1985
paper which excludes observations fran the SEE) sample. This data set

contains 1696 observations on male heads-of-households.

We began by using $ .25 intervals b.it discovered that the model failed2

apparently because of its inability to predict the tendency of wages to

cluster at exact dollar values. This result serves to underscore the view
that all models are wrong. However, when we used $1 intervals, we could not

reject the hypothesis that the model was correctly specified at the 05
level. The test statistic was 28.4 which has a probability of exactly .1
with twenty degrees of freedcm. Moreover, as can be seen in figure 1, the

dual labor market predicted distrilxition tracks the &npirical distribition
very well.
The intervals ranges are less than $1.71, $1.71

and up.3
which

Peaks

appear in

to $2.70, ...

the intervals covering $7 .50 and

$20.71

$10 .00 per hour

are not captured by the model, bit otherwise the model tracks the

aipirical

distrib.ition

ranarkably accurately. Thus we conclude that the

dual labor market model provides a good

distribition

representation of

the wage

except for its inability to account for the attraction of

5

certain round numbers.

Of course, the fact that the dual

labor

market model represents the

wage distri1ition well does not danonstrate that the heteroskedastic error
models which other people "knew about all along" do not fit the distribition

equally

well.

Since there are undoubtedly

is a little difficult to know how

the

a

large number of such mcxels, it

to proceed.

Nevertheless, we believe that

following approach will generally be viewed as reasonable.

Cur model used 21 parameters. Cut of a sense of good sport and fair
play, we decided to allow the alternative model 22 parameters, 11 to

describe the regression line and 11 to describe the heteroskedastic

structure of the disturbance term. The first seven terms were obvious --

a

constant and the effects of living in an SMSA, never having been married,

race, schooling, experience arid its square. SalEwhat less obvious but we
thought likely to be chosen by most people were schooling and experience

interacted and race and schooling interacted. For the raTaining two terms,
we chose between interacting race and the experience terms and adding

schooling squared and its interaction with race. The second specification
performs better

in

the sense that the R2 is higher for both the wage

equation and the equation explaining the heteroskedastic structure. We

therefore tested that specification using a goodness of fit test.
The heteroskedastic single equation model is easiiy rejected. The
Chernoff-LeI-iiiann test statistic is 67.5 with 20 degrees of freedari which is

significant at any conventional level. Moreover, as can be seen frau figure
1, ccvipared with the dual labor market model, the predicted distribution
based on the single equation model conforms notably less wefl to the

aiipirical distribution. While we have not exhausted the set of error

6

distributions which people will have known about all along, we have given

the single equation rrcdel a fair chance, and it has not performed up to the
standards of the dual labor market model. We therefore conclude that the
dual labor market model provides a better description of the wage

distribution than single equation models.

III.

Conclusion

While

the dual

labor market model outperforms a

reasonable single

equation alternative and "passes" a goodness of fit test, it is clear that
the dual labor market model developed in our paper does not provide a

ccrnplete description of the wage distribution. At the very least, it cannot

account for certain spikes in the distribution. Moreover, it seans likely
that with a sufficiently large data set, even a test based on the wage
intervals used in this paper would allow us to reject the model.
While we find these results supportive of the dual labor market
description of the wage distribution, they pose a more serious problQrt for

our test of the existence of nonprice barriers to primary sector anployment.
Without considerable Monte Carlo experimentation which would be

prohibitively expensive, it is iimpossible to determine precisely the effect
on our test of apparently minor departures frcm the normality asswiption.

While we recognize this as a lijriitation of our test and that it serves to
underline the importance of pirsuing other avenues for testing the same

that this criticism is not
particular to our model and test but instead is quite general. It can be
hypothesis, it should nevertheless

be recognized

applied to all attanpts to test theories in the context of ccniplex models.

7

References

Dickens, William T. and Kevin Lang,

"A

Test of aial Labor Market Theory,"

American Econanic Review, 75, 4 (Septanber 1985): 792-805.
Heckman,
Earnings

James J. and V. Joseph Hotz, "An Investigation of the Labor Market
of Panamanian Males: Evaluating the Sources of Inequality," The

Journal of aiman

Resources,

21, 4 (Fall

1986)

:507-542.

Moore, David S., "Generalized Inverses, Wald' s Method, and the Constniction
of C.hi-Squared Tests of Fit," Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 72 (March 1977):131—7.
Surrmers, Lawrence H.,

"The Scientific Illusion in Macoreconcinics,"

University, uniblished, 1987.

Harvard

8

Footnotes

1. As we noted in our paper, the sampling distrth.ition of the 1iJce1ihoc
ratio test statistic we used is not well-defined, }iit Monte-Carlo evidence
suggested that the approach we used was, in fact, conservative.

2. air initial tests used the Chernoff-Lebmann test statistic because of its
greater siJTplicity.
3. The use of these particular intervals was largely accidental. We
initally used intervals expressed in logs. The upper and lower bounds were
used to keep all predicted friencies fran falling notably below ten.

FIGURE 1
208

158

188

58

2

4

_ACTIJAL

6

8

DUAL

18

12

___SINGLE

14

16

18

28

