                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      PLANNING FOR RETIREMENT? THE IMPORTANCE OF TIME PREFERENCES

                                       Robert L. Clark
                                     Robert G. Hammond
                                      Christelle Khalaf
                                    Melinda Sandler Morrill

                                      Working Paper 23501
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23501


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2017




The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from the Sloan Foundation, Grant Number
2013-10-20. The authors would like to thank Bryan Allard, Emma Hanson, and Aditi Pathak for
research assistance. The research reported herein is part of an on-going project that is being
conducted in partnership with the North Carolina Retirement Systems Division. The authors
thank Janet Cowell, former North Carolina State Treasurer, Steven C. Toole, Director of the
Retirement Systems Division, Mary Buonfiglio, Deputy Director of Supplemental Retirement
Plans, and Sam Watts, Policy Director of the Retirement Systems Division for their help and
support. An earlier draft of this paper was prepared for the 2014 SIEPR Conference on Working
Longer and Retirement; the authors thank seminar participants for helpful comments. The
authors also thank Olivia Mitchell and John Pencavel for helpful suggestions. The opinions and
conclusions expressed herein are solely those of the authors and do not represent the opinions or
policies of the North Carolina Retirement System or any other institution with which the authors
are affiliated. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Robert L. Clark, Robert G. Hammond, Christelle Khalaf, and Melinda Sandler
Morrill. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
 Planning for Retirement? The Importance of Time Preferences
Robert L. Clark, Robert G. Hammond, Christelle Khalaf, and Melinda Sandler Morrill
NBER Working Paper No. 23501
June 2017
JEL No. J32

                                         ABSTRACT

Ensuring retirement income security is a priority for individuals, employers, and policymakers.
Using merged administrative and survey data for public sector workers in North Carolina, we
explore how workers’ characteristics and preferences are associated with planning and saving for
retirement. We then assess the “quality” of a retirement plan and whether retirement behavior is
consistent with these plans. The findings indicate that the way that individuals discount future
consumption is associated with the extent of their retirement planning and preparedness. We find
that individuals who engage in retirement planning are better prepared to meet their retirement
goals upon leaving their career jobs.

Robert L. Clark                                Christelle Khalaf
Poole College of Management                    Department of Economics
Box 7229                                       North Carolina State University
North Carolina State University                ckhalaf@ncsu.edu
Raleigh, NC 27695
and NBER                                       Melinda Sandler Morrill
robert_clark@ncsu.edu                          Department of Economics
                                               North Carolina State University
Robert G. Hammond                              Box 8110
Department of Economics                        Raleigh, NC 27695-8110
North Carolina State University                melinda_morrill@ncsu.edu
Raleigh, NC 27695
robert_hammond@ncsu.edu
         Planning for Retirement? The Importance of Time Preferences


   I.      Introduction

        Economists have understood the importance of risk and time preferences in household

decision making since Adam Smith (Ashraf, Camerer, and Loewenstein, 2005). We study the

role of these preference parameters in explaining individuals’ retirement planning and decisions

regarding retirement saving. Understanding how individuals plan for retirement is key to

determining whether they will achieve their retirement goals. In addition, this information

informs the design of both government and employer policies related to retirement timing and to

retirement income security.

        The analysis considers multiple aspects of an individual’s retirement planning behavior

using data from detailed administrative records on public employees in North Carolina linked to

a large-scale survey. Our results indicate that risk and time preferences are quantitatively

significant determinants of an individual’s retirement planning behavior. Interestingly, when

explaining an individual’s plans for retirement, our measures of time preferences hold more

predictive power than risk preferences. Our primary measure of retirement planning is derived

from self-reports on a survey. We confirm the robustness to alternative measures of planning

including activities using an online retirement planning tool available to all employees. In

addition, we consider other, more typical objective aspects of retirement planning such as

supplemental savings contributions and wealth accumulation.

        A key contribution of our work is the use of data that provide an extensive picture of

retirement planning behavior along with the realization of retirement age, which is a central

aspect of the retirement plan. There is an important role for time preferences in understanding

decision making in regards to retirement planning and preparedness. We further exploit the
                                                 1
richness of our data by tracking our survey respondents in the administrative records for nearly

two years after the survey closed. Planned retirement behavior, as self-reported on our survey, is

predictive of actual retirement behavior. There is clear evidence that stated plans matter:

planned retirement age is highly correlated with whether an individual has indeed retired and this

relationship is strongest for those who had already made a retirement plan. Finally, we show that

time preferences matter for actual retirement timing, but only for individuals who had already

made a retirement plan. The extensive nature of our data allows us to provide evidence that self-

reported plans are an important aspect of understanding retirement behavior.

          There is an emerging literature on retirement planning and its effect on economic

wellbeing in retirement, but less is known about public employees who may behave differently

than private sector workers. Public sector employees, including state, local, and federal

governmental employees, comprise approximately 18 percent of the U.S. non-farm labor force.1

In general, public sector workers are more likely to be covered by defined benefit (DB) pension

plans and retiree health insurance. The model of deferred compensation, in combination with a

relatively stable size of the workforce, may attract workers who are particularly risk averse or

who demonstrate more “patience” towards the timing of compensation and consumption.

Because public workers seem to have different risk and time preferences (Bellante and Link,

1981) and receive very different compensation packages than their private sector counterparts,

results from studies examining the retirement planning and preparedness of private sector




1
    See Bureau of Labor Statistics, Current Employment Statistics,
http://www.bls.gov/web/empsit/ceseeb1b.htm, [accessed October 2, 2014].


                                                      2
workers do not necessarily apply to public sector workers.2

          Lusardi and Mitchell (2014) provide a detailed review of research on financial literacy

and its relationship to planning and wealth accumulation (see also Van Rooij, Lusardi, and

Alessie, 2011). Lusardi and Mitchell (2007) examine survey responses from the Health and

Retirement Study (HRS) and conclude that financial literacy predicts planning and that planning

affects saving and wealth accumulation. These studies highlight the importance of two

significant relationships: the relationship between financial literacy and planning and the

relationship between planning and retirement wealth accumulation. We build on this work by

emphasizing the importance of risk and time preferences in addition to financial literacy.

          While risk preferences have received a lot of attention among economists, there is a

growing literature that emphasizes the importance of time preferences in determining retirement

planning behavior. The majority of papers that include a measure of time preferences find that

they play an important role in determining retirement decision making (e.g., Petkoska and Earl,

2009, Finke and Huston, 2013, Brown and Previtero, 2014, Bradford, Courtemanche, and Heutel,

2014, Brown, Farrell, and Weisbenner, 2015, and Koehler, Langstaff, and Liu, 2015). In

contrast, Ameriks, Caplin, and Leahy (2003) and Binswanger and Carman (2012) find little

predictive power for time preferences in retirement planning or wealth accumulation.

          Our data are derived from survey responses linked to administrative records maintained

by the North Carolina Retirement System Division (RSD).3 The sample consists of public sector




2
    We present a comparison of our sample of public workers and private sector workers in the Health and
Retirement Study (HRS) in Appendix C. We confirm that the public sector workers we study are more
risk averse and more patient than the private sector workers in the HRS.


                                                     3
workers in a large state, North Carolina, which is diverse in terms of economic activity,

urbanicity, and demographic characteristics. The sample includes active workers ages 50-64.

By using both administrative records and survey responses, the data have several indicators of a

worker’s behavior in regards to retirement planning and include both subjective and objective

measures along several key dimensions. Our findings suggest several differences between

subjective measures and objective measures in terms of an assessment of planning and of other

types of retirement activities such as supplemental plan participation. Thus, it is important to

combine subjectively and objectively measured outcomes in order to provide a fuller

understanding of retirement decision making.4

          To study the role of risk and time preferences, the survey includes items based on similar

questions used in the HRS to categorize respondents as more or less risk averse and more or less

patient (Barsky and Juster, 1997). Further, the survey includes questions that assess respondents’

financial literacy objectively in addition to questions that elicit a self-assessed measure of

financial knowledge. This study explores several aspects of planning, including subjective and

objective measures of planning, supplemental plan participation and contribution levels, wealth

accumulation, planned age at retirement, and plans for working after retirement from a career job

in the public sector. Combining survey and administrative data allows us to include both




3
    As described in more detail in the Appendix, these data were gathered as part of a larger project titled
“Challenges to Retirement Readiness in the North Carolina Public Sector Workforce.” More details on
the full data and project can be found at: https://sites.google.com/a/ncsu.edu/retirementstudy/
4
    Subjective measures have several disadvantages (e.g., social desirability bias and recollection errors),
while objective measures have their own disadvantages (e.g., administrative data do not typically provide
measures of all relevant outcomes). See the discussion in Section II.


                                                        4
subjective and objective measures, which provides a more comprehensive picture of retirement

planning and preparedness.



II. Administrative and Survey Data on North Carolina Public Sector Workers

          On most dimensions, North Carolina is broadly representative of the nation in terms of its

size, the diversity of the population, and the structure of its public pension plans. Public sector

jobs cover a wide range of occupations, skill levels, educational backgrounds, and levels of

compensation. There are over 400,000 state and local government employees in North Carolina

including doctors, lawyers, teachers and other professional employees along with clerical and

other office workers, maintenance staff, construction workers, and law enforcement officers.

The population including in our analysis is representative of other state and local government

employees and also resembles much of the national labor force. As such, examining this large

group of employees is a useful case study of how older workers plan for retirement and whether

retirement plans are realized.

          Full-time employees working for a state agency in North Carolina, as well as teachers

employed by local public school systems, are required to enroll in the Teachers’ and State

Employees’ Retirement System (TSERS).5 Most municipal, county, and other local

governmental employers participate in the Local Governmental Employees’ Retirement System

(LGERS). Both plans are defined benefit pensions and have similar characteristics. The TSERS

plan formula provides a benefit equal to 1.82 percent of average salary over the high four years
5
    The major exception to automatic inclusion in TSERS is that university faculty have the option of
enrolling in TSERS or participating in a defined contribution plan managed by the University of North
Carolina system. Faculty electing to be in TSERS are included in our sample; however, faculty who
selected the Optional Retirement Plan (ORP) are not included in the survey sample nor do we have
administrative records on these individuals.

                                                      5
of earnings times the number of years of service, while the LGERS formula is 1.85 percent of

salary times years of service. Both plans allow workers to retire with unreduced benefits after 30

years of service or at age 65 with 5 years of service.6 A comparison of the generosity of these

plans to other state and local pensions indicates that their level of generosity is near the mean of

all such plans. The Retirement System Division of the Office of the State Treasurer manages

both plans. Public employees in North Carolina are also covered by Social Security and

Medicare.

           The data are derived from a survey of public sector workers merged with corresponding

administrative records maintained by the North Carolina Retirement Systems Division. The

administrative records contain detailed information about each employee including earnings, job

information, agency type, years of service, age, and creditable service. From these values, we

impute the number of years until each individual is first eligible for retirement benefits or

whether the individual is already eligible for benefits.7 We observe basic demographic

information in the administrative data, and we supplement this demographic information with

responses to survey questions about race/ethnicity, education level, and marital status, as well as

various questions about their spouses’ characteristics (if applicable). We combined these data

with records of participation in the state-managed NC 401(k) and NC 457 plans.8




6
    Other details of the two plans can be found at the systems websites:
https://www.nctreasurer.com/ret/Benefits%20Handbooks/TSERShandbook.pdf
https://www.nctreasurer.com/ret/Benefits%20Handbooks/LGERShandbook.pdf.
7
    Table A.2 explains in detail how years until eligible for retirement benefits is calculated.
8
    Appendix A describes the data and sample in more detail. As described there, we conducted both an
email and postal mail survey. All respondents were given the option to enter a drawing for two iPad
tablets ($500 value) as an incentive for survey completion. Our response rate was approximately 18%.

                                                         6
          The first column of Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the full sample. The

average salary is $52,481, average tenure is 16.3 years, and average age at the time of the survey

is 57. Over half of our sample is already eligible to retire and immediately begin receiving

retirement benefits. Among those not yet eligible, the average years until retirement eligibility is

4.1. The final two columns of Table 1 are described below.

                                                      [Table 1]

          Retirement planning, our main outcome of interest, is measured in several alternative

ways. We include both subjectively and objectively measured variables to illustrate the

robustness of our findings and to provide support that we are capturing economically important

behaviors associated with retirement planning. To study retirement decision making, we

consider three categories of variables: a direct self-reported measure of retirement planning,

objective measures of aspects of the retirement plans, and observed results of retirement

planning. Each is described below.

          A. Self-Reported Retirement Planning

          Our main measure of retirement planning is a ‘subjective’ indicator from the response to

a survey question aimed at determining the extent to which a respondent has thought about

retirement and formulated a retirement plan. Each respondent had the option to indicate that she:

(1) has a retirement plan; (2) has thought about retirement but does not have a plan; or (3) has

not thought about retirement at all. While ‘thinking about’ retirement is a somewhat nebulous

concept, having made a retirement plan is a concrete indication of having planned. We define a

measure of ‘subjective planning’ to be whether the individual reports having a retirement plan.9

9
    We describe sensitivity tests using alternative parameterizations further below and in the appendix. Our
preferred definition of subjective planning (have a retirement plan) has a stronger association with
preferences than a more inclusive definition.

                                                       7
Columns 2 and 3 of Table 1 show mean values for those that have or have not made a retirement

plan, respectively. We observe that those with higher salaries, closer to retirement, more years

of service, and are older are more likely to report having made a retirement plan. The final

column of Table 1 presents the mean differences in each variable by whether the respondent

indicated that they had a retirement plan; all differences are statistically significant.

           Interestingly, men and women who are married are more likely to report having made a

retirement plan. This could be due to the need to coordinate between spouses or might reflect

having a spouse that has already begun the retirement process. Gustman and Steinmeier (2000),

Michaud (2003), Banks, Blundell, and Casanova (2010) examine why a significant share of

spouses retire within one year of each other, independently of their age difference.10 Leisure

complementarities or similar preferences and Social Security spousal benefits are responsible for

a large portion of observed joint retirements (Casanova, 2010). While we do not explicitly

model joint retirement behavior in this paper, results not shown demonstrate that public

employees whose spouses have already retired are more likely to report having made a

retirement plan and to themselves retire sooner than employees who did not report having a

retired spouse.11 We return to this comparison in a regression context below.

           In Table 1, we also observe that planners are more likely to have a college degree than

non-planners, are less likely to be non-white, and are more likely to own their home. Our survey

was distributed by hard-copy for individuals who did not provide an email address to their

employer. Thus, it is not surprising to find that print sample respondents were more likely to be




10
     Among our married sample with an already retired spouse, 16 percent plan to retire within one year.
11
     In our data, workers with a retired spouse were more likely to have a retirement plan (58 percent versus
50 percent) and an earlier planned retirement age (4.7 years until retirement versus 6.1 years).

                                                       8
non-planners. We explore the associations between demographic characteristics and planning

further below using multivariate regression analysis.

          B. Alternative Planning Measures

          While making a plan is an important step in retirement preparedness, one must also

engage in behaviors to achieve those goals, such as acquiring financial literacy and saving in

supplemental retirement saving plans. We propose several outcomes that reflect additional

aspects of an individual’s retirement planning behavior. By combining survey and

administrative data, we are able to construct measures for a variety of nuanced characteristics of

the planning process to provide a fuller understanding of planning to go beyond our main

measure discussed above.

          First, we draw an objective measure of planning from the administrative data. These data

indicate actions by individuals from an employee’s use of the Online Retirement Benefits

through Integrated Technology (ORBIT) website. ORBIT allows members of the retirement

systems to access their retirement account information, including account balances in 401(k) and

457 plans, and to engage in a more intensive form of planning by requesting a “self-service

estimate” of their pension benefit.12 While technically an individual can determine their

expected annual benefit using the annuity formula, the actuarial factors used by RSD in the

calculation of benefits are somewhat sophisticated. The annual benefit changes with each

additional year of service and with increases in annual earnings. In addition, the benefit at any

given time is a function of whether the worker has achieved sufficient service for an early or


12
     In fact, staff at RSD indicate that the member services staff at RSD and the employers’ human
resources staff regularly refer workers to the ORBIT Self-Service Estimator to obtain estimated benefit
information rather than conducting the calculation on behalf of the employee (personal correspondence
with RSD staff).

                                                      9
normal retirement benefit. While one could make these calculations, the worker first would have

to understand all of the various characteristics of the pension plan. Because of this complexity,

we view accessing one’s ORBIT account as a form of planning. We classify individuals as

planners using two measures: (1) if they have logged into the ORBIT website within the past 12

months or (2) if they have requested a self-service estimate from ORBIT in the past 12 months.13

We chose to use a 12-month timeframe because RSD sends communications encouraging

employees to login to ORBIT to review their personal benefit account several times a year and

provides an annual benefit statement that is only accessible through ORBIT. Thus, we believe

that a member actively planning for retirement would likely check their ORBIT account and

conduct a self-service estimate at least annually.14

          At the top of Table 2, we see that 67.5 percent of the sample has logged into ORBIT in

the past year, while 53.6 percent have also requested a self-service estimate from the website.

While these numbers may seem high, the reader should remember that this is a sample of public

employees aged 50-64 who are near to their planned retirement age. These “objective” measures

of planning are strongly correlated to the self-reports indicating that the respondent has

developed a retirement plan. Comparing Columns 2 and 3, planners are more likely to log into

ORBIT and more likely to request a self-service estimate.

                                                     [Table 2]

          Next, we consider two indicators of participation in supplemental retirement savings

plans: (1) a self-reported measure of participation in any 401(k), 403(b), or 457 plan, drawn from

the survey, and (2) an indicator of participation in the state-managed 401(k) or 457 plans, taken


13
     Our 12 month window covers the period from August 19, 2013 to August 18, 2014.
14
     Results using alternative timeframes are described in footnote 21 and Appendix Table D2.


                                                     10
from the administrative records. Participation in a supplemental plan is an action that illustrates

an active decision as part of one’s retirement planning behavior. In parallel with our two

measures of retirement planning, we refer to the first measure as “subjective supplement plan

participation” and the second as “objective supplement plan participation.” Table 2 shows that

around 74 percent of individuals responded that they participate in a supplemental retirement

savings plan, which is much higher than the 44 percent participation rate we observe in the

administrative data. Note that local government employers, including school districts, have the

option to offer a locally-managed supplemental plan.15 So, for employees at non-state

governmental employers in North Carolina, we cannot observe objectively whether the

individual is saving in a locally-managed plan. As described in Appendix B, when considering

only those individuals who work at a state government agency, we still observe substantially

higher self-reported participation rates. We believe this may be due to a misunderstanding

among survey respondents of the difference between being enrolled the primary defined benefit

plan and supplemental retirement saving plans.16 Comparing across Columns 2 and 3,

individuals who self-report having made a retirement plan are also more likely to be saving and,

conditional on contributing, are saving a higher fraction of their salaries.


15
     Clark, et al. (2016) provide a detailed examination of participation in and contributions to supplemental
retirement saving plans of public school personnel. Over half of the school employees who contribute to a
supplemental retirement saving plan are enrolled in locally managed 403(b) and 457 plans. These
contributions are not included in the administrative records from the state retirement system.
16
     Appendix B provides the exact wording of the question, which asks about participation in any
“retirement savings plan with my current public employer (e.g., 401(k), 403(b), 457(b) plan).” We find
that about 13% of the population incorrectly self-reports participating but are not participating according
to the administrative records. Thus, we believe our survey measure may be overstating participation for
all our workers.


                                                       11
       Wealth is self-reported on the survey, where respondents choose which of a set of

categories best represents their household current savings and investments. Respondents are

asked to include savings, several enumerated categories of investments, account balances in any

defined contribution plans, and estimated values of any business owned; respondents are asked to

exclude the value of their primary residence and savings in any defined benefit plans. In these

data, the reported wealth level of the average individual is just below $200,000. For comparison,

using data from the 2013 Survey of Consumer Finances, Rosnick and Baker (2014) find that the

median non-housing wealth of households headed by someone ages 55-64 was $89,300. In our

sample of public employees in North Carolina, we observe large differences in accumulated

wealth by subjective planning where planners have over $284,000 in assets compared to just

$97,000 among non-planners.

       Some of the measures detailed in this section are subjectively measured, while others are

objectively measured. Both types of measures have important limitations. For subjectively

measured outcomes, our primary concern is social desirability bias. This bias suggests that our

respondents may exaggerate the extent to which they are prepared for retirement. If individuals

believe that both patience and retirement preparedness are socially desirable, then patience and

planning for retirement could be spuriously correlated. However, when we include a host of

covariates in the model, which are also self-reported, we see a similar relationship between time

preference and retirement planning. This is evidence against a spurious correlation or a

substantive bias coming from perceptions of social desirability. While objectively measured

outcomes overcome these limitations of subjective measures, the information available in

workers’ administrative records do not provide the same detail on retirement planning per se.




                                                12
Our approach to these limitations is to combine the information from subjective and objective

measures into a comprehensive analysis of retirement behavior.

       C. Additional Aspects of Retirement Planning

       In addition to the above measures of planning, the survey includes information on two

key components of a retirement plan. First, the survey includes a question on planned age of

retirement, that is, the age at which the respondent plans to “stop working full-time for your

current employer and begin receiving retirement benefits.” The average age of planned

retirement is 63. About 6.4 percent of the sample did not report a planned age of retirement.

Second, respondents were asked if they planned to work after retirement, which is coded as zero

if an individual reported a plan to “completely retire and not work at all.” Individuals indicating

that they plan to work full-time or part-time were given a value of one for this measure. In these

data, 73 percent of individuals plan to work after retirement. About 2 percent of the sample did

not report if they intended to work or not in retirement.

       Finally, we construct a respondent’s perceived necessary replacement rate. The survey

provides information on a respondent’s expected income needed in retirement. If the respondent

self-reported as married, the replacement rate is calculated by dividing expected needed

retirement income by the sum of own salary and spouse’s salary, both salaries reported on the

survey. If the respondent did not self-report as married, only own salary is used to calculate the

replacement rate. The mean perceived replacement rate is around 85 percent, which is very close

to the often-discussed rule of thumb of 80 percent (TIAA-CREF, 1994), despite the fact that we

asked for expected retirement income needed instead of asking for a replacement rate directly.

Expected retirement income was not reported by 25 percent of respondents.




                                                 13
           Interestingly, we find that among planners, the expected replacement is much closer to

the recommended 80 percent, while non-planners have a perceived needed replacement of 88.1

percent. Planners are also less likely to leave questions on the aspects of their retirement plan

blank. Non-planners were less likely to report planned retirement age, employment plans after

retirement, as well as expected income needed in retirement.

III. Risk and Time Preferences

           Using several aspects of retirement planning, we explore the predictive power of risk and

time preferences in understanding decision making in this important setting.

           A. Preference Elicitation

           The literature has established the predictive power of risk and time preference in

explaining the full range of economic behaviors. Our measures of risk and time preferences are

adapted from questions in the HRS (Barsky and Juster, 1997).17 On risk preferences, respondents

were given a hypothetical situation in which they would choose one of two new jobs, one with a

constant income and one with an income that is 100 percent higher or 20 percent lower (with the

increase or decrease equally likely). As shown in Table 3, Column 1, 67.5 percent of

respondents chose the safe job (more risk averse).18

                                                        [Table 3]



17
     See Appendix C for a detailed description of the questions and responses. Loennqvist et al. (2011) find
that unincentivized survey questions outperform incentivized tasks in the measurement of preference
parameters, because unincentivized survey questions are more highly correlated with actual decisions.
This supports our categorization of individuals’ time preferences using unincentivized survey questions.
18
     In results not shown, 19.6 percent chose the risky job (less risk averse) and 12.9 percent reported that
they did not know which job they would choose. Appendix Table C3 compares responses to the HRS for
those that choose either the first or second job and did not select “don’t know”.


                                                       14
       We included two questions to assess a respondent’s level of patience. The benefit frame

asks whether a respondent, upon reaching 65 years of age, prefers $1,000 per month in Social

Security benefits or $500 per month plus an up-front, lump sum payment of $80,500. The lottery

frame asks whether a respondent prefers to take a $1,000 windfall gain today or wait for one year

and receive $1,200 instead. On the benefit frame, 34.2 percent of individuals chose the larger

monthly benefit (more patient), while 49.7 percent chose the up-front payment and the smaller

monthly benefit (less patient). 16.1 percent reported “don’t know” as their answer. On the

lottery frame, 46.5 percent of individuals chose the larger, later payment (more patient), while

46.5 percent chose the smaller, sooner payment (less patient). Only about 7 percent of the

respondents chose “don’t know” with the lottery frame.

       We combine our two measures of time preferences into a single binary measure equal to

one if the respondent chose the more patient option on either frame. Using this combined

measure, 62.7 percent of respondents are more patient. We present alternative approaches to

measures respondents’ time preferences in Appendix Table D1. Columns 2 and 3, Table 3, Panel

A, compare these measures of risk and time preferences among those that report having made a

retirement plan (Column 2) and those that have not (Column 3).             Planners are around 13

percentage points more patient, a difference that is statistically significant. Planners are slightly

more risk averse, but the small difference is statistically insignificant. These associations are

examined further in a regression framework below.

       B. Related Literature on Risk and Time Preferences and Retirement

       Using these measures of risk and time preferences, we explore their role in determining

an individual’s retirement planning behavior. The related literature is broad, but we present a

discussion of the papers that share our focus on time preferences and retirement decision making.



                                                 15
       Finke and Huston (2013) find empirical evidence that demonstrates the importance of

time preferences using a sample of college students with stated preference data on how highly

students prioritized retirement savings. Their focus on time preference is similar to ours but we

use data on the planning behavior of older workers linked to retirement decisions from

administrative data. Similar to our survey of older workers, Petkoska and Earl (2009) survey

workers 50 years and older. They find an important role for time preferences in general but

mixed results on particular preference dimensions, where their measures are akin to those used in

the personality literature (e.g., responses to the question “I make lists of things to do”).

       Brown, Farrell, and Weisbenner (2015) look at the retirement-related financial behavior

of procrastinators versus non-procrastinators, where procrastinators are defined as individuals

who delayed choosing a health care plan until the final day of the enrollment period. Their

results show that procrastinators are 2.4 percentage points less likely to participate in a

supplemental retirement plan and contribute 10 to 15 percentage points less in defined-

contribution plans. Presenting a similar set of findings, Brown and Previtero (2014) measure

procrastination using a five survey questions on the tendency to delay decisions. Finally,

Bradford, Courtemanche, and Heutel (2014) provide evidence that time preferences are

correlated with a wide range of decisions, most relevantly finding that present biasedness is

positively and significantly associated with non-retirement savings and less strongly and

significantly associated with having retirement savings.

       In contrast to these papers (and ours), two related papers find that risk and time

preferences do not have a strong association with retirement planning or wealth accumulation.

Binswanger and Carman (2012) provide a nuanced measurement of retirement planning behavior

by differentiating among three types of behavior: working out a formal retirement plan, using a



                                                  16
rule of thumb, and having neither a plan nor a reliance on a rule of thumb. The authors find that

rule-of-thumb adopters behave in similar ways to planners in their savings decisions, and both

types of individuals save meaningfully more than individuals who follow an unsystematic

approach to retirement savings. However, Binswanger and Carman (2012) find no statistically

significant association of time and risk preferences with planning behavior and wealth

accumulation. Using survey data from a sample of TIAA-CREF participants, Ameriks, Caplin,

and Leahy (2003) also find little predictive power for risk and time preferences.

           C. Financial Literacy

           Lusardi and Mitchell (2014) provide a comprehensive assessment of studies that estimate

the impact of financial literacy using responses to specific literacy questions and self-reported

levels of literacy. The introduction of the same questions into the Health and Retirement Survey

and in other such surveys (including our own) has allowed researchers to compare the effect of

literacy in many diverse situations.19 Comparing Columns 2 and 3, Table 3, Panel B, we see that

those who self-report having made a retirement plan are more financially literate, both

subjectively and objectively measured. These comparisons show a clear link between financial

literacy and retirement planning.

IV. Results: Retirement Planning and Individual Preferences and Characteristics
           A. Subjective Planning

           In Tables 1-3, we considered the differences in sample means among planners and non-

planners. Our main measure of planning is subjective and is drawn from a self-report in the

survey data of having made a retirement plan. In pairwise comparisons, planners are shown to

19
     The exact wordings of the three financial literacy questions are included in Appendix Table A3. The
questions concern compound interest, inflation, and the tax advantages to supplemental retirement
savings.


                                                     17
be more patient and slightly more risk averse. We now consider these associations in a

multivariate regression framework holding demographic and economic characteristics constant.

Table 4 presents estimates of a linear probability model regression of subjective planning on risk

and time preferences, financial literacy, and a host of demographic and economic characteristics.

                                                  [Table 4]

       The first column of Table 4 reports a specification that includes only risk and time

preferences and financial knowledge. In our sample of older public employees in North

Carolina, individuals who are more patient are 7.5 percentage points more likely to have made a

retirement plan. The estimated coefficient on risk preferences is not statistically significant but

is also not statistically significantly different than the estimated effect for time preferences. All

specifications separately control for those who responded “don’t know” to one of the time or risk

preference questions (three “don’t know” controls: time-benefit, time-lottery, and risk).

       Financial literacy has long been shown to matter in retirement decision making, and this

is the case in our results as well. In Column 1, Table 4, high financial literacy (as measured by

answering all three financial literacy questions correctly), medium financial literacy (as

measured by answering two financial literacy questions correctly) and self-reported financial

knowledge on a scale of 1-7 are all individually associated with a higher likelihood of having

made a retirement plan. Next, in Column 2, Table 4, we include economic and demographic

characteristics. The variable “years until eligible for retirement” is calculated “objectively”

using age at survey and years of service from the administrative records. Many individuals in

the sample are already eligible for either early or normal retirement benefits, so those individuals

will have zero years until retirement and a dummy indicator for being already eligible to retire.

We find no evidence that individuals are more likely to plan as they near their eligibility for



                                                  18
retirement benefits. Note that this does not incorporate retirement expectations or self-reported

plans but is calculated from age and years of service combined with information about the

retirement eligibility rules. We do find that individuals are more likely to plan as they age, even

conditional on years until eligible for retirement benefits.

       Controlling for having a college degree, tenure, and preferences, having a higher salary is

associated with a higher probability of planning. Gender and marital status are interacted to

create three categories, with married females as the omitted group. Married females have the

highest propensity to plan, which may be due to the retirement planning of an older spouse. In

support of this conjecture, in results not shown, we find that marital status is no longer

significant after controlling for spousal characteristics (age and salary). Both male and female

unmarried individuals are less likely to have made a retirement plan relative to married women.

       Next, homeowners are more likely to report having made a retirement plan, as are those

reporting to be in excellent or very good health. Individuals with dependent children (defined as

having children depend on the individual for more than half of their financial support) are

significantly less likely to report having made a retirement plan, holding all else equal.

Individuals who were given the print survey, rather than the online survey, are less likely to

report having made a retirement plan. While this may reflect some difference in the response

due to the survey type, it more likely reflects some characteristic of individuals that caused them

to be excluded from the email sample. Any individual in the administrative records for which an

email address was available was sent the email survey. The final column of Table 4 adds




                                                 19
controls for individuals’ agency of employment and type of job.20 Overall, time preferences and

financial literacy are important in understanding retirement planning behavior.

          B. Subjective Planning and Time Preferences: Heterogeneity

          Above, we found a significant association between subjectively measured retirement

planning and elicited preferences towards time where the more patient were also more likely to

plan. Next, we explore this link further by comparing the association for different subsets of the

population. Table 5 considers heterogeneity in the effects of time preferences on subjective

planning. First, Column 1 repeats the specification in Table 4, Column 3 for reference. Note

that the specification is identical but not all covariates are reported here.

                                                        [Table 5]

          Table 5, Column 2 considers the number of years until the individual’s objectively-

measured time until retirement, with a zero implying already eligible for retirement benefits. The

further from retirement eligibility is associated with a weaker link between patience and

planning, although the estimated coefficient on years until eligible for retirement benefits is not

statistically significant. Next, Column 3 of Table 5 asks whether the relationship between time

preferences and retirement planning differs by gender and marital status, which are interacted to

create four categories. Here we see that for married women (the omitted category), being more

patient is associated with a 6.5 percentage point higher likelihood of planning. The estimated

20
     We classify the employees in six agency categories and nine job categories. Agency categories are:
city, county, public school, general government, Department of Transportation, and other. Job
classifications are: safety/rescue officers, executives/management, education professionals, educational
support, health care professionals, professionals, trades and technical, social service professionals, and
university. None of the estimated coefficients on agency categories are statistically significant. Of the job
categories, only the estimated coefficient for social service professionals is statistically significant, where
social service professionals are more likely to plan.


                                                        20
coefficients on the interaction terms for married and single men are both positive and large, but

not statistically significant. However, we do see that single women are statistically significantly

different such that patience does not predict planning for single women.

       Table 5, Column 4 considers educational attainment by gender, separating individuals

who have less than a college degree from those with a college degree. We observe no

statistically significant relationship between patience and planning for the non-college educated.

The relationship between patience and planning is only statistically significant for men with a

college degree. Together, these findings suggest that the relationship found between time

preferences and retirement planning is concentrated among more highly educated men and is not

found at all for those without a college degree or for college educated women. Highly educated

men may have more assets and a greater need for retirement planning.

       Finally, Table 5, Column 5 explores the potential for interactions between risk and time

preferences. Andersen, et al. (2008) and Jamison, Karlan, and Zinman (2012), among others,

show that eliciting both sets of preferences jointly is important for a full understanding of their

role. Some of these papers have found that risk and time preferences interact in complex ways,

but the evidence is mixed. While we find that the estimated coefficient on time preferences is

indeed larger for individuals who are more risk averse, the coefficient on the interaction term is

not statistically significant. This suggests that our measures of risk and time preferences do not

provide sufficient statistical power to estimate their interactive effects.

       C. Alternative Measures of Planning

       We next consider a series of objectively and subjectively measured alternative proxies for

retirement planning behavior. In Table 6, each column includes a parallel regression to the

specification in Column 3, Table 4, with different dependent variable to consider alternative



                                                  21
measures of planning. The measures were described in more detail above in Section II.B. In

Table 2, we saw that these alternative planning measures were all positively related to the

subjective planning measure but are perhaps also capturing other aspects of planning. Our main

objective measures of planning rely on administrative records indicating activities on the ORBIT

website. The first column of Table 6 considers whether an individual has logged in to the

retirement system’s benefit website in the past 12 months, while the second column considers

further whether the individual used the retirement system’s benefit website to receive an estimate

of their benefit upon retirement (i.e., a “self-service estimate”).21

                                                      [Table 6]

          Considering ORBIT activity, there is no statistically significant relationship between

planning and either the time or risk preference measures. Individuals with higher financial

literacy are more likely to request a self-service estimate. The remaining columns of Table 6

include the following additional components of the planning process, described earlier in Section

II.B: supplemental plan participation (subjective and objective), supplemental plan contribution

level, and log of self-reported non-housing wealth. We recognize the host of interrelated factors

that jointly determine retirement planning, retirement savings, and wealth accumulation. As a

result, the analysis considers wealth because it is an observable characteristic of individuals that

is (in part) associated with planning. Across the four aspects of retirement planning behavior

presented in Columns 3-6 of Table 6, risk aversion has no significant association with these




21
     Appendix Table D.2 provides estimates for a 6-months window and for a two-year window. The
results are relatively consistent with those shown in Table 6: self-reported financial knowledge is
consistently found to be statistically significant, while the coefficients on risk and time preferences and
objective financial knowledge are not consistently statistically significant.


                                                     22
outcomes. Time preferences are only statistically significantly related to retirement planning for

wealth accumulation.

       Financial literacy and self-reported financial knowledge are associated with having

obtained an ORBIT self-service estimate in the past 12 months and the amount of accumulated

wealth. Financial literacy does not have a strong association with the supplemental plan

participation measures, with the exception that self-reported financial knowledge is positively

associated with self-reported plan contribution rates conditional on participation. When

considering time until eligible for retirement, being further from objectively measured retirement

eligibility is associated with a lower probability of requesting a self-service estimate and of

objectively measured plan participation. For three out of four measures of planning in Columns

3-6, we observe that higher earners are more likely to be planning for retirement.

       D. Reverse Causality

       Our results have documented an association between time preferences and retirement

planning. We interpret this finding as telling us that more patient individuals are more willing to

engage in planning activities today that have delayed rewards (e.g., more income security in

retirement) because of the fundamental way that time preferences affect intertemporal tradeoffs.

An alternative explanation is a causal link in the reverse direction: individuals who chose to

engage in planning activities change their time preferences toward higher levels of patience.

One justification for a reverse causality story is that planning teaches individuals to be willing to

delay consumption. This subsection presents evidence that this reverse relationship is not

driving our results.

       We have referred to an individual as more patient if she chose the delayed reward on

either of our hypothetical choice survey question. This includes a lottery frame ($1,000 windfall



                                                 23
gain today or $1,200 in one year) and a benefit frame ($500 per month in Social Security benefits

plus an up-front, lump sum payment of $80,500 or $1,000 per month). We conjecture that

reverse causality is more of a concern for a time preference framing in the context of retirement

planning and less of a concern in the context of lottery windfalls. That is, it is more likely that

prior retirement planning might “teach” an individual to be willing to forgo a lump sum in order

to maintain a high level of pension benefits. But it is less likely that planning would

subsequently affect responses on a preference for the timing of windfall gains.

       Behavioral economics has presented a substantial amount of evidence that individuals

treat gains differently depending on the stakes and depending on whether the gains are

anticipated. These differences affect which “mental account” individuals perceive them as

belonging to (Thaler, 1990). Our benefit frame involves high stakes payments of anticipated

gains, while the lottery frame involves a lower stakes payment of windfall gains. We provide

evidence against reverse causality by exploring whether the association between patience and

planning holds if we only consider the lottery frame of our time preference elicitation.

       Table 7 reruns the regressions of subjective planning (Column 3, Table 4) and the

additional aspects of planning (Columns 1-6, Table 6) with time preferences measured with the

lottery frame only. In Column 1 of Table 7, patience has a smaller association with planning

(around four percentage points). But the basic pattern of more patient individuals engaging in

more planning continues to hold to a degree that is economically and statistically significant.

Columns 2 and 3 consider ORBIT activity and, as with the results in Table 6, show no

association of patience with planning as measured with ORBIT log-ins or benefit estimates.

Next, we reanalyze supplemental plan participation and contributions in Columns 4-6 using only

the lottery frame. The results suggest a stronger association between planning time preferences



                                                 24
as measured in the lottery frame, relative to our main specification of patient on either frame.

This runs counter to a reverse causality explanation. Finally, Column 7 of Table 7 finds a similar

association of time preferences and planning using the lottery frame as we saw with the results

using either frame.

          Time preferences elicited with a lottery frame are more robustly associated with

retirement planning relative to our combined time preference measure.22 We prefer to remain

agnostic about which framing is more appropriate for studying retirement planning. However,

finding that patience as measured in a lottery frame is robustly associated with retirement

planning provides evidence that reverse causality is not the sole explanation for our findings.

V. Plan Realizations

          Thus far, we have documented a key role for time preferences and financial literacy in

determining retirement planning behavior. Given the importance of planning for lifetime income

security, these planning results have strong implications for public policy as well as individual

behavior. However, we can say more by connecting retirement planning to actual retirement

timing. For this exercise, we exploit our rich data, which link administrative records and survey

responses. Do plans made for retirement predict behavior that is eventually implemented?

Further, are the associations we have documented consistent with a causal link from time

preferences to retirement timing decisions via the link from time preferences to retirement

planning? That is, do we see evidence of time preferences affecting retirement planning which

in turns affects retirement timing decisions?




22
     Similarly, Anderson and Mellor (2009) find that risk preferences elicited from a question involving
windfall gains has more predictive power than those from a question involving anticipated gains.


                                                      25
          The administrative data provide us with a snapshot of work status as of April 2016, which

can be compared with our survey data on active employees collected between April and June of

2014.23 We present two sets of results: Table 7 considers planned retirement age as self-reported

on the survey and Table 8 considers whether individuals have retired as of April 2016. 24 For this

exercise, we focus on individuals who reported their planned retirement age.25 We analyze

whether time preferences are associated with planned retirement age and whether time

preferences are associated with actual retirement timing, controlling for planned retirement age.

Our focus is on whether the association of time preference and retirement timing is mediated by

retirement planning. If so, this suggests that time preferences affect retirement timing because

time preferences affect retirement planning that in turn affects retirement timing.

          Table 8 suggests that an individual who is more patient reports a planned retirement age

that is around four months later, all else equal. The effect of patience on planned retirement age

is similar when subjective planning is included. As noted in Table 2, planners have earlier

planned retirement ages; this also holds in the full regression specification controlling for age,

years of service, and time until eligible for retirement benefits. More risk averse individuals plan

to retire slightly later but the standard error on the estimated coefficient is large. There is not a



23
     We received our first email survey response on April 1st, 2014 and our last email survey response on
June 17th, 2014. The last retirement date we observe in the administrative data is July 1st, 2016. Therefore,
we observe retirements approximately two years after completion of the survey.
24
     See Table 2 for summary statistics of planned retirement age. Only 6% of respondents did not report a
planned retirement age. The sample also excludes eleven deceased individuals.
25
     The survey asked respondents their anticipated retirement age, not date. Using the administrative data,
we calculate the age of respondents at time of survey. We calculate the difference between self-reported
planned retirement age and their imputed age at the time of the survey.


                                                      26
statistically significant relationship with objective financial literacy, while self-reported financial

knowledge is associated with a small decrease in planned retirement age.

                                                  [Table 8]

       Having documented the relationship between time preferences and planned retirement

age, we now turn to retirement behavior. The dependent variable in Table 9 equals one if the

individuals retired between the time of the survey and April 2016. The specification controls for

planned retirement age and finds a large and statistically significant estimated coefficient; those

with older planned retirement ages are significantly less likely to have retired by April 2016.

Thus, we find that stated plans are highly predictive of actual behavior, which supports our focus

on retirement planning behavior in the earlier parts of the paper. More importantly, controlling

for planned retirement age, time preferences affect retirement behavior. From Column 1 of

Table 9, more patient individuals are around three percentage points more likely to have retired.

Risk aversion has a small and statistically insignificant estimated relationship with retirement

behavior. Objective financial literacy is associated with large reductions in retirement

propensity, while self-reported financial knowledge is not significantly related.

                                                  [Table 9]

       The remaining columns in Table 9 explore our mediation hypothesis: time preferences

affect retirement behavior because they affect retirement planning. Column 2 adds subjective

planning to the specification in Column 1. The coefficient on patience is only slightly reduced,

which is inconsistent with an effect of time preferences on retirement timing that is mediated by

planning. However, in Columns 3 and 4, we rerun the specification in Column 1 for only

planners (Column 3) and only non-planners (Column 4). Time preferences are predictive of

retirement timing but only for planners. This is consistent with our mediation hypothesis. The



                                                  27
difference between the effect of patience on retirement for planners and its effect for non-

planners is large (5.90 percentage points) and statistically significant (standard error of the

difference = 3.36, p-value = 0.08). We conclude that time preferences matter more for planners

than for non-planners in their determination of retirement behavior.

VI. Conclusion

       We study the predictive power of risk and time preferences in the determination of

retirement planning behavior, including subjective and objective measures of planning,

supplemental savings plan contributions, wealth accumulation, planned age at retirement, and

plans for working after retirement from a career job in the public sector. After demonstrating the

importance of financial literacy, we show that our measures of time preferences have an

association with retirement planning that is more robust, in quantitative and statistical terms, than

the association of planning with our measures of risk preferences. It is intuitive that planning for

lifetime income security over a long horizon will be heavily dependent on an individual’s time

preferences but the literature has been more focused on risk preferences.

       We show the importance of financial literacy and time preferences using a new data set

that is well suited for understanding retirement planning and preparedness. By combining survey

data and administrative reports, the analysis considers retirement decision making from a broad

perspective. Further, our survey allows us to classify individuals as more or less patient based on

their reported preference between hypothetical intertemporal income patterns. In addition to

being more likely to report having formulated a retirement plan, more patient individuals

participate in supplemental plans more often, contribute to supplemental plans at higher levels,

and plan to retire at older ages. These results suggest that behavioral aspects of decision making

tell us something important about how individuals prepare for retirement.



                                                 28
       The richness of our data allows us to explore multiple facets of retirement planning

behavior and outcomes associated with retirement plans. By combining a large-scale survey

with detailed administrative records, we provide unique insights into older workers transitions

out of career employment into full retirement. An additional feature of our data is the ability to

exploit longitudinal data for multiple years after our initial survey. We track our survey

respondents in the administrative records for two years. Our final analysis explores individuals’

retirement propensity during these two years. We find that stated plans matter, which

demonstrates why it is important to study planning behavior. Further, planned retirement age

and actual retirement timing are associated with time preferences. But, conditional on planned

retirement age, time preferences only have an association with actual retirement timing among

individuals with a retirement plan. For non-planners, the association of time preferences and

actual retirement timing is estimated to be very close to zero and statistically insignificant. In

total, our results highlight the important role played by time preferences in understanding

retirement planning and actual retirement behavior.




                                                 29
References

Ameriks, J., Caplin, A., & Leahy, J. (2003). Wealth accumulation and the propensity to plan.
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3), 1007–47.
Andersen, S., Harrison, G. W., Lau, M. I., & Rutström, E. E. (2008). Eliciting Risk and Time
    Preferences. Econometrica, 76(3), 583–618.
Anderson, L. R., & Mellor, J. M. (2009). Are risk preferences stable? comparing an experimental
    measure with a validated survey-based measure. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 39(2),
    137–160.
Ashraf, N., Camerer, C. F., & Loewenstein, G. (2005). Adam Smith, Behavioral Economist.
    Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(3), 131–145.
Banks, J., Blundell, R., & Casanova Rivas, M. (2010). The dynamics of retirement behavior in
    couples : Reduced-form evidence from England and the US. Working Paper, UCLA.
Barsky, R., & Juster, F. (1997). Preference parameters and behavioral heterogeneity: An
    experimental approach in the health and retirement study. The Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 112(2), 537–579.
Bellante, D. O. N., & Link, A. N. (1981). Are Public Sector Workers More Risk Averse Than
     Private Sector Workers ? Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 34(3), 408–412.
Binswanger, J., & Carman, K. G. (2012). How real people make long-term decisions: The case
    of retirement preparation. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 81(1), 39–60.
Bradford, D., Courtemanche, C., & Heutel, G. (2014). Time Preferences and Consumer
    Behavior. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, (20320).
Brown, J., & Previtero, A. (2014). Procrastination, Present-Biased Preferences, and Financial
    Behaviors. Working Paper.
Brown, J. R., Farrell, A. M., & Weisbenner, S. J. (2015). Decision-Making Approaches and the
    Propensity To Default: Evidence and Implications. Journal of Financial Economics,
    Forthcoming.
Burks, S., Carpenter, J., Götte, L., & Rustichini, A. (2012). Which measures of time preference
    best predict outcomes: Evidence from a large-scale field experiment. Journal of Economic
    Behavior and Organization, 84(1), 308–320.
Casanova, M. (2010). Happy Together : A Structural Model of Couples’ Joint Retirement
    Choices. Working Paper, UCLA.
Clark, R. L., Hanson, E., Morrill, M. S., & Pathak, A. (2016). Supplemental Plan Offerings and
     Retirement Saving Choices: an Analysis of North Carolina School Districts. Journal of
     Pension Economics and Finance, 15(3): 333-355.
Coller, M., & Williams, M. B. (1999). Eliciting individual discount rates. Experimental
     Economics, 2(2), 107–127.
Current Employment Statistics. (2014). Bureau of Labor Statistics. Retrieved from
    http://www.bls.gov/web/empsit/ceseeb1b.htm

                                               30
Finke, M. S., & Huston, S. J. (2013). Time preference and the importance of saving for
    retirement. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 89, 23-34.
Goda, G. S., Levy, M. R., Manchester, C. F., Sojourner, A., & Joshua Tasoff. (2015). The Role
    of Time Preferences and Exponential-Growth Bias in Retirement Savings. National Bureau
    of Economic Research Working Paper, (21482).
Gustman, A. L., & Steinmeier, T. L. (2000). Retirement in Dual‐Career Families: A Structural
    Model. Journal of Labor Economics, 18(3), 503–545.
Jamison, J., Karlan, D., & Zinman, J. (2012). Measuring risk and time preferences and their
    connections with behavior. Working Paper.
Koehler, D., Langstaff, J., & Liu, W. Q. (2015). A simulated financial savings task for studying
    consumption and retirement decision making. Journal of Economic Psychology, 46, 89-97.
Loennqvist, J.-E., Verkasalo, M., Walkowitz, G., & Wichardt, P. C. (2011). Measuring
    Individual Risk Attitudes in the Lab: Task or Ask? An Empirical Comparison. Cologne
    Graduate School Working Paper Series.
Loewenstein & Prelec, D., G. (1992). Anomalies in intertemporal choice: Evidence and an
    interpretation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(2), 573–597.
Lusardi, A., & Mitchell, O. S. (2007). Baby Boomer retirement security: The roles of planning,
    financial literacy, and housing wealth. Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(1), 205–224.
Lusardi, A., & Mitchell, O. S. (2008). Planning and financial litearcy: How do women fare?.
    American Economic Review P&P 98:2,413-417.
Lusardi, A., & Mitchell, O. S. (2014). The Economic Importance of Financial Literacy : Theory
    and Evidence. Journal of Economic Literature, 52(1), 5–44.
Michaud, P. (2003). Joint labour supply dynamics of older couples. IZA Discussion Paper 832.
Petkoska, J., & Earl, J. K. (2009). Understanding the influence of demographic and
    psychological variables on retirement planning. Psychology and aging, 24(1), 245.
Rosnick, D., & Baker, D. (2014). The Wealth of Households : An Analysis of the 2013 Survey of
    Consumer Finances.
Thaler, R. H. (1990). Anomalies: Saving, Fungibility, and Mental Accounts. Journal of
    Economic Perspectives, 4(1), 193–205.
TIAA-CREF. (1994). Looking Ahead to Retirement. Library Series No.3, New York, NY.
Van Rooij, M., Lusardi, A., & Alessie, R. (2011). Financial literacy and stock market
    participation. Journal of Financial Economics, 101(2), 449-472.




                                               31
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
                                               Full                                           Difference
                                              Sample         Subjective Planning
                                                               Yes             No
                                                (1)            (2)             (3)            (4) = (2)-(3)
                                               2,024           954           1,070
Number of Observations                                       (47.1%)        (52.9%)

Salary                                        $52,481        $57,718         $47,811              9,907 **
                                                                                                   (1,078)
Earned years of service                        16.34           17.26            15.52              1.74 **
                                                                                                    (0.40)
Eligible to retire                            53.11%         59.22%           47.56%             11.66% **
                                                                                                    (2.20)
Years until eligible if not yet eligible        4.10            3.92             4.23               -0.31+
                                                                                                    (0.17)
Age at survey                                  56.76           57.21            56.35              0.86 **
                                                                                                    (0.18)
Married female                                45.16%         48.85%           41.87%              6.98% **
                                                                                                    (2.21)
Single female                                 23.67%         19.39%           27.48%             -8.09% **
                                                                                                    (1.87)
Married male                                  24.31%         26.42%           22.43%               3.99% *
                                                                                                    (1.91)
Single male                                    6.87%          5.35%            8.22%              -2.87% *
                                                                                                    (1.11)
College degree                                63.14%         70.65%           56.45%             14.20% **
                                                                                                    (2.11)
Non-white                                     22.78%         18.03%           27.01%             -8.98% **
                                                                                                    (1.84)
Home Owner                                    86.22%         92.56%           80.56%             12.00% **
                                                                                                    (1.48)
Print sample                                  22.58%         14.47%           29.81%            -15.34% **
                                                                                                    (1.80)
Self-reported healthy                         61.12%         69.50%           53.64%             15.86% **
                                                                                                    (2.13)
Dependent children                            37.06%         34.28%           39.53%              -5.25% *
                                                                                                    (2.14)
Notes: Data are from merged administrative and survey data of public sector workers in North Carolina.
Means of continuous variables and percentages of dichotomous variables are presented. Subjective
planning is defined as self-reporting having made a retirement plan. For details on the variable
definitions, see Appendix A. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                   32
Table 2: Retirement Planning and Aspects of the Retirement Plan
                                                                            Subjective Planning
                                                                    Full                          Difference
                                                                   Sample     Yes        No
                                                       Number                                        (4) =
                                                       of Obs.       (1)      (2)        (3)        (2)-(3)
Number of Observations (Full Sample)                                          954       1,070
                                                           2,024
                                                                            (47.1%)    (52.9%)
Alternative Planning Measures:
ORBIT Log-in past 12 months                                2,024   67.49%    77.04%    58.97%      18.07%**
                                                                                                     (2.03)
ORBIT Self-Service Estimate past 12 months                 2,024   53.56%    63.84%    44.39%      19.45%**
                                                                                                     (2.17)
Subjective supplemental plan participation                 1,948   73.72%    82.10%    66.28%      15.82%**
                                                                                                     (1.94)
Objective supplemental plan participation                  2,024   44.17%    50.31%    38.69%      11.62%**
                                                                                                     (2.20)
Self-reported contribution level among participants        1,085    8.98%    11.18%     6.31%      4.87%**
                                                                                                     (0.73)
Self-reported non-housing wealth                           1,548   $190,019 $284,021   $97,224    $186,797**
                                                                                                    (13,123)
Additional Aspects of the Retirement Plan:
Planned retirement age                                     1,895    62.75    62.23      63.23      -1.00**
                                                                                                    (0.19)
Blank planned retirement age                            2,024     6.37%        4.93%      7.66%   -2.73%*
                                                                                                    (1.07)
Plan to work after retirement                           1,992    73.04%       70.26% 75.55%      -5.29%**
                                                                                                    (1.99)
Blank planned work after retirement                     2,024     1.58%        0.94%      2.15%   -1.21%*
                                                                                                    (0.54)
Imputed expected replacement rate                       1,508    84.57%       80.99% 88.13%      -7.14%**
                                                                                                    (2.45)
Blank on expected income or salary information          2,024    25.49%       21.38% 29.16%      -7.78%**
                                                                                                    (1.92)
Notes: Data are from merged administrative and survey data of public sector workers in North Carolina.
Means of continuous variables and percentages of dichotomous variables are presented. Subjective
planning is defined as self-reporting having made a retirement plan. For details on the variable
definitions, see Appendix A. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01




                                                      33
Table 3: Preferences, Knowledge, and Retirement Planning
                                                                    Subjective Planning
                                                   Full Sample       Yes           No
                                                        (1)          (2)           (3)          (2)-(3)
Number of Observations (Full Sample)                                 954          1,070
                                                       2,024                                    -5.80%
                                                                   (47.1%)      (52.9%)
Panel A: Risk and Time Preferences
More patient                                           62.65%      69.39%       56.64%        12.75%***
                                                                                                (2.13)
More risk averse                                       67.49%      68.34%       66.73%          1.61%
                                                                                                (2.08)
Panel B: Financial Literacy
High financial literacy: 3 of 3 correct                30.73%      36.79%       25.33%           11.46%**
                                                                                                   (2.05)
Moderate financial literacy: 2 of 3 correct             46.39%        47.06%         45.79%       1.27%
                                                                                                   (2.22)
Self-reported financial knowledge                         4.23         4.68           3.83        0.85**
                                                                                                   (0.05)
Notes: Data are from merged administrative and survey data of public sector workers in North Carolina.
Means of continuous variables and percentages of dichotomous variables are presented. Subjective
planning is defined as self-reporting having made a retirement plan. For details on the variable
definitions, see Appendix A. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01




                                                  34
Table 4: Linear Probability Model Estimates of Subjectively Measured Planning
                                                               (1)           (2)                             (3)
                                                                   **
More patient                                                 0.075        0.063**                         0.064**
                                                             (0.023)     (0.023)                         (0.023)
More risk averse                                              0.030        0.027                           0.025
                                                             (0.027)     (0.026)                         (0.026)
Financial literacy: High                                     0.125**       0.051                           0.051
                                                             (0.030)     (0.032)                         (0.032)
Financial literacy: Medium                                   0.086**      0.047+                           0.044
                                                             (0.027)     (0.028)                         (0.028)
Self-reported financial knowledge                            0.118**      0.102**                         0.103**
                                                             (0.008)     (0.008)                         (0.008)
Eligible for retirement                                                    0.025                           0.023
                                                                         (0.040)                         (0.040)
Years until eligible for retirement                                        0.005                           0.005
                                                                         (0.007)                         (0.007)
Earned years of service                                                    0.003                           0.002
                                                                         (0.002)                         (0.002)
Annual 2013 salary (10 k)                                                  0.010*                          0.014*
                                                                         (0.005)                         (0.006)
Married male                                                             -0.051+                          -0.056*
                                                                         (0.026)                         (0.028)
Single female                                                            -0.083**                        -0.081**
                                                                         (0.027)                         (0.027)
Single male                                                              -0.141**                        -0.153**
                                                                         (0.043)                         (0.045)
College degree                                                            0.048+                           0.019
                                                                         (0.024)                         (0.028)
Non-white                                                                 -0.028                          -0.024
                                                                         (0.026)                         (0.026)
Home owner                                                                0.112**                         0.109**
                                                                         (0.032)                         (0.032)
Print sample                                                             -0.117**                        -0.119**
                                                                         (0.026)                         (0.027)
Self-reported healthy                                                     0.076**                         0.077**
                                                                         (0.022)                         (0.022)
Dependent children                                                        -0.047*                         -0.049*
                                                                         (0.022)                         (0.022)
Agency fixed effects                                           No            No                             Yes
Job fixed effects                                              No            No                             Yes
Adjusted R squared                                            0.124        0.184                           0.185
Notes: In all columns, the dependent variable is subjective planning, which is defined as a self-report of having
made a retirement plan. Mean of subjective planning is 0.4713 and number of observations is 2,024. Coefficients
are estimated using a linear probability model. All regressions include indicators for answered don’t know when
asked the risk and time preferences questions and a dummy for those that did not answer the dependent children
question. Standard errors are in parentheses. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                        35
Table 5: Heterogeneity in the Link between Patience and Retirement Planning
                                      Baseline    Years     Gender x Gender x                        Risk
                                                   until     Married Education                      Aversion
                                                Retireme
                                                     nt
                                         (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)                         (5)
More patient                           0.064**    0.093*      0.065*     0.024                        0.021
                                       (0.023)   (0.037)     (0.032)    (0.035)                      (0.039)
More patient * Years until retirement             -0.004
                                                 (0.005)
More patient * Married Male                                   0.066
                                                             (0.053)
More patient * Single Female                                 -0.093+
                                                             (0.053)
More patient * Single Male                                    0.101
                                                             (0.090)
More patient * Female * College                                          0.040
                                                                        (0.047)
More patient * Male * College                                            0.139*
                                                                        (0.061)
More patient * Risk Averse                                                                            0.061
                                                                                                     (0.046)
More risk averse                              0.025        0.030          0.027         0.027        -0.016
                                             (0.026)      (0.027)        (0.026)       (0.026)       (0.041)
Financial literacy: High                      0.051        0.034          0.051         0.047         0.052
                                             (0.032)      (0.033)        (0.032)       (0.032)       (0.032)
Financial literacy: Medium                    0.044        0.033         0.046+         0.043         0.044
                                             (0.028)      (0.029)        (0.028)       (0.028)       (0.028)
Self-reported financial knowledge            0.103**      0.101**        0.103**       0.103**       0.103**
                                             (0.008)      (0.009)        (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)
Eligible for retirement                       0.023        0.006          0.021         0.021         0.023
                                             (0.040)      (0.041)        (0.040)       (0.040)       (0.040)
Years until eligible for retirement           0.005        0.016*         0.005         0.005         0.005
                                             (0.007)      (0.008)        (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.007)
Earned years of service                       0.002        0.001          0.002         0.002         0.002
                                             (0.002)      (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)
Annual 2013 salary (10 k)                     0.014*       0.014*         0.014*        0.014*        0.014*
                                             (0.006)      (0.006)        (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)
Adjusted R squared                            0.183        0.200          0.186         0.184         0.185
Notes: In all columns, the dependent variable is subjective planning, which is defined as a self-report of having
made a retirement plan. Mean of subjective planning is 0.4713 and number of observations is 2,024. Coefficients
are estimated using a linear probability model. The specification is identical to Table 4, Column 3 and includes
agency and job fixed effects, indicators for answered don’t know when asked the risk and time preferences
questions, and a dummy for those that did not answer the dependent children question. Standard errors are in
parentheses. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                        36
Table 6: Additional Aspects of Planning
                                                                             Self-reported       Objective        Self-reported       Log (Self-
                                                              ORBIT self-    supplemental      supplemental       contribution      reported non-
                                          ORBIT log-in           service          plan               plan            rate for           housing
                                                                estimate     participation     participation       participants         wealth)
                                                 (1)               (2)             (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)
More patient                                   0.013              0.000          0.032              0.027              0.833            0.220**
                                              (0.019)           (0.021)         (0.022)           (0.022)            (0.808)            (0.064)
More risk averse                               0.032              0.023         -0.030             -0.032             -0.175             -0.081
                                              (0.022)           (0.025)         (0.025)           (0.025)            (0.891)            (0.073)
Financial literacy: High                       0.036             0.068*         -0.002              0.040              1.201            0.345**
                                              (0.027)           (0.030)         (0.031)           (0.031)            (1.135)            (0.091)
Financial literacy: Medium                     0.030             0.050+         -0.005              0.001             -0.147             0.159+
                                              (0.023)           (0.026)         (0.027)           (0.027)            (1.043)            (0.082)
                                                     **                **                                                   **
Self-reported financial knowledge             0.027             0.024            0.008              0.013            1.217              0.239**
                                              (0.007)           (0.008)         (0.008)           (0.008)            (0.308)            (0.024)
Eligible for retirement                        0.046             -0.038         -0.022             -0.056              1.743            0.315**
                                              (0.033)           (0.037)         (0.038)           (0.038)            (1.416)            (0.114)
Years until eligible for retirement            0.004            -0.017*         -0.005             -0.004              0.090             0.036+
                                              (0.006)           (0.007)         (0.007)           (0.007)            (0.256)            (0.021)
Earned years of service                       0.004**           0.007**          0.002            0.011**            -0.170*            -0.010+
                                              (0.002)           (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)            (0.068)            (0.006)
Age: 55 to 59.5                                -0.000            0.014**         0.017**             0.003             0.150             0.082**
                                              (0.005)            (0.005)         (0.005)           (0.005)            (0.172)           (0.016)
Age: over 59.5                                0.095**            0.082**         -0.034             -0.016             0.699             0.289**
                                              (0.028)            (0.031)         (0.032)           (0.032)            (1.153)           (0.096)
Annual 2013 salary (10 k)                       0.000            0.014**         0.017**             0.003             0.137             0.084**
                                              (0.005)            (0.005)         (0.005)           (0.005)            (0.171)           (0.015)
Mean                                            0.675             0.536           0.737              0.442             8.977            194,122
Adjusted R squared                              0.345             0.280           0.074              0.238             0.104              0.314
Observations                                    2,024             2,024           1,948              2,024             1,085              1763
Notes: The dependent variable is indicated in the column header. ORBIT log-in (Col. 1), ORBIT self-service estimate (Col. 2), and participation
in a state-managed supplemental plan (Col. 4) are all derived from administrative records. Participation in any supplemental retirement saving
plan (Col. 3), contribution rate among participants (Col. 5), and non-housing wealth (Col. 6) are all self-reported in the survey data. Coefficients
are estimated using a linear probability model (Columns 1-4) or OLS (in Columns 5-6). All regressions include a parallel set of coefficients to
Table 4, Column 3 with several covariates not reported here for brevity. Standard errors are in parentheses. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.

                                                                         37
Table 7: Lottery Frame Only
                                                                                       Self-reported     Objective     Self-reported     Log (Self-
                                        Subjective    ORBIT log-       ORBIT self- supplemental supplemental contribution reported non-
                                         planning        in               service            plan           plan          rate for        housing
                                                                         estimate       participation participation     participants       wealth)
                                               (1)           (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)             (6)              (7)
More patient: Lottery                       0.043+         -0.006         -0.003          0.054**         0.040+           1.286+          0.244**
                                            (0.022)       (0.018)         (0.020)         (0.020)         (0.020)         (0.745)          (0.060)
More risk averse                             0.027          0.025          0.018           -0.009         -0.032           -0.270           -0.098
                                            (0.026)       (0.018)         (0.020)         (0.021)         (0.021)         (0.769)          (0.062)
Financial literacy: High                     0.050          0.039          0.067*          -0.001          0.034            0.968          0.336**
                                            (0.032)       (0.026)         (0.030)         (0.030)         (0.030)         (1.118)          (0.091)
Financial literacy: Medium                   0.045          0.031         0.050+           -0.000         -0.002           -0.248           0.169*
                                            (0.028)       (0.023)         (0.026)         (0.026)         (0.026)         (1.022)          (0.081)
                                                   **            **              **                                              **
Self-reported financial knowledge           0.103         0.028           0.024             0.007          0.012          1.194            0.237**
                                            (0.008)       (0.007)         (0.008)         (0.008)         (0.008)         (0.307)          (0.024)
Eligible for retirement                      0.022          0.046         -0.038           -0.024         -0.056            1.731          0.312**
                                            (0.040)       (0.033)         (0.037)         (0.038)         (0.038)         (1.412)          (0.114)
Years until eligible for retirement          0.005          0.004         -0.017*          -0.005         -0.004            0.080           0.036+
                                            (0.007)       (0.006)         (0.007)         (0.007)         (0.007)         (0.255)          (0.021)
Earned years of service                      0.002        0.004**         0.007**           0.002         0.011**         -0.167*          -0.009+
                                            (0.002)       (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.068)          (0.006)
Annual 2013 salary (10 k)                    0.014*        -0.000         0.014**         0.016**          0.003            0.146          0.078**
                                            (0.006)       (0.005)         (0.005)         (0.005)         (0.005)         (0.172)          (0.016)
Mean                                         0.471          0.675          0.536            0.737          0.442            8.977         194,122
Adjusted R squared                           0.183          0.345          0.280            0.076          0.240            0.108            0.315
Observations                                 2,024          2,024          2,024            1,948          2,024            1,085            1,763
Notes: The dependent variable is indicated in the column header. ORBIT log-in (Col. 2), ORBIT self-service estimate (Col. 3), and participation
in a state-managed supplemental plan (Col. 5) are all derived from administrative records. Subjective planning (Col.1), participation in any
supplemental retirement saving plan (Col. 4), contribution rate among participants (Col. 6), and non-housing wealth (Col. 7) are all self-reported in
the survey data. Coefficients are estimated using a linear probability model (Columns 1-5) or OLS (in Columns 6-7). All regressions include a
parallel set of coefficients to Table 4, Column 3 with several covariates not reported here for brevity. Standard errors are in parentheses. +
p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                                         38
Table 8: Planned Retirement Age
                                                        (1)                                (2)
More patient                                          0.268+                             0.321*
                                                      (0.157)                           (0.156)
Subjective planning                                                                     -0.858**
                                                                                        (0.156)
More risk averse                                           0.171                          0.193
                                                         (0.185)                        (0.183)
Financial literacy: High                                  -0.025                          0.004
                                                         (0.223)                        (0.221)
Financial literacy: Medium                                -0.007                          0.020
                                                         (0.196)                        (0.194)
Self-reported financial knowledge                        -0.258**                       -0.167**
                                                         (0.060)                        (0.062)
Eligible for retirement                                   -0.227                         -0.217
                                                         (0.276)                        (0.274)
Years until eligible for retirement                       0.498**                        0.504**
                                                         (0.051)                        (0.050)
Earned years of service                                  -0.130**                       -0.128**
                                                         (0.013)                        (0.013)
Annual 2013 salary (10 k)                                 -0.011                          0.002
                                                         (0.039)                        (0.038)
Adjusted R squared                                         0.481                          0.489
Notes: The sample size is 1,885 respondents reporting a planned retirement age. In all columns, the
dependent variable is the planned retirement age, which has a mean of 62.765. All regressions include an
identical set of control variables to the specification in Table 4, Column 3 with several not reported here
for brevity. Standard errors are in parentheses. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                    39
Table 9: Plan Realizations
                                 Full Sample        Includes         Planners       Non-Planners
                                                   Retirement
                                                       Plan
                                     (1)                (2)              (3)             (4)
More patient                       0.031+             0.028+           0.060*           0.001
                                   (0.017)           (0.017)          (0.028)          (0.021)
Subjective planning                                   0.040*
                                                     (0.017)
Planned retirement age             -0.037**         -0.036**          -0.054**         -0.023**
                                   (0.003)           (0.003)          (0.004)          (0.003)
More risk averse                    -0.007            -0.008           -0.020            0.010
                                   (0.020)           (0.020)          (0.031)          (0.025)
Financial literacy: High           -0.069**         -0.070**          -0.102*          -0.058+
                                   (0.024)           (0.024)          (0.040)          (0.030)
Financial literacy: Medium         -0.038+           -0.040+           -0.057          -0.046+
                                   (0.021)           (0.021)          (0.036)          (0.025)
Self-reported financial             -0.002            -0.006           -0.009           -0.003
knowledge
                                   (0.006)           (0.007)          (0.011)          (0.008)
Eligible for retirement            0.094**           0.094**           0.094*           0.081*
                                   (0.030)           (0.030)          (0.047)          (0.037)
Years until eligible for           0.037**           0.036**          0.044**          0.028**
retirement
                                     (0.006)          (0.006)          (0.009)          (0.007)
                                           **               **               **
Earned years of service              0.010            0.010            0.012            0.007**
                                     (0.001)          (0.001)          (0.002)          (0.002)
Annual 2013 salary (10 k)            -0.002            -0.003          -0.010+          0.011+
                                     (0.004)          (0.004)          (0.006)          (0.006)
Mean                                  0.196             0.196           0.261            0.135
Adjusted R squared                    0.321             0.323           0.378            0.247
N                                     1,885             1,885            903              982
Notes: The sample size is 1,885 respondents reporting a valid planned retirement age. In all columns, the
dependent variable is retired as of April 2016 defined as terminating employment and receiving a pension
benefit. Coefficients are estimated using a linear probability model. All regressions include an identical
set of control variables to the specification in Table 4, Column 3 with several not reported here for
brevity. Standard errors are in parentheses. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                   40
                                      Online Appendix

         Planning for Retirement? The Importance of Time Preferences
       Robert L. Clark, Robert G. Hammond, Christelle Khalaf, Melinda Sandler Morrill
                                   This version: May 31, 2017


Appendix A: Data Appendix

       The data used in this paper are part of the North Carolina Retirement Transitions Study-

Active Workers (NCRTS-A). These data were gathered as part of a larger project, “Challenges

to Retirement Readiness in the North Carolina Public Sector Workforce,” funded by Sloan

Foundation Grant Number 2013-10-20. This appendix describes the sample used in this paper

only. For more information about the full project, please see the website:

http://go.ncsu.edu/publicsectorretirement.

       Table A1 illustrates the construction of the sample used in this paper. The target survey

population is workers that were ages 50-64, actively employment in March 2014, and have valid

2013 salary information indicating an active membership (N=138,790). Those with an email

address were eligible for the email sample (N= 82,503), while the remaining workers were

eligible for the print survey (N = 56,287). We sent a survey to the final target population of

13,884 (8,293 and 5,591 surveys sent for the email and print sample, respectively). As an

incentive to complete the survey, we advertised that participants could enter into a drawing to

win a free iPad. We received 2,480 responses (1,953 and 527 for email and print, respectively)

for an overall response rate of about 18 percent. When including only those with valid survey

responses to the main demographic characteristics (marital status, education, and race) and those

that answered the key economic questions on retirement planning, risk and time preferences, and

self-reported financial knowledge, the final data set used for analysis includes 2,024 workers


                                         Appendix Page 1
(1,567 email and 457 print). We return to sample representativeness in Appendix Table A4

below.

         Definitions of key variables are presented in Table A2. Of note, there are several types of

service that could be important in our analysis. First, there is membership service, which should

approximate the actual tenure of the employee minus any transferred or withdrawn service. We

use membership service for our measure of job tenure. However, to be eligible for retirement

benefits, individuals may also have purchased non-contributory (e.g., sick leave and vacation

time) service. To account for these latter types of service for all employees, we include an

additional 0.71 years of service in our calculation of eligibility for retirement benefits. We

include any other purchased service reported while working in the total years of service when

calculating eligibility (e.g., transferred or military service). Finally, Table A3 shows the

responses to the financial literacy questions.

         Table A4 explores the representativeness of the respondents relative to the information

available on the full population. The samples for Columns (1)-(3) are described in Table A1

above. The analysis sample is roughly similar to the full population. Respondents are more

likely to be female, are slightly older, higher earning and have fewer years of service.

Importantly, respondents are 9 percentage points less likely to be already eligible for retirement

benefits than the full population. Among those not yet eligible to retire, the analysis sample is

about 3 months closer to eligible to retire. Not surprisingly, we observe that our respondents are

substantially more likely to have engaged in objectively measured retirement planning activities.

         To compare our analysis sample to the full population in terms of more detailed

demographic characteristics, we extract from the American Community Survey (ACS) using




                                          Appendix Page 2
2008-2012 ACS 5-year Public Use Microdata Samples.26 The sample is full time federal, state,

or local government employees, defined as individuals who worked at least 30 hours for 14 or

more weeks in the past year. Individuals with missing demographics (age, gender, marital status,

and income) were excluded. We include data from North Carolina only and from the entire

United States for comparison. The comparison to the ACS confirms the findings above. The

analysis sample is more female, older, and higher earning relative to the average population. In

addition, respondents are more likely to be married, have a college degree, and to be white.

Thus, our findings should be interpreted as relating to a somewhat selected sample of survey

respondents.




 U.S. Census Bureau; American Community Survey, 2010 American Community Survey 5-Year
26


Estimates, using American FactFinder; <http://factfinder2.census.gov>; [November, 2014].


                                          Appendix Page 3
Table A1. Data set construction
                                                       Full            Email           Print
Aged 50-64 in the administrative records             138,790          82,503          56,287
Surveys Sent                                          13,884           8,293           5,591
Survey Responses                                      2,480            1,953            527
Marital status reported                               2,253            1,739            514
Education and race reported                           2,226            1,718            508
Retirement plan question answered                     2,210            1,710            500
Risk and time preferences question answered           2,052            1,583            469
Self-reported financial knowledge                     2,040            1,578            462
Own home                                              2,024            1,567            457


Final Sample                                          2,024            1,567            457
Notes: The full NCRTS-A data contains responses for workers ages 50-70 in 2014. The first
row indicates the number of workers ages 50-64 with valid employment status and gender in the
administrative records. Of these, 13,884 were sent a survey and 2,480 responded (response rate
is 18 percent). The remaining rows indicate the restrictions placed on the analysis sample for a
final sample size of 2,024 respondents.




                                        Appendix Page 4
Table A2: Key variables

Variable                          Source           Definition
Demographics
Earned years of service           Administrative   Years of contributory service. Does not include any service purchased. Excludes transferred
                                                   or withdrawn service. This measure is used to proxy for tenure.
Age at survey                     Administrative   Age of respondents as of April 1, 2014.
Annual 2013 salary                Administrative   Sum of total salary in 2013 across all memberships. If employee was hired in 2013, annual
                                                   salary is imputed from 2013 reported salary in the administrative data and number of days
                                                   hired (calculated using membership begin date).
Print sample                      Administrative   Survey respondents who that did not provide an email address to their employer.
Agency                            Administrative   Employees belong to one of the following agencies: city, county, public school, general
                                                   government, Department of Transportation, or other.
Job categories                    Administrative   Employees belong to one of the following job categories: safety/rescue officers,
                                                   executives/management/government, education professionals, educational support
                                                   personnel, health care professionals, professionals, trades and technical, social service
                                                   professionals, or university.
Self-reported healthy             Survey           Self-reported health: Excellent or very good.
Dependent children                Survey           Self-reported having children depending on her for more than half of their financial support.

Planning Measures
Subjectively measured planning    Survey           Self-reported having a plan on the survey.
Orbit log-in                      Administrative   Logged into orbit between August 19th, 2013 and August 18th, 2014.
Orbit self-service estimate       Administrative   Logged into orbit between August 19th, 2013 and August 18th, 2014 and requested a self-
                                                   service estimate.
Self-reported supplemental plan   Survey           Self-reported currently participating in a supplemental retirement saving plan with her
participation                                      current public employer (e.g., 401(k), 403(b), or 457(b) plan)
Objective supplemental plan       Administrative   Indicator for participating in either NC 401(K) or NC 457.
participation
Self-reported contribution rate   Survey           Self-reported contribution rate for those participating in supplemental retirement saving
for participants                                   plans. If annual dollar amount provided, contribution rate is imputed using annual 2013
                                                   salary from the administrative records.
Self-reported non-housing         Survey           Self-reported category of household’s current savings and investments. Median of category
wealth                                             is used in regression except the last category, “1 million or more” where 1.2 million is used.
Planned retirement age            Survey           Self-reported age at which she plans to stop working full-time for current employer and
                                                   begin receiving retirement benefits.

                                                             Appendix Page 5
Financial literacy: High            Survey            Answered 3 out of 3 financial literacy questions correctly
Financial literacy: Medium          Survey            Answered 2 out of 3 financial literacy questions correctly

Imputed Variables
Expected replacement rate           Survey            Dividing expected income needed in retirement for survey respondent (and spouse if
                                                      applicable) by self-reported salary on survey (and self-reported spouse salary if applicable).
Retired and claiming benefits       Administrative    Calculated as of April 19, 2016. Claimed benefits under full or early retirement
Years until eligible for            Administrative    Calculated as of April 1, 2014. Minimum number of years before an employee can qualify
retirement                                            for retirement when considering all the combinations of age at survey and years of service
                                                      by which an individual can qualify. Indicator for those already eligible for retirement.

Calculating years until eligible for retirement:
TSERS and LGERS members are eligible to retire with an unreduced service retirement benefit after reaching (1) age 65 and 5 years of
membership (creditable) service (2) age 60 and 25 years of creditable service (3) 30 years of creditable service at any age. Local law enforcement
officers that are members of LGERS are also eligible to retire with an unreduced service retirement benefit after reaching age 55 and 5 years of
creditable service.

TSERS and LGERS members are eligible to retire with a reduced benefit after reaching: (1) age 50 and 20 years of creditable service, or (2) age
60 (age 55 if the employee is a firefighter or rescue squad worker) and 5 years of creditable service. Local law enforcement officers that are
members of LGERS are eligible to retire with a reduced service retirement benefit after reaching age 50 and 15 years of creditable service.

While the years of creditable service used to determine eligibility can include purchased service and unused sick leave (converted to creditable
service at retirement), we do not generally observe these latter types of service since our sample includes only active workers. To get a better
approximation for time until eligible for retirement, we include an additional 0.71 years of non-contributory membership service for all workers.
This number is the median difference between the measure of creditable years of service observed at retirement and the actual creditable years of
service claimed at retirement using data from a sample of recent retirees.




                                                                Appendix Page 6
Table A3: Financial Literacy Questions
Survey Question                                                                              Answers (%)
Compound Interest
If you have $100 in your savings account and the annual interest rate is 2%, how
much money will you have in your account after 5 years?
    1. More than $102                                                                        83.99
    2. $102                                                                                  4.40
    3. Less than $102                                                                        3.75
    4. Do not know                                                                           6.27
    Blank                                                                                    1.58

Inflation
If the current interest rate on your bank deposit is 1% per year and the inflation rate is
2% per year, how much do you think you will be able to buy with your money a year
from now?
     1. A larger amount than you can buy now                                                 1.93
     2. Exactly the same as you can buy now                                                  3.51
     3. A smaller amount than you can buy now                                                82.11
     4. Do not know                                                                          10.77
     Blank                                                                                   1.68

Tax Advantage
Assume you are in the 25% tax bracket (you pay $0.25 in tax for each additional
dollar earned) and you contribute $100 more pre-tax to a retirement saving plan (e.g.,
401(k), 403(b), 457(b), IRA). Your take-home pay (what is in your paycheck after all
taxes and other payments are taken out) will:
    1. Decline by $100                                                                       17.44
    2. Decline by $75                                                                        34.09
    3. Decline by $50                                                                        5.19
    4. Remain the same                                                                       9.24
    5. Do not know                                                                           23.07
    Blank                                                                                    10.97
N=2,024




                                             Appendix Page 7
Table A4: Comparison of key variables across population and survey responses
                                                                                  Difference
                                                                                 between sent
                                                    Target      Valid/Included    sample and
                                 Population         Sample       Responses         responded
                                    (1)               (2)             (3)        (4) = (3) –(2)
Admin data
N                                 138,790           13,884          2,024
Male                              35.50%            34.21%         31.18%         -3.03%**
                                                                                    (1.13)
Age at survey
Mean                               56.39            56.40           56.75           0.35**
                                                                                    (0.09)
50-54.99                          41.69%            41.54%         37.75%         -3.79%**
                                                                                    (1.17)
55-59.99                          36.72%            36.80%         37.94%           1.14%
                                                                                    (1.15)
60-65.15                          21.58%            21.65%         24.31%          2.66%**
                                                                                    (0.98)
Salary
Mean                              $46,549          $45,586         $52,481         $6,895**
                                                                                   (547.20)
Less than $30,000                 24.44%            25.05%         14.82%         -10.23%**
                                                                                    (1.00)
$30,000 to $49,999                39.69%            39.92%         37.50%          -2.42%*
                                                                                    (1.16)
$50,000 to $74,999                26.89%            26.65%         33.60%          6.95%**
                                                                                    (1.06)
$75,000 to $99,999                 6.20%            5.86%          9.49%           3.63%**
                                                                                    (0.58)
$100,000 to $149,999               2.14%            2.13%          4.05%           1.92%**
                                                                                    (0.36)
$150,000 and above                 0.64%            0.39%          0.54%            0.15%
                                                                                    (0.15)
Earned years of service            14.72            14.64           16.34           1.70**
                                                                                    (0.21)
Eligible to retire                44.22%            44.05%         53.11%          9.06%**
                                                                                    (1.18)
Years until eligible to retire      4.35            4.36            4.10
                                                                                   -0.26**
for those not yet eligible       (N=77,412)       (N=7,768)       (N=949)
                                                                                    (0.09)
ORBIT log-in past 12              48.33%            47.93%         67.49%         19.56%**
months                                                                              (1.19)
ORBIT self-service                35.82%            35.40%         53.56%         18.16%**
estimate past 12 months                                                             (1.15)
Objective supplemental            38.79%            37.42%         44.17%          6.75%**
plan participation                                                                  (1.16)




                                              Appendix Page 8
Table A5: Comparison of key variables across population and survey responses
                                       NCRTS-A           ACS (NC)      ACS (All)
                                          (1)               (2)           (3)
Admin data
N                                        2,024            11,105        376,040
Married female                          45.16%            39.09%        35.27%
Married male                            24.31%            31.53%        33.21%
Single female                           23.67%            20.93%        20.89%
Single male                             6.87%              8.46%        10.63%
College degree                          63.14%            47.18%        30.52%
Non-white                               22.78%            29.06%        27.05%

Age at survey
Mean                                     56.75             55.73         55.84
50-54.99                                37.75%            42.79%        42.12%
55-59.99                                37.94%            36.35%        36.23%
60-65.15                                24.31%            20.86%        21.65%

Salary
Mean                                    $52,481           $49,994       $58,901
Less than $30,000                       14.82%            25.65%        19.20%
$30,000 to $49,999                      37.50%            32.69%        26.17%
$50,000 to $74,999                      33.60%            28.32%        30.98%
$75,000 to $99,999                       9.49%             7.46%        12.87%
$100,000 to $149,999                     4.05%             4.33%         8.43%
$150,000 and above                       0.54%             1.54%         2.36%


Notes: Column 1 includes the analysis sample drawn from the North Carolina Retirement Transition
Study-Active Workers (NCRTS-A) survey data conducted March 2014. Columns 2 and 3 report means
for the American Community Survey (ACS) data pooled 2008-2012 5-year PUMS




                                        Appendix Page 9
                                                      Appendix B: Supplemental plans
                                                     Survey question on supplemental plan:


2.1 Are you (and your spouse) currently participating in any of the following supplemental retirement saving plans?
                                                                                                                           Yes      No    N/A

a- Retirement savings plan with my current public employer (e.g., 401(k), 403(b), 457(b) plan)
b- Individual Retirement Account (IRA)
c- Retirement savings plan with your spouse/partner’s current employer



Table B.1: Administrative records and survey supplemental plan participation rate:

                                                                         (1)                                      (2)
                                                                Administrative Records                   Survey Responses (2.1a)
                                                       (a)         (b)          (c)        (d)          (a)        (b)        (c)         (d)
                                            N         Only       Only 457      Both       Neither       Yes        No         N/A        Blank
                                                      401k
                         All records     139,172     31.46%       3.43%       3.92%       61.20%
                        Responded to
Full sample                               2,024      36.02%       3.31%       4.84%       55.83%      70.95%      23.67%    3.75%        3.75%
                           survey
Only eligible to         All records     25,875       23.46%       14.36%       12.02%       50.16%
participate in the
Prudential              Responded to
                                           384        28.91%       13.28%       17.19%       40.63%       69.79%       24.48%       1.56% 4.17%
NC401(k)/NC457             survey
Notes: Column 1(a) defined as having an account balance in the NC 401k as of 7/17/2014. Column 1(b) defined as having an account balance in
the NC 457 as of 7/17/2014. Only eligible to participate in the Prudential plans is based on the revised list of agencies that offer the
NC401k/NC457 plans exclusively. Observations with no agency information or having worked for both exclusive and none exclusive agencies are
part of the nonexclusive sample.



                                                               Appendix Page 10
Table B.2: Comparison for those with access to NC plans only

                                       Survey Response (2.1)
                        Yes           No             N/A       Blank   TOTAL
Admin Records:
Only 401k             27.60%         0.52%           0.26%     0.52%    111
Only 457              12.76%         0.52%           0.00%     0.00%     51
Both                  16.15%         0.52%           0.52%     0.00%     66
Neither               13.28%        22.92%           0.78%     3.65%    156
TOTAL                   268            94               6        16     384




                                      Appendix Page 11
                             Appendix C: Time and Risk Questions


       In this appendix, we present additional detail on our measures of risk and time

preferences. We consider three issues: (1) the correlation of time preferences from our two

frames, (2) the interaction of time and risk preferences, and (3) a comparison of our sample’s

responses relative to the sample in the HRS.

       First, Table C1 provides pairwise cross-tabulations of various preferences measures as

well as their correlations. The measure of time preferences used in the main text equals one if

the respondent chose the delayed reward on either the lottery frame or the benefit frame. Here,

we refer to this measure as patient on either frame. We consider three additional measures:

patient on the lottery frame, excluding the benefit frame; patient on the benefit frame, excluding

the lottery frame; and patient on both frames.

       Our two frames of the time preference questions provide measures of patience that are

positively correlated. But the correlation of 0.07 is small, which suggests that the two frames

provide measures that offer independent variation. Considering a given time preference measure

and our measure of risk preferences, each pairwise correlation is small in absolute value. The

patience measure providing the strongest correlation with risk aversion is the lottery frame,

which has a correlation of -0.09 with our measure of risk preferences. Further, patience on the

benefit frame also has a small correlation with risk aversion and, differently than the lottery

frame, is positively correlated with risk aversion. While we find that our time preference

questions offer measures that offer independent variation, we prefer to remain agnostic about

which framing is more appropriate for studying retirement planning. As such, we use a single

measure for patient on either frame as our main measure of patience.




                                        Appendix Page 12
       Next, Table C2 provides additional analysis of the interactions of risk and time

preferences in the determination of retirement planning behavior. Column 1 of Table C2

reproduces Column 5 of Table 5 in the main paper for comparison, where the dependent variable

is subjective planning and patience and risk aversion are interacted. Columns 2-4 use different

measures of time preferences: patient on the lottery frame, excluding the benefit frame; patient

on the benefit frame, excluding the lottery frame; and patient on both frames. In Column 2

(lottery frame) and Colum 3 (benefit frame), we find that, unlike in Column 1, risk and time

preferences have no interactive effects in terms of the size of the estimated coefficient on the

interaction term. In Column 4 (patient on both frames), we find that, unlike in any of the other

specifications, time preferences are strongly related to planning for less risk averse individuals

but are much less strongly related to planning for more risk averse individuals. Given the lack of

robustness in this analysis, we refrain from drawing firm conclusions regarding the ability of our

measures of risk and time preferences to speak to the interactive effects of patience and risk

aversion.

       Table C3 provides a comparison of our survey respondents drawn from the North

Carolina Retirement Transitions Study-Active Workers (NCRTS-A) to a sample drawn from the

Health and Retirement Study (HRS) in terms of the risk preference question and the two time

preference questions. Column 1 provides the tabulations in our sample, conditional on having

answered the question. The remaining columns consider data from the HRS, where we match

our answers as closely to those in the HRS. See each panel’s note for a full discussion of how

closely the exact dollar amounts match between our questions and those the HRS. We restrict

the sample of HRS respondents to only include active workers aged 50-64, which matches our

workers of interest. Column 2 includes the restricted HRS sample with only private sector



                                         Appendix Page 13
workers (active workers aged 50-64 who report working in an industry other than public

administration). Column 3 includes the restricted HRS sample with only public sector workers

(active workers aged 50-64 who report working in the public administration industry).

       For statistical inference, we are limited by the very small sample of public sector workers

in the HRS. Few public sector workers are covered in the HRS, yet much of what has been

studied in the retirement literature uses the HRS. This is one of our motivations for studying the

retirement planning and decision making of public sector workers. The small sample issue with

public sector workers in the HRS is especially evident on the time preference questions (11

public sector workers responding to the lottery frame question and 10 public sector workers

responding to the benefit frame question). In the discussion below (not reported in the table), we

make formal statistical comparisons only between our respondents and respondents in the HRS

who are active private sector workers aged 50-64 (Column 1 versus Column 2).

       Our sample of public workers is more risk averse than private sector HRS respondents.

The difference is 11.44 percentage points, which is statistically significant (standard error of the

difference = 1.18, p-value = 0.00). This is consistent with the general intuition regarding public

versus private sector workers and with past empirical evidence (Bellante and Link, 1981).

Considering time preferences, our sample of public workers is more patient than private sector

HRS respondents, irrespective of which frame is used (lottery frame difference = 12.24

percentage points, standard error of the difference = 2.40, p-value = 0.00; benefit frame

difference = 19.73 percentage points, standard error of the difference = 2.45, p-value = 0.00).

This is consistent with the fact that public sector workers have self-selected into jobs with more

delayed compensation (lower salaries but higher DB pension benefits, relative to similar private




                                         Appendix Page 14
sector jobs). However, we do not know of empirical evidence on the comparison of time

preferences between public and private sector workers in a representative sample.

       Because of these differences between our sample of public workers and the private sector

workers in the HRS, results from studies examining the retirement planning and preparedness of

private sector workers do not necessarily apply to public sector workers. Further, given the

limited coverage of public sector workers in the HRS, our data from North Carolina offer new

insights not possible by considering the HRS alone.




                                       Appendix Page 15
Table C1: Cross-Tabulations and Correlations of Preference Measures
Panel A: Time preferences
                                Patient: lottery          Impatient: lottery   Dk: lottery
Patient: benefit                   18.08%                     15.17%            0.94%
Impatient: benefit                 22.88%                     25.20%            1.63%
Dk: benefit                         5.58%                      6.13%            4.40%
Notes: Number of observations is 2,024.
Correlation (conditional on answering both questions): 0.0668

Panel B: Patient either and risk
                                 Risk averse                Risk seeking        Dk: risk
Patient: either                    43.08%                      13.44%           6.13%
Not “Patient: either”              24.41%                       6.18%           6.77%
Notes: Number of observations is 2,024.
Correlation (conditional on answering both questions): -0.0373

Panel C: Benefit frame and risk
                                  Risk averse               Risk seeking        Dk: risk
Patient: benefit                    24.85%                     6.47%            2.87%
Impatient: benefit                  34.19%                    11.26%            4.25%
Dk: benefit                          8.45%                     1.88%            5.78%
Notes: Number of observations is 2,024.
Correlation (conditional on answering both questions): 0.0480

Panel D: Lottery frame and risk
                                  Risk averse               Risk seeking        Dk: risk
Patient: lottery                    31.08%                    11.02%            4.45%
Impatient: lottery                  33.89%                     7.95%            4.64%
Dk: lottery                          2.52%                     0.64%            3.80%
Notes: Number of observations is 2,024.
Correlation (conditional on answering both questions): -0.0857.

Panel E: Patient both and risk
                                 Risk averse               Risk seeking         Dk: risk
Patient: both                      12.85%                     4.05%              1.19%
Not “Patient: both”                54.64%                    15.56%             11.71%
Notes: Number of observations is 2,024.
Correlation (conditional on answering both questions): -0.0103




                                           Appendix Page 16
Table C2: Interactions of Risk and Time Preference for Subjective Planning
                                               Either       Lottery       Benefit                           Both
                                                 (1)           (2)           (3)                             (4)
More patient                                   0.021         0.036         0.060                           0.116*
                                              (0.039)       (0.038)       (0.041)                         (0.050)
More patient * More risk averse                0.061         0.010         0.004                          -0.072
                                              (0.046)       (0.045)       (0.047)                         (0.058)
More risk averse                              -0.016         0.021         0.019                           0.038
                                              (0.041)       (0.035)       (0.031)                         (0.029)
Financial literacy: High                       0.052         0.050         0.056+                         0.053+
                                              (0.032)       (0.032)       (0.032)                         (0.032)
Financial literacy: Medium                     0.044         0.045         0.045                           0.046
                                              (0.028)       (0.028)       (0.028)                         (0.028)
Self-reported financial knowledge             0.103**       0.103**       0.104**                         0.104**
                                              (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)                         (0.008)
Eligible for retirement                        0.023         0.022         0.026                           0.026
                                              (0.040)       (0.040)       (0.040)                         (0.040)
Years until eligible for retirement            0.005         0.005         0.005                           0.006
                                              (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.007)                         (0.007)
Earned years of service                        0.002         0.002         0.002                           0.002
                                              (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)                         (0.002)
Annual 2013 salary (10 k)                      0.014*        0.014*       0.015**                          0.013*
                                              (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)                         (0.006)
Adjusted R squared                             0.185         0.183         0.184                           0.184
Notes: In all columns, the dependent variable is subjective planning, which is defined as a self-report of having
made a retirement plan. Mean of subjective planning is 0.4713 and number of observations is 2,024. Coefficients
are estimated using a linear probability model. Column 1 measures patience with a single measure that equals one if
the respondent chose the delayed reward on either frame (the measure from the main text); Column 2 uses the lottery
frame, excluding the benefit frame; Column 3 uses the benefit frame, excluding the lottery frame; and Column 4
uses a single measure that equals one if the delayed reward was chosen on both frames. All regressions include
dummies for those that answered don’t know when asked the risk and time preferences questions and a dummy for
those that did not answer the dependent children question. Standard errors are in parentheses. + p<0.10, * p<0.05, **
p<0.01.




                                               Appendix Page 17
Table C3: Comparison to the HRS of Risk and Time Preference Questions

Panel A: More risk averse         Answered “First job” to the risk preference question
                                                                                   HRS,            HRS,
                                                                                  private          public
                                                                                 workers          workers
Risk Preference                                                     NCRTS-A       50-64            50-64
Suppose that you are the only income earner in the family. Your
doctor recommends that you move because of allergies, and you
have to choose between two possible jobs. The first would
guarantee you an annual income for life that is equal to your
current income. The second is possibly better paying, but the
income is also less certain. There is a 50-50 chance the second job
would double your income and a 50-50 chance that it would cut
your income by 20%. Would you take the first job or the second
job?
First job                                                            77.48%      66.04%           66.97%
Second job                                                               22.52%       33.96%        33.03%
Number of observations                                                    1,763         5,674         302
Notes: NCRTS-A refers to the North Carolina Retirement Transitions Study of Active Workers data as
described in the main paper and in Appendix A. HRS 1992 asks a series of income questions. The
income cut in the first question is a third and the income cut in the second question is 20 percent. We use
both questions to group individuals in bins similar to the ones used in NCRTS-A. HRS refers to the
Health and Retirement Study age eligible cohorts, without any other sample restrictions. The sample of
HRS responses with restrictions includes active workers aged 50-64, shown separately for private sector
and public sector workers. The HRS results are weighted using respondent level weights.

Panel B: More patient: Lottery frame Answered “Wait one year and claim $1200” to the time
preference question
                                                                                      HRS,         HRS,
                                                                                     private       public
                                                                                     workers      workers
Time Preference [Lottery Frame]                                       NCRTS-A         50-64        50-64
Suppose that you won a prize that is worth $1,000 if you take it
today. Alternatively, you could wait one year to claim the prize
and be guaranteed to receive $1,200. Would you claim the $1,000
dollars today, or would you wait one year for $1,200?
Claim $1000 today                                                      49.97%        62.21%       43.78%
Wait one year and claim $1200                                          50.03%        37.79%       56.22%
Number of observations                                                   1,883         533           11
Notes: HRS 2004 asks a series of lottery questions. The pay out in the first question is 1,100 and the
payout in the second question is 1,200. We use both questions to group individuals in bins similar to the
ones used in NCRTS-A. See the notes to Panel A of Table C3 for more details.




                                           Appendix Page 18
Panel C: More patient: Benefit frame Answered “Take the $1000 monthly benefit” to the time
preference question
                                                                                 HRS,         HRS,
                                                                                private       public
                                                                                workers      workers
Time Preference [Benefit Frame]                                      NCRTS-A     50-64        50-64
Imagine you are 65 years old, and you currently receive $1,000
per month in Social Security benefits. Suppose you were given the
choice to lower that benefit by half, to $500 per month. This one-
half benefit reduction would continue for as long as you live. In
return, you would be given a one-time, lump-sum payment of
$80,500. Would you take the $1,000 monthly benefit for life, or
the lower monthly benefit combined with the lump sum payment?
Take the $1000 monthly benefit                                       59.25%     39.52%       52.08%
Take the lower benefit and the lump sum                              40.75%     60.48%       47.92%
Number of observations                                                1,698       522          10
Notes: The amount in the HRS 2004 survey is $87,000 for married individuals and $80,000 for single
individuals. See the notes to Panel A of Table C3 for more details.




                                          Appendix Page 19
Appendix D: Sensitivity checks
Table D.1: Patience frameworks
                                                                              Self-reported     Objective     Self-reported     Log (Self-
                                      Subjective   ORBIT log-   ORBIT self-   supplemental    supplemental    contribution    reported non-
                                       planning       in          service          plan            plan          rate for        housing
                                                                 estimate     participation   participation    participants      wealth)
                                          (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)
More patient: Both frameworks          0.099**        0.024        0.012          0.064*         0.050+           0.419          0.374**
                                       (0.031)       (0.025)      (0.028)        (0.029)         (0.029)         (1.026)         (0.086)
More patient: Only lottery             0.045+        -0.006       -0.011         0.045+           0.031          1.575+          0.231**
                                       (0.027)       (0.022)      (0.024)        (0.025)         (0.025)         (0.915)         (0.073)
More patient: Only benefit              0.068*        0.036        0.004         -0.005          -0.006          -0.534           0.129
                                       (0.031)       (0.025)      (0.028)        (0.029)         (0.029)         (1.107)         (0.087)
More risk averse                        0.023         0.023        0.017         -0.009          -0.032          -0.203          -0.108+
                                       (0.026)       (0.018)      (0.021)        (0.021)         (0.021)         (0.771)         (0.062)
Financial literacy: High                0.050         0.037        0.067*        -0.001           0.034           1.028          0.327**
                                       (0.032)       (0.026)      (0.030)        (0.030)         (0.030)         (1.119)         (0.091)
Financial literacy: Medium              0.044         0.029       0.049+         -0.000          -0.002          -0.198           0.159+
                                       (0.028)       (0.023)      (0.026)        (0.026)         (0.026)         (1.026)         (0.081)
Self-reported financial knowledge      0.103**       0.027**      0.024**         0.007           0.011          1.216**         0.235**
                                       (0.008)       (0.007)      (0.008)        (0.008)         (0.008)         (0.308)         (0.024)
Eligible for retirement                 0.025         0.048       -0.037         -0.024          -0.055           1.694          0.318**
                                       (0.040)       (0.033)      (0.037)        (0.038)         (0.038)         (1.412)         (0.114)
Years until eligible for retirement     0.005         0.004       -0.016*        -0.005          -0.004           0.073           0.037+
                                       (0.007)       (0.006)      (0.007)        (0.007)         (0.007)         (0.256)         (0.021)
Earned years of service                 0.002         0.004*      0.007**         0.002          0.011**         -0.166*         -0.009+
                                       (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.068)         (0.005)
Annual 2013 salary (10 k)               0.014*       -0.000       0.014**        0.016**          0.003           0.153          0.078**
                                       (0.006)       (0.005)      (0.005)        (0.005)         (0.005)         (0.172)         (0.016)
Mean                                    0.471         0.675        0.536          0.737           0.442           8.977          194,122
Adjusted R squared                      0.185         0.346        0.280          0.075           0.239           0.108           0.316
Observations                            2,024         2,024        2,024          1,948           2,024           1,085           1,763




                                                           Appendix Page 20
Table D.2: Alternative Planning Measures
                                                                         ORBIT                        ORBIT
                                           Thought        ORBIT            self-       ORBIT            self-
                                             about        log-in:        service       log-in:        service
                                          retirement     6 months       estimate:      2 years       estimate:
                                                                        6 months                      2 years
                                              (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)
More patient                                 0.003          0.022         0.007          0.002         -0.007
                                           (0.016)        (0.022)        (0.022)       (0.014)        (0.020)
More risk averse                            -0.019         0.045+         0.030          0.008          0.000
                                           (0.018)        (0.025)        (0.025)       (0.016)        (0.023)
Financial literacy: High                    0.040+          0.023         0.051          0.011         0.064*
                                           (0.022)        (0.030)        (0.031)       (0.020)        (0.028)
Financial literacy: Medium                  0.044*          0.026        0.048+          0.015         0.057*
                                           (0.019)        (0.026)        (0.027)       (0.017)        (0.024)
Self-reported financial knowledge           0.051**        0.032**       0.030**         0.013*        0.019*
                                           (0.006)        (0.008)        (0.008)       (0.005)        (0.007)
Eligible for retirement                      0.027         0.112**        0.022          0.002         -0.055
                                           (0.028)        (0.038)        (0.039)       (0.025)        (0.035)
Years until eligible for retirement          0.004         0.013+        -0.004          0.001       -0.017**
                                           (0.005)        (0.007)        (0.007)       (0.005)        (0.006)
Earned years of service                      0.001         0.006**       0.007**         0.003*       0.008**
                                           (0.001)        (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.001)        (0.002)
Annual 2013 salary (10 k)                   -0.000         -0.001         0.011*         0.001        0.016**
                                           (0.004)        (0.005)        (0.005)       (0.004)        (0.005)
Married male                               -0.041*         -0.024        -0.026         -0.037*        -0.032
                                           (0.020)        (0.027)        (0.027)       (0.018)        (0.025)
Single female                               -0.009         -0.008        -0.011          0.013          0.013
                                           (0.019)        (0.026)        (0.026)       (0.017)        (0.024)
Single male                                -0.071*         -0.106*       -0.064         -0.034         -0.025
                                           (0.031)        (0.043)        (0.044)       (0.028)        (0.039)
College degree                              0.053**         0.032         0.005          0.020         -0.010
                                           (0.019)        (0.026)        (0.027)       (0.017)        (0.024)
Non-white                                  -0.045*        -0.044+        -0.063*        -0.018       -0.062**
                                           (0.018)        (0.025)        (0.025)       (0.016)        (0.023)
Home owner                                  0.081**         0.049        0.052+          0.010          0.019
                                           (0.022)        (0.030)        (0.031)       (0.020)        (0.028)
Print sample                               -0.076**       -0.446**      -0.389**       -0.701**      -0.548**
                                           (0.019)        (0.025)        (0.026)       (0.017)        (0.023)
Self-reported healthy                        0.016          0.019         0.018          0.007          0.015
                                           (0.015)        (0.021)        (0.021)       (0.014)        (0.019)
Dependent children                          -0.013          0.007        -0.009          0.007        -0.036+
                                           (0.016)        (0.021)        (0.022)       (0.014)        (0.020)
Mean                                         0.871          0.567         0.460          0.776          0.599
Adjusted R squared                           0.106          0.249         0.225          0.539          0.342
Notes: Column 1 dependent variable is whether the individual had thought about or made a retirement plan. The
remaining columns involve use of the ORBIT website within either 6 month or two year time intervals. N= 2,024.




                                             Appendix Page 21
