NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTIMATING THE RECESSION-MORTALITY RELATIONSHIP WHEN MIGRATION
MATTERS
Vellore Arthi
Brian Beach
W. Walker Hanlon
Working Paper 23507
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23507

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017

We thank James Fenske, Joe Ferrie, Marco Gonzalez-Navarro, Tim Hatton, Taylor Jaworski,
Amir Jina, Shawn Kantor, Carl Kitchens, Adriana Lleras-Muney, Grant Miller, Christopher
Ruhm, William Strange; audiences at the 2017 ASSA Annual Meeting, 2017 NBER Cohort
Studies Meeting, 2017 PAA Annual Meeting, and 2017 SDU Workshop on Applied
Microeconomics; and seminar participants at University of California, Davis, University of
Essex, Florida State University, Queen's University, RAND, University of Toronto, and
University of Warwick; for helpful comments. For funding, we thank the UCLA Rosalinde and
Arthur Gilbert Program in Real Estate, Finance and Urban Economics, the California Center for
Population Research, the UCLA Academic Senate Faculty Research Grant Fund, and the
National Science Foundation (CAREER Grant No. 1552692) The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Vellore Arthi, Brian Beach, and W. Walker Hanlon. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Estimating the Recession-Mortality Relationship when Migration Matters
Vellore Arthi, Brian Beach, and W. Walker Hanlon
NBER Working Paper No. 23507
June 2017
JEL No. I1,J60,N32,N33
ABSTRACT
A large literature following Ruhm (2000) suggests that mortality falls during recessions and rises
during booms. The panel-data approach used to generate these results assumes that either there is
no substantial migration response to temporary changes in local economic conditions, or that any
such response is accurately captured by intercensal population estimates. To assess the
importance of these assumptions, we examine two natural experiments: the recession in cotton
textile-producing districts of Britain during the U.S. Civil War, and the coal boom in Appalachian
counties of the U.S. that followed the OPEC oil embargo in the 1970s. In both settings, we find
evidence of a substantial migratory response. Moreover, we show that estimates of the
relationship between business cycles and mortality are highly sensitive to assumptions related to
migration. After adjusting for migration, we find that mortality increased during the cotton
recession, but was largely unaffected by the coal boom. Overall, our results suggest that
migration can meaningfully bias estimates of the impact of business-cycle fluctuations on
mortality.
Vellore Arthi
Department of Economics
University of Essex
Wivenhoe Park
Colchester CO4 3SQ, UK
v.arthi@essex.ac.uk
Brian Beach
Department of Economics
College of William and Mary
P.O. Box 8795
Williamsburg, VA 23187
and NBER
bbbeach@wm.edu

W. Walker Hanlon
Department of Economics
NYU Stern School of Business
Henry Kaufman Management Center
44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
walker.hanlon@gmail.com

1

Introduction

How do business cycles affect mortality? This question has attracted substantial attention following an influential study by Ruhm (2000), which found that mortality
rates in the U.S. fall during recessions and rise during booms.1 Methodologically,
Ruhm compared state-level unemployment rates to state-level total mortality rates.
This panel-data approach has now been applied to a wide variety of settings in developed and developing countries, both modern and historical. The majority of studies
in this literature yield consistent results: mortality appears to be pro-cyclical.2
One critical assumption embedded in this empirical approach is that either there
is no large migration response to business-cycle fluctuations, or that short-run population flows are accurately captured by intercensal population estimates. If this
assumption fails, say, because unobserved migration changes either the size or the
composition of an affected location’s at-risk population, then we may observe a spurious change in the observed mortality rate which we will misinterpret as reflecting the
true impact of business cycles on health. We call this phenomenon migration bias.3
The presence of a migratory response raises two further concerns. First, migration
may cause unemployment rates, the key explanatory variable used in most of the
studies following Ruhm (2000), to become endogenous.4 Second, to the extent that
1

We acknowledge that we are using the terms “recession”, “boom”, and “business cycles” loosely,
to refer to temporary changes in local economic conditions (i.e., changes in unemployment rates and
individual incomes) rather than to more technical changes in national GDP. Nevertheless, we adopt
this convention to remain consistent with the existing literature; see, for instance, Ruhm (2000, p.
617).
2
Summarizing this literature, Ruhm (2015) writes, “Using data from a variety of countries and
time periods, these investigations provide strong evidence of procyclical fluctuations in total mortality and several specific causes of death.” Notable exceptions which find either mixed health effects or
evidence of counter-cyclical mortality include Svensson (2007), Economou et al. (2008), and Miller
& Urdinola (2010). Also, Ruhm (2015) suggests that this relationship may have changed in the last
decade. We review this literature in Appendix A.1.
3
This potential issue is mentioned in Ruhm (2007), Stuckler et al. (2012), and Lindo (2015), but
we are not aware of a study that assess the extent to which migration may affect the results in this
literature.
4
This is because unemployment rates both affect and are affected by migration. That is, a
change in the unemployment rate may induce migration, and this migration will in turn affect both

1

individuals migrate towards areas that offer better economic opportunities, we are
likely to observe migration between treatment and control locations, which has the
potential to bias coefficient estimates obtained in panel-data regressions.
In light of these issues, the aims of this study are twofold: first, to assess the migration response to short-run changes in economic conditions; and second, to examine
the impact of such migration on estimates of the relationship between business cycles
and mortality.
To do this, we draw on two empirical settings. The first setting is the large
recession in cotton-textile producing regions of Britain caused by the U.S. Civil War
(1861-1865), an event which sharply reduced the industry’s supply of raw cotton
inputs.5 The second setting is the boom in coal-producing counties of the Appalachian
U.S. over the period 1970-1977, an event precipitated by the OPEC oil embargo and
national regulatory changes.6 Both settings were chosen because they offer plausibly
exogenous variation in the timing and spatial distribution of short-term economic
shocks. This allows us to more cleanly identify the impact of changes in local economic
conditions, as we can observe the local incidence of the economic shock without relying
on unemployment rates, which drive and are endogenously affected by migration.7 In
both cases, the temporal component of the economic shock was short, sharp, and
generated by outside forces that were largely unexpected. Meanwhile, the spatial
incidence of each shock was determined by the pre-existing distribution of economic
activity, which was in turn due to underlying natural endowments.8
the numerator and denominator used to calculate unemployment rates in the next period. Similarly,
unemployment rates may affect and be affected by patterns in mortality and fertility, patterns which
may also be influenced by migration. The endogeneity of unemployment rates has been raised as a
concern in Miller & Urdinola (2010) and Foote et al. (2017).
5
This setting has previously been studied by Hanlon (2015) and Hanlon (2017), which examined
outcomes related to technological change and urban growth, respectively.
6
This setting has previously been studied by Black et al. (2002), Black et al. (2005), and Black
et al. (2013), which investigated outcomes related to social welfare provision, local economic performance, and fertility, respectively.
7
This approach follows work by Miller & Urdinola (2010).
8
In the case of the coal boom, the key natural endowment was coal reserves. In the case of the
cotton shortage, work by Crafts & Wolf (2014) shows that the spatial distribution of the cotton

2

We make three primary contributions in this study. First, we show that local
economic shocks can induce substantial and systematic migratory responses. In the
case of the cotton shortage, we observe evidence that workers left cotton textileproducing areas during the recession and migrated to nearby non-cotton locations.
In the case of the coal boom, we observe that the pattern of out-migration from
Appalachia in the decades prior to the 1970s saw a short-lived reversal during the
boom decade of 1970-1980. In this setting in particular, migration appears to have
been highly selective, with boom-time population changes driven by the return of
healthy working-age adults.
Second, we provide evidence that the estimated relationship between business
cycles and mortality is highly sensitive to modeling assumptions related to migration. In both settings, different sets of assumptions about the relationship between
population, migration, and mortality lead to substantially different results—in some
cases, with completely different signs. Moreover, as we describe below, the standard
approach makes strong assumptions about both the accuracy of intercensal population estimates and the short-run relationship between population and mortality.
These assumptions are at odds with the evidence on migration in the settings that
we consider.
Accordingly, we use four strategies to diagnose and account for the impact of
migration on estimates of the relationship between business cycles and mortality.
First, we propose a set of alternative estimation strategies, each embedding different
assumptions about the relationship between mortality and short-run changes in population. Comparing the results obtained from these alternative approaches shows that
estimates of the business cycle-mortality relationship depend heavily on the choices
made to model migration. Second, we use the available evidence on the migration
textile industry in the 1830s was driven by factors including the availability of water power sources,
rugged terrain, and access to a natural port. There was strong persistence in industry location, so
that the locations where the industry was concentrated in the 1830s remained the main centers of
the industry in the 1860s.

3

response in each setting in order to choose between these alternative approaches and
the underlying assumptions that they imply. Third, we validate our choice of modeling assumptions by generating additional results using windows around census years,
when population estimates are more accurate and less subject to migration bias.
Fourth, we identify migrant-sending and migrant-receiving locations, and separately
estimate the effects in each in order to account for treatment spillovers.
Our final contribution is to provide substantive evidence on the relationship between business cycles and mortality in two very different environments. In the case
of the cotton shortage, our results after adjusting for migration bias suggest that
mortality increased during this recession. In the case of the Appalachian coal boom,
there is evidence that migration was selective, with young, healthy workers migrating
temporarily to coal areas during the boom. This had a substantial impact on the
observed mortality rate by changing the size and composition of the at-risk population. We find little evidence, however, that the Appalachian coal boom had any real
effect on underlying population mortality. Strikingly, neither our cotton nor our coal
findings are consistent with the pro-cyclical results obtained in most of the existing
literature on the net effects of business cycles on total mortality.
Together, our results suggest that migration bias is an important concern, and
that it may cause the standard panel-data approach used in the literature to generate
meaningfully inaccurate estimates of the relationship between business cycles and
mortality. Although here we illustrate these issues in two specific empirical settings,
there is evidence that migration may be a key margin of adjustment to local economic
shocks in many other contexts (Blanchard & Katz, 1992; Bound & Holzer, 2000;
Foote et al., 2017).9 This suggests that migration bias may be an important concern
when assessing the relationship between business-cycle fluctuations and mortality in

9

Two other recent papers documenting the dynamic migration response to local economic shocks
are Monras (2015) and Monras (2017). Both of these suggest that the internal migration response
in the modern U.S. is rapid, with much of the adjustment taking place within just a couple of years.

4

a variety of settings10
Given the capacity of migration bias to undermine inference, one approach to dealing with these effects is that proposed in this study: to focus on specific shocks, to
assess the magnitude and direction of migration bias in the setting being considered,
and to use additional information on those migratory responses to make empirical
choices that will mitigate this bias. One alternative approach to dealing with migration bias—but one that is only possible in settings with unusually rich data—is
to use individual-level panel data. This approach has been applied in Sweden by
Gerdtham & Johannesson (2005) and in the U.S. by Edwards (2008). Notably, these
papers find mixed or counter-cyclical effects. Together with our results, the findings
in these studies suggest that accounting for migration bias may substantially change
our understanding of the relationship between business cycles and mortality. Although studies using individual-level panel data may be less vulnerable to migration
issues, current data constraints mean that this approach cannot be readily applied to
developing-country settings or over longer periods of time. Another alternative approach is to analyze patterns at the national level, as has been done using life tables
in recent work such as Cutler et al. (2016).11 This can help deal with migration bias
because of the barriers faced by international migrants. However, an analysis run at
the national level in the contexts that we study either requires relying on time-series
variation, which has been criticized in previous work (e.g., Ruhm (2000)), or requires
conducting cross-country regressions.
In the next section, we briefly describe the mechanisms through which local eco-

10

This finding complements existing work highlighting the potential for migration to bias estimates
obtained when applying a fixed-effects estimation strategy to assess the impact of local economic
shocks. For example, Borjas (2003) and Borjas (2014) provide evidence that migration responses
can be an important source of bias in estimates of the impact of foreign migrants on local labor
market conditions.
11
Indeed, Cutler et al. (2016) find mixed evidence of pro-cyclicality as well: large recessions are
bad for health, while small ones may improve health. Given that the cotton shortage we study
was a very large shock, our results upon adjusting for migration appear to be consistent with their
findings.

5

nomic shocks may affect health. Section 3 describes the impact that migration can
have on observed mortality rates, while Section 4 describes the empirical approach
that we will use to investigate these issues. We illustrate the impact of migration bias
empirically in our cotton shortage and coal boom examples, which are presented in
Sections 5 and 6, respectively. Section 7 concludes.

2

Business cycles and health

The existing literature highlights a number of channels through which booms or
recessions can affect mortality rates. For example, recessions may improve health by
removing individuals from environmental and work-related hazards such as pollution,
traffic accidents, and on-the-job injuries (Muller, 1989; Chay & Greenstone, 2003;
Miller et al., 2009); by freeing up time for breastfeeding, childcare, exercise, and
other salutary activities (Dehejia & Lleras-Muney, 2004; Ruhm, 2000); by raising the
quality of elder-care (Stevens et al., 2015); and by limiting the capacity for unhealthy
behaviors such as smoking and alcohol use (Ruhm & Black, 2002; Ruhm, 2005). On
the other hand, these adverse income shocks can worsen health by compromising
access to proper nutrition, shelter, and medical care (Griffith et al., 2013; Painter,
2010) or by causing psychological stress, which may in turn raise rates of suicide and
risky behavior (Eliason & Storrie, 2009; Sullivan & von Wachter, 2009).12 Accordingly,
the net effects of business cycles on mortality are ambiguous ex ante.

3

Migration and the standard approach

Despite the variety of channels through which business-cycle fluctuations might impact mortality, studies that apply the standard panel-data approach have consistently
12

Work such as Adda et al. (2009) has suggested that some of these same channels may operate
for less transitory income shocks as well. However, they find less support for the idea that behavioral
change feeds instantaneously into mortality outcomes.

6

found evidence that, on net, health improves during recessions, although there is some
evidence that this relationship may have weakened in recent years (Ruhm, 2015). A
review of leading papers in this literature is provided in Appendix A.1. Following the
convention in this literature, we focus on the impact of temporary changes in local
economic conditions on all-age mortality. Although related issues, such as the impact
of business-cycle fluctuations on age- and cause-specific mortality, and on fertility, are
certainly important for better understanding the underlying mechanisms, these fall
beyond the scope of this particular study.
Equation 1 provides an example of the standard estimating equation applied in
this literature,

ln(M Rit ) = βEit + Xit γ + φi + ηt + it ,

(1)

where M Rit is the mortality rate in a given location (e.g., state) i; ηt and φi are a
full set of time-period and location fixed effects; Eit is the location’s unemployment
rate (or another similar variable representing local economic conditions); and Xit is
a set of controls.
There are three channels through which migration can affect estimates generated
using Eq. 1. First, migration may affect the key explanatory variable, Eit . Second,
migration can affect the dependent variable M Rit , which includes population in the
denominator. Third, migration spillovers across locations may affect results through
the comparison, implicit in Eq. 1, between treated and control locations. Below we
discuss each of these potential channels in more detail. Before doing so, it is worth
noting that some of these channels reflect a true effect of migration on mortality rates,
while in other cases, migration will only affect estimates of the mortality rate.
One channel where migration can affect the results of Eq. 1 is through the Eit
term. In particular, one may be concerned that unemployment rates are endogenous.
This is particularly true if individuals migrate towards areas that offer better eco7

nomic opportunities, as migration will not only respond to the local unemployment
rate, but migration will also directly affect the unemployment rate by changing the
size and composition of the labor force.13 Our solution is to study settings where
we can observe plausibly exogenous variation in the timing and spatial incidence of
temporary changes in local economic conditions. Specifically, we follow the work of
Miller & Urdinola (2010), and interact global price shocks with the pre-exiting spatial
distribution of economic activity.
Migration can also affect estimates obtained from Eq. 1 through the interpolated
annual population variable, which appears in the denominator of the mortality rate
term. Specifically, by taking the log of the mortality rate as the outcome variable, Eq.
1 implicitly assumes that mortality scales one-for-one with population.14 Migration
can cause this assumption to fail in several ways.
First, if short-run population changes are not accurately captured by intercensal
population estimates, then we should not expect a one-for-one mortality response.
This is a purely mechanical phenomenon that arises from the fact that while the
mortality rate numerator (deaths) are observed annually, direct measures of the denominator (population) are only available in census years. Indeed, in 9 out of 10 years,
population must be constructed, which introduces room for error.15 This means that
while deaths in the (annually-observed) numerator may increase or decrease as a function of changes in the true at-risk population, the denominator may not move in step.
13

Moreover, migration will affect the unemployment rate in both migrant-sending and migrantreceiving locations, potentially tainting our control group.
14
One way to see this point is to separate the log mortality rate into log mortality and log
population. Moving log population to the right-hand side of the equation shows that the specification
in Eq. 1 is assuming that population is reflected in mortality with a coefficient of one.
15
Typically, population in a non-census year is interpolated using observed population counts from
two censuses, as well as data on births and deaths occurring in the interim. In data from modern
developed countries, additional sources are used to help capture that portion of migration which can
be observed. For example, the U.S. Census uses tax information from the IRS as well as Medicare
data to track migration among working-age and older adults, respectively. However, as we discuss in
Appendix A.2.2, even in modern developed countries there remains some unobserved migration that
must be allocated across intercensal years. Note also that this implies that all intercensal population
values are interdependent and endogenously constructed by design.

8

If we expect that people migrate from places with worse economic conditions to those
with better ones (as we find in both of our empirical examples), and if migration is
not fully captured by intercensal population estimates, then this will mechanically
bias results towards finding pro-cyclical mortality.16
A second channel that can cause the one-for-one assumption to fail is migrant
selection. Indeed, even if population is perfectly observed, the one-for-one assumption
may fail if migrants are not representative of the population as a whole. For example,
if healthy young workers are more likely to migrate to areas offering better economic
opportunities (as is the case in the two settings that we study), then we should expect
the observed mortality rate in the location experiencing worse economic conditions to
rise even if the change in economic conditions itself has no causal impact on mortality.
Focusing on age-standardized mortality can partially deal with the selective sorting
of population, but it cannot account for selection of migrants within age groups.
While the first two channels illustrate ways in which migration can affect the observed mortality rate, it is also possible for migration to influence the true mortality
rate. One such channel is through congestion costs (e.g., by straining fixed local
resources), which will increase mortality in migrant-receiving areas while reducing
mortality in migrant-sending areas. Another channel by which the act of migration
itself can change underlying health is by relocating people across locations with different intrinsic conditions. If, for example, people move from less healthy to healthier
locations, then migration will have a direct and beneficial impact on health.17 As
with the first two channels, the congestion effects and protective effects of migration
16

To see this, note that unobserved out-migration will lead to an artificially high population
denominator and fewer observed deaths because of a smaller at-risk population. Conversely, unobserved in-migration will lead to an artificially low population denominator but more observed
deaths because the at-risk population has increased. Thus, even if migration is not selective, and
even if there is no change in the true underlying mortality rate (say, due to either the direct effect
of business-cycle fluctuations on health or to the effects on health of the act of migration itself), the
relocation of individuals from one region to another can mechanically generate the false appearance
of health change where there has been none. For further discussion of this issue, see Appendix A.2.1.
17
This would also be an example of an indirect but true effect of business cycles on mortality—it
is indirect in that it occurs as a result of the migration that business cycles induce.

9

will also undermine the one-for-one relationship between population and mortality.
To help address the potential issues generated by assuming a one-to-one relationship between population and mortality, we consider alternative specifications that do
not impose this strict relationship. In particular, we consider a range of specifications
embodying assumptions that vary from a strictly proportional relationship between
population and mortality to no short-run relationship. Estimating results using this
range of alternative specifications will help us assess the sensitivity of estimates to
assumptions about the relationship between interpolated population and mortality.
We also offer a second strategy to understanding the impact of migration bias that
relies on the fact that intercensal population estimates are more accurate, and less
vulnerable to migration-related error, closer to census years. Thus, by looking at
treatment windows close to census years and expanding these windows iteratively,
we can assess the stability of the results obtained from our range of specifications as
the wedge between the true (unobserved) population and our best interpolated estimates of it becomes larger. Combining these strategies with additional information
about the migration response in the settings under study allows us not only to diagnose migration bias, but also to mitigate it so that we can arrive at a more accurate
understanding of the relationship between business cycles and health.
It should be noted that a key feature of several of the sources of bias listed above—
the endogeneity of unemployment rates, the mechanical relocation of population, migrant selectivity, and congestion effects—is that the impacts of migration in migrantsending locations will be matched by opposite responses in migrant-receiving locations. Such spillovers violate the assumptions behind the panel-data approach in Eq.
1. Accordingly, treatment spillovers reflect yet another channel through which migration may bias results generated using the standard approach. However, this issue
can be addressed if migrant-sending and migrant-receiving locations can be identified
and compared to a third set of locations that were not contaminated by substantial spillovers. This intuition provides the foundation for our empirical approach to
10

addressing spillover concerns.
An alternative approach to dealing with spillovers is to simply aggregate to higher
geographic levels. For instance, one could combine migrant-sending and migrantreceiving areas and, in essence, treat the two areas as a single unit. While this type
of aggregation would solve the migration-related spillovers issue, it does so by ignoring
the fact that the various local labor markets within the aggregated study area are
likely to be experiencing dramatically different economic conditions.18 Accordingly,
such aggregation may undermine inference by assuming that the aggregated unit’s
full population was subject to the same change in local economic conditions. For
this reason, we prefer to conduct our analysis at the local labor market level, and to
correct for migration spillovers by analyzing migrant-sending and migrant-receiving
locations separately.

4

Empirical approach

Our starting point is the standard estimating equation introduced by Ruhm (2000),
shown in Eq. 1 above. To deal with the possibility that measures of local economic
conditions might be endogenous, we modify Eq. 1 by replacing the unemployment
rate Eit with a plausibly exogenous measure of the incidence of local economic shocks,
SHOCKit . In our examples, this variable is generated by interacting time-varying
industry-specific global price shocks with measures of the initial importance of the
affected industry in each location. Our modified specification is

ln(M Rit ) = β1 SHOCKit + φi + ηt + it .

(2)

Conditional on SHOCKit being exogenously determined, Eq. 2 removes concerns
about the measure of local economic conditions being endogenous in the presence of
18

Indeed, if there are migrant-sending and migrant-receiving locations within the aggregated unit,
it is likely that the difference in local economic conditions is precisely what drove this migration.

11

migration.19 Still implicit in Eq. 2, however, is the assumption that that mortality
and population move one-for-one. As discussed in the previous section, migration is
likely to cause this assumption to fail, either because the true at-risk population is not
well measured by intercensal population estimates, because migration is selective, or
because of congestion effects. Thus, the specification in Eq. 2 is only likely to be valid
under ideal circumstances, i.e., when intercensal population estimates are accurate
and neither migrant selection nor congestion effects are important.
Motivated by this concern, we consider two alternative regression specifications.
The first is,

˜ it ) + φi + ηt + it
ln(M ORTit ) = β̃1 SHOCKit + β̃2 ln(P OP

(3)

˜ it is
where M ORTit is the number of deaths in location i and period t and P OP
interpolated population in period t.20 The key difference in Eq. 3, relative to Eq. 2,
is that the relationship between population and mortality is no longer constrained to
be one-to-one. Rather, it is estimated in the data.
The estimated values of β̃2 obtained from Eq. 3 can be a useful tool for diagnosing
estimation issues created by migration. In particular, the approach shown in Eq. 2
assumes that β̃2 = 1. If instead we estimate a β̃2 significantly different from one, then
this signals that migration is likely to be affecting results obtained using Eq. 2, say,
by affecting the size or composition of the true at-risk population. One reason that we
19

Note that we use a reduced-form approach in Eq. 2, rather than using SHOCKit as an instrument for unemployment. This is because we do not observe sufficient unemployment data in either
of our empirical examples to enable an IV approach. Specifically, in the cotton shortage, we only
observe Poor Law relief-seekers, which is not comparable to modern unemployment, and then only
for a subset of years. In the case of the coal boom, the U.S. Census does not report unemployment
at the county level prior to 1970, which would leave an IV approach with no pre-boom period.
20
Note that throughout this paper, in any part of our empirical analysis that incorporates population values (i.e., in any graph or regressions that includes mortality rates or population), the
population values in census years are observed, and in non-census years are estimates that are constructed using the Das Gupta interpolation method. This is not to suggest that we believe that
these intercensal estimates are necessarily reliable reflections of the true population at that point
in time. To the contrary, we use these constructed values to illustrate the methodological problems
arising from the use of population data that may be inaccurate due to unobserved migration.

12

might find β̃2 < 1 is that intercensal population estimates are inaccurate reflections
of the true population at that moment in time. In that case, and if migrants move
from places with worse economic conditions to places with better ones, then β̃2 will be
systematically biased downwards. Attenuation bias due to random mis-measurement
of population will also push β̃2 towards zero. We should also expect to see β̃2 < 1
if migrants tend to be healthier than the general population. This is because such
population movements will cause less-than-proportional changes in receiving-location
mortality.21
While we view Eq. 3 as an improvement on Eq. 2 because it does not require the
assumption that mortality moves one-for-one with population, it still suffers from two
potential problems. First, we may be concerned that the ln(P OPit ) term is not only
systematically mis-measured, but is also endogenously affected by both mortality and
migration. This is because the best-available interpolation methods use the observed
population in the following census as an explicit input for interpolation.
A second, and ultimately more important issue, is that the estimated relationship
between population and mortality reflects a combination of the long-run relationship
and the short-run relationship between these variables. Over the long run, we expect
that a location’s population and number of deaths will move together; as population
increases, there are more people at risk of mortality, and it is reasonable to expect the
number of deaths to also rise. However, in the short-run, the relationship between
population and mortality may be very different from the long-run relationship. For
example, if short-run population changes are driven by young workers who have very
low mortality risk, then there may be little or no short-run relationship between
population and mortality.22
21

On the other hand, if migrants are negatively selected on health, or if congestion forces are
strong, then we may observe β̃2 > 1. For example, if congestion is important, when population
moves away from a location we should expect a more-than-proportional fall in deaths because the
fall in deaths generated by a reduction in congestion is added to the reduction in deaths due to the
mechanical removal of population. We do not emphasize this possibility here because it does not
appear to be the dominant force in our empirical examples.
22
This issue will be exacerbated by the use of interpolated population values in non-census years.

13

One way to partially address issues raised by the difference between the short-run
and long-run relationship between population and mortality in Eq. 3 is to include
location-specific time trends. Because population growth rates tend to be fairly persistent over the time periods that we study, the inclusion of time trends in Eq. 3
will serve to absorb differences in long-run population growth, allowing β̃2 to pick up
the short-run relationship between population and mortality. To allow this, we will
incorporate linear location-specific time trends in some regression specifications.
An alternative approach to dealing with the concerns we have raised about Eqs.
2-3 is to consider a third specification:

ln(M ORTit ) = β̄1 SHOCKit + φi + ηt + it .

(4)

Note that Eq. 4 differs from Eq. 3 only in that we omit the log population variable.
Implicitly, this specification assumes that in the short run, there is no relationship
between population and mortality, reflecting the opposite extreme to the strictly
proportional relationship assumed in Eq. 2.
To summarize, Eqs. 2, 3, and 4 reflect a range of assumptions about the shortrun relationship between population and mortality, and therefore generate a range
of estimates of the relationship between business cycles and mortality.23 When these
In Appendix A.2 we provide a short example illustrating this concern.
23
One minor issue that warrants discussion is whether we should weight our regressions. When
using the death rate as the dependent variable, weighting accounts for the increased precision with
which this value is measured when it represents a greater number of underlying observations. Accordingly, Ruhm (2000) weights his regressions, as do some of the other papers in this literature.
In this study, we typically do not weight our regressions. One reason for this is that two of the
three specifications that we consider use deaths as the outcome variable, where differential precision
is less of a concern. Another reason is that weighting can place considerable weight on large outliers, where effects may be different than those experienced in the average location. For example,
national or local government centers may experience recessions differently than the typical town,
either because of the stability of government employment or because they are more likely to receive
relief in a downturn. Finally, and perhaps most important, population is likely to be systematically
mis-measured in the presence of unobserved migration, which will result in our giving too much
weight to observations from locations that lose population and too little weight to districts that gain
population. Nevertheless, we provide weighted results for both empirical settings in the appendix,
and our results are largely unaffected by weighting.

14

estimates are close to agreement, we can be reasonably confident in the results, even
in the presence of migration. When estimates diverge substantially, this signals that
assumptions about how to model underlying population and its impact on mortality
play an important role in determining the results. In those cases, carefully studying
the available evidence on migration patterns in the setting under study can help us
choose between alternative specifications.
The last issue we need to address before moving to our empirical results is the impact of spillovers across locations. The specifications in Eqs. 2-4 rely on a comparison
between a set of treated locations and a set of control locations. However, if migration
in response to local economic shocks in the treated locations affects mortality in the
control locations, then the control locations cannot provide a valid counterfactual.
We implement a relatively simple approach for dealing with this issue, which involves
identifying those locations that are likely to send or receive migrants to or from the
treated locations. Since migrant flows are often related to distance, we refer to these
as “nearby” locations.24 Once we have identified nearby locations that are likely to
share migrant flows with the treated locations, we can estimate the impact of the
shock on both the treated and nearby locations by comparing these to a third set of
uncontaminated control locations.

5

The Lancashire cotton shortage

Having laid out our basic empirical approach, we now turn to the first of our two
examples: a sharp, severe, and short-lived downturn in the cotton textile-producing
region of Britain in the 19th Century.25 This historical example is useful because
24

Of course, in many, and particularly, in modern settings, geographic distance may not be the
dimension over which migration takes place. For instance, migrant-sending regions may be identified
on the basis of occupational similarity, social or transportation networks, etc.
25
Historians often refer to this event as the “Cotton Famine,” where the term “famine” is used
metaphorically to describe the dearth of cotton inputs. We avoid using this term because it can be
misleading in a study focused on health.

15

it allows us to cleanly identify the spatial and temporal incidence of a short-term
adverse shock without having to rely on potentially endogenous measures of local
economic conditions, such as unemployment. In addition, high migration costs in
this setting make it easier for us to track and demonstrate the impact of migrant
spillovers, which occur mainly between geographically proximate locations. Below we
provide a brief description of this setting and the data we use. Further details are
available in Appendix B.

5.1

Background and Data

The cotton textile industry was the largest and most important industrial sector
of the British economy during the 19th century. For historical reasons dating to
the 1700s, British cotton textile production was geographically concentrated in the
Northwest counties of Lancashire and Cheshire, which held over 80% of the cotton
textile workers in England & Wales in 1861.26 The industry was entirely reliant on
imported raw cotton and, in the run-up to U.S. Civil War, 70% of these imports came
from the U.S. South (Mitchell, 1988). The war sharply reduced British imports of
U.S. cotton, prompting a sudden and dramatic rise in cotton prices and a sharp drop
production. These effects are depicted in the left-hand panel of Figure 1.27 The righthand panel shows the spatial distribution of the British cotton textile industry on the
eve of the U.S. Civil War. Additional information, in Appendix B.1, shows that the
direct impact of the U.S. Civil War on the British economy was largely confined to
26

Crafts & Wolf (2014) suggest that the main factor determining the location of the cotton textile
industry prior to 1830 was the location of rivers, which were used for power, access to the port
of Liverpool, and a history of textile innovation in the 18th century. Calculation based on data
collected by the authors from the 1861 Census of Population reports.
27
Appendix Figure 11 shows British firms’ raw cotton consumption and variable operating costs
(excluding cotton), good proxies for industry output. These show a sharp drop in production and
factor payments during the 1861-1865 period equal to roughly a 50% reduction compared to prewar output levels. As described in Hanlon (2015), other cotton-producing countries such as India,
Egypt, and Brazil rapidly increased their output during the U.S. Civil War period. However, these
increases were not large enough to offset the lost U.S. supplies, though they did contribute to the
rapid rebound in imports after 1865.

16

Figure 1: Cotton prices, imports, and spatial distribution of cotton textile industry
British import quantities and prices

Spatial distribution of cotton textiles

Import data from Mitchell (1988). Price data, from Mitchell & Deane (1962), are for the
benchmark Upland Middling variety. Data on the geography of the cotton textile industry
the are calculated from the 1851 Census of Population. Shaded in the map of England &
Wales are districts with over 10% of employment in cotton, while the inset shows the share
of employment in cotton in the core cotton region, with darker colors indicating a greater
share of employment in cotton.

the cotton textile sector.
Both contemporary reports on public assistance and data on relief-seekers suggest
that the shock had a substantial and geographically-concentrated impact on workers. One reflection of these effects is presented in Figure 2. The left-hand panel of
this figure describes the number of able-bodied relief-seekers who obtained aid from
local Poor Law Boards, the main source of government support for the destitute in
our setting. During the U.S. Civil War, we see an increase in relief-seekers in the
Northwest counties, where cotton textile production was concentrated. Non-cotton
counties, however, were largely unaffected. Contemporary reports suggest that at the
nadir of the recession in 1862 and early 1863, roughly half a million people in the
cotton-producing districts relied on relief from government sources or private charities (Arnold, 1864). The right-hand panel of Figure 2 describes expenditures by local
Poor Law Boards. These spiked in Lancashire and Cheshire, the two main cotton
textile counties, during the U.S. Civil War. In the face of the cotton shortage, work17

Figure 2: The spatial incidence of the cotton shock
Able-bodied relief-seekers

Poor Law Board expenditures

Expenditure data were collected by the authors from the annual reports of the Poor Law
Board. Data on relief-seekers come from Southall et al. (1998) (left-hand graph reproduced
from Hanlon (2017)).

ers in the affected areas employed a variety of coping mechanisms, including running
down savings, pawning valuables and furniture, seeking government and charitable
support, and migrating. In Appendix B.2, we review contemporary evidence on all
these private and institutional responses to the cotton shortage, with the exception
of migration, which we discuss in Section 5.2.
To analyze the impact of the U.S. Civil War on migration and mortality in the
cotton-textile regions of Britain, we draw on population data from the British Census
for every decade from 1851-1881, and mortality data over the period 1851-1865, the
latter taken from reports produced annually by the Registrar General’s office.28 Our
analysis is conducted at the district level using 539 geographically-consistent districts
covering all of England & Wales over this period.29
To identify treated districts, we use information on the industrial composition of
28

Further details on the data are available in Appendix B.3.
The available data cover around 630 districts in each year, but some districts experienced boundary changes over time. To obtain geographically consistent districts, we manually review the boundary changes for every district over our study period and combine any pair of districts experiencing
a boundary change that resulted in the movement of over 100 people from one to the other. This
leaves us with 539 consistent districts in the main analysis.
29

18

employment in each district on the eve of the U.S. Civil War, based on occupation
data from the 1851 Census. In the main analysis, we define as cotton (i.e., “treated”)
districts those districts with over 10% of employment in cotton textile production.30
Our study covers the years 1851-1865, with the U.S. Civil War years (1861-1865) defining the cotton shortage period. We focus only on the periods before and during the
shortage because of concerns that the post-shortage years may have been influenced
by persistent effects of the shortage.31 Wherever intercensal population estimates are
used, these are generated using Das Gupta interpolation, which accounts for annual
changes in population due to observed births and deaths within each district, and
distributes any residual population change at the decade level (the error of closure, a
measure of implied net migration) smoothly across intercensal years.32

5.2

Migration

Contemporary accounts indicate that out-migration occurred in response to the cotton shortage, but the extent of these flows remains debated. Thus, to assess the
magnitude of the migratory response, we look for changes in population growth patterns using data from the 1851-1881 censuses. These data are presented in Figure 3,
which describes changes in district population across each decade, normalized by the
30

In robustness checks we also generate results using a continuous measure of local cotton textile
employment shares. We focus our main results on a discrete cutoff both in order to make interpretation easier, and in order to reduce the impact of measurement error. In particular, within the set
of major cotton textile districts, variation in cotton textile employment share does not necessarily
correspond to variation in shock intensity because the impact of the cotton shortage depended in
part on the type of cotton textile products produced in each district. For example, districts that
produced finer fabrics, where raw cotton was a smaller portion of total cost, were less affected by
the cotton shortage.
31
For example, we know that one form of relief during the cotton shortage was public works employment, which was mainly focused on projects improving health or transportation infrastructure.
These projects were undertaken relatively late in the study period, so they are unlikely to have
substantially affected mortality during the U.S. Civil War. Furthermore, we omit the post-1865
recovery period so as to avoid comparisons that generate spurious results driven by mean reversion
in population, i.e., by large-scale return migration during the recovery period. See Appendix Section
B.3 for more.
32
The Das Gupta method is the same approach used by the U.S. Census Bureau. A more detailed
discussion of this approach, and its limitations, appears in Appendix A.2.2.

19

change in 1851-1861 (the decade preceding the downturn).33 This figure reveals three
important patterns. First, it presents evidence of a substantial slowdown in population growth in the cotton textile districts in the decade spanning the cotton shortage.
This suggests either that the downturn coincided with a rise in out-migration from
those districts, or a reduction in in-migration. Indeed, additional evidence on the
birthplaces of Northwest county residents, which we present in Appendix B.4, suggests that both an increase in out-migration and a reduction in in-migration occurred
during this period.34 Second, we observe an acceleration in population growth in
nearby districts, which we define as non-cotton districts that are within 25 km of a
cotton district. Meanwhile, there is little change in the population growth trend in
districts beyond 25 km. These patterns are consistent with short-distance migration
from cotton textile districts during the downturn. Third, we see that these changes
essentially disappear after 1871, a fact which highlights the temporary nature of the
shock.
These implied migration flows were meaningfully large. In terms of magnitude,
had the population of the cotton districts grown from 1861-1871 at the same rate
that it grew in 1851-1861, these districts would have had 54,000 additional residents
in 1871, a figure equal to 2.2% of the districts’ 1861 population.35 Similarly, if nearby
districts had grown in 1861-1871 at the rate they grew during 1851-1861, they would
have had 61,000 fewer residents, which is equal to 4% of the districts’ 1861 population. Note that these figures will understate the migration response if some migrants
returned between 1865 and 1871.36

33

The 1861 Census was collected in April of that year, before the U.S. Civil War had any substantial
impact. As a result, this should be thought of as a clean pre-war population observation.
34
Appendix B.4 also provides evidence of a sharp and short-lived increase in emigration from
Britain during this period.
35
As a point of comparison, during the Great Depression in the U.S., Fishback et al. (2006) report
that from 1935-1940, 11% of the U.S. population moved, with 60% of the moves occurring within
state. This suggests that the migration response observed in our setting may not be unusually large
compared to other historical recessions.
36
These patterns are consistent with the city-level experiences documented in Hanlon (2017).

20

Figure 3: Migration response to the cotton shortage
Changes in district population, 1851-1881

This graph describes the change in population for all cotton
districts, all non-cotton districts, all districts in England &
Wales, and all non-cotton districts within 25km of a cotton
district using Census data. Cotton districts are defined as
those districts with more than 10% of employment in cotton
textile production in 1851. The population growth rate for
each group of districts is normalized to one in 1851-1861.
Data are from the Census of Population.

An alternative view of migration is provided by calculating implied net migration
rates at the district level. These are calculated as the difference between the observed
population count in a district in a given census year and the population that we
would have expected in that district-year given the population in the previous census
plus all births and less all deaths in the intervening years.37 In the left-hand panel
of Figure 4, we map implied net migration by district from 1851-1861. The cotton
textile districts show a strong pattern of net in-migration (dark colors) in this decade.
In the right-hand panel we plot the change in net migration in 1861-1871 compared
to 1851-1861. This figure provides evidence of a large reduction in net in-migration
in most of the cotton textile districts during the U.S. Civil War decade. We also
see evidence of an increase in migration into districts surrounding the cotton areas,
37

Put another way, implied net migration is the difference between the census count and the
postcensal estimate obtained via the components of change method. This conceptual approach has
been used in studies of migration such as Fishback et al. (2006).

21

Figure 4: Maps of implied net migration
Net migration before the war (1851-61)

Implied change in net migration
from 1851-1861 to 1861-1871

The left-hand panel maps implied net migration (per 1000 residents) for each district in the decade
before the shock, 1851-1861. Darker colors indicate net in-migration. The right-hand panel plots
the difference in net migration (per 1000 residents) between the 1851-61 and 1861-71 decade.
Lighter colors indicate an increase in net out-migration from a district during the U.S. Civil War
decade (1861-71). Implied net migration is calculated as the difference between the observed
population count in a district in a given census year and the population that we would have
expected in that district-year given the population in the previous census count plus all births and
less all deaths in the intervening years.

consistent with migration from the cotton districts into nearby locations. Overall,
the results in Figures 3-4 show a substantial and short-distance migration response
to the cotton shortage.
Although selectivity will become much more important in our second empirical
example, there is also some evidence of selective migration away from the cotton
textile districts during the U.S. Civil War period. In particular, in Appendix B.4 we
provide evidence showing that young adults were somewhat more likely to migrate
in response to the cotton shock than the elderly. However, the change in population
in the 20-39 age group accounts for only about three-fifths of the overall change in
population of the cotton districts between 1861 and 1871. Thus, even though this
22

group was important, a substantial amount of migration likely occurred among other
segments of the population as well.

5.3

Mortality

Having established that the cotton shortage induced a substantial and spatially concentrated migratory response, we next analyze the impact of this event on mortality
patterns. As a first step, Figure 5 describes the evolution of log mortality across the
study period (normalized such that 1860=1).38 In the left-hand panel we separate
cotton districts, nearby districts (those within 25 km), and all other districts. There
are three notable features here. First, in the pre-shortage period, mortality in the
three groups track each other well. Second, in the first two years of the U.S. Civil
War, there is evidence of elevated mortality in the cotton districts, though this increase disappears after 1862. Third, in the nearby districts we observe a substantial
increase in mortality, particularly after 1862. One potential cause of this increase in
mortality in nearby districts is migration from cotton to nearby districts.
Since our evidence suggests that most migration out of cotton districts went to
nearby areas, combining the migrant-sending and migrant-receiving districts can help
us get a sense of the aggregate mortality impact of the downturn. Recall that most of
the channels through which migration generates bias, discussed in Section 3, suggest
that we should observe offsetting effects in migrant-receiving and migrant-sending
districts. Given this, aggregating migrant-sending and migrant-receiving regions will
allow us to assess the net impact of the recession on mortality. In the right-hand
graph we combine the cotton and nearby districts. These results provide evidence
that overall mortality in the cotton-and-nearby-districts category increased during
the U.S. Civil War period.
38

Graphs of the mortality rate are available in Appendix B.5.

23

Figure 5: Mortality effects of the cotton shortage
Cotton, nearby and control districts

Combining cotton and nearby districts

Mortality data from the reports of the Registrar General. Data cover all of England & Wales.
Cotton districts are those with more than 10% of employment in cotton textile production
in 1851. Nearby districts are non-cotton districts within 25 km of the cotton districts. The
linear trend line in the right-hand panel is fitted to data from the cotton and nearby districts
from 1851-1860.

Next, we analyze these patterns econometrically. Table 1 present our results, with
coefficients in Columns 1-3 corresponding to the specifications in Eqs. 2-4, respectively. In these regressions, standard errors are clustered by district to adjust for
serial correlation.39 In Column 1, we present results using the log mortality rate as
the dependent variable, as in the standard approach. Here we find evidence that
the mortality rate fell during the recession, a finding that is consistent with the procyclical mortality results obtained in the existing literature. In Column 2, we move
the population denominator to the right-hand side of the equation. This weakens
the relationship between the cotton shock and mortality. Moreover, the estimated
relationship between population and mortality is well below (and statistically different from) one, suggesting that the one-to-one relationship between population and
mortality implied by the specification in Column 1 may be inaccurate. Column 3
presents results based on the specification in Eq. 4, which assumes no short-run rela39

Clustering standard errors by district is similar to the approach used in most studies in this
literature. In Appendix table 12, we present additional results including those clustered by county (a
larger geographic unit), and those adjusting simultaneously for serial and spatial correlation across
locations. Results are qualitatively unaffected as all three approaches produce similar standard
errors.

24

tionship between population and mortality. Here the sign of the relationship between
the cotton shock and mortality becomes positive.

Table 1: Preliminary estimates of the mortality effect of the cotton shortage
Dependent variable:
Cotton district × shortage

Ln(MORT. RATE)
(1)

Ln(MORTALITY)
(2)

Ln(MORTALITY)
(3)

-0.0276**
(0.0108)

-0.0221*
(0.0114)
0.872***
(0.0283)

0.0155
(0.0189)

8,085
0.137

8,085
0.334

8,085
0.195

Ln(Pop)
Observations
R-squared

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by district. Data cover 539
districts from 1851-1865. All regressions include district fixed effects and year effects. Shock
period is 1861-1865. Cotton districts are defined as those with a cotton employment share
greater than 10%.

The results in Table 1 show that the estimated relationship between population
and mortality is sensitive to assumptions about the relationship between short-run
population changes and mortality. To provide substantive evidence on the true effect
of the cotton shortage on mortality, we need a way to choose between these alternative
sets of assumptions. Before we tackle that issue, however, it is useful to deal with
a second concern that is not addressed in Table 1: the impact of spillovers across
treated and control districts due to migration.
In order to deal with the issue of migrant spillovers, we include a term to capture
the impact of migration from cotton textile districts to other nearby areas. Our
primary approach to dealing with the impact of migration on nearby districts is to
construct a variable, N EARcot0−25
, which reflects, for each non-cotton district, the
j
amount of cotton textile employment in other districts within 25 km (or alternative
distance windows). Specifically, we calculate,
25

N EARcot0−25
j



X
= ln 
1[d(i, j) < 25km] ∗ (COTi + 1) ∗ 1[COT DISTj = 0]

(5)

i6=j

where 1[d(i, j) < 25km] is an indicator variable that equals one when the distance
between districts i and j is less than 25 km and COTi is cotton textile employment in
district i.40 The 1[COT DISTj = 0] component of this equation ensures that we only
cacluate nearby cotton exposure for non-cotton districts, defined as those with 10%
or less of employment in cotton textile production.41 Finally, because nearby cotton
textile employment is zero for districts that were far from cotton textile-producing
areas, we add one before taking logs. We then include this employment-weighted
distance term, interacted with an indicator for the shock period, in our regressions.
Including this variable effectively removes indirectly-treated districts from the control
group, allowing us to separately evaluate the direct and indirect mortality effects
against a clean counterfactual.42
Table 2 presents results that account for the impact of cotton textile employment
in nearby districts. Again, we display results that correspond to each of our three
estimating equations in Columns 1-3. The results in Table 2 provide evidence that
mortality increased in nearby districts during the cotton shortage, consistent with
the relocation of migrants from the cotton to nearby districts. Once we account
40

To calculate the distance between any pair of districts, we collect the latitude and longitude of
the main town or district seat for each district, which we call the district center. For a small number
of very rural districts, we use the geographic center of the district.
41
We include the 1[COT DISTj = 0] term because we expect that the impact of the recession
in nearby districts will influence migration into non-cotton districts, but that this is unlikely to
influence net migration into other cotton districts. Contemporary evidence consistently shows that
those leaving cotton districts were not migrating to other major cotton-producing areas. See, e.g.,
Arnold (1864).
42
In Appendix Table 8, we include employment-weighted distance terms for each of the following
bands: 0-25 km, 25-50 km, 50-75 km, and 75-100 km. The inclusion of these variables highlights
that the majority of systematic spillovers are captured within 25 km. We also consider alternative
approaches to measuring “nearby” districts, for instance those that use unweighted (i.e., indicator)
variables for districts within particular distance bands of the major cotton textile districts, or those
that discount a continuous measure of distance. These alternatives deliver similar results.

26

for migration spillovers, the results in Column 3 suggest that the recession led to a
statistically significant increase in mortality, while the results in Column 1 continue
to suggest that the recession reduced mortality. Again, it is clear that the results
are highly sensitive to assumptions about the relationship between population and
mortality.43
Table 2: Accounting for spillovers to nearby districts

Dependent variable:
Cotton district × shortage
Nearby cotton emp. × shortage

Ln(MORT. RATE)
(1)

Ln(MORTALITY)
(2)

Ln(MORTALITY)
(3)

-0.0229**
(0.0114)
0.00154
(0.00117)

-0.0125
(0.0123)
0.00287**
(0.00122)
0.857***
(0.0293)

0.0494**
(0.0195)
0.0109***
(0.00187)

8,085
0.137

8,085
0.335

8,085
0.207

Ln(Pop)
Observations
R-squared

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by district. Data cover 539 districts
from 1851-1865. All regressions include district fixed effects and year effects. Shock period is
1861-1865. Cotton districts are defined as those with a cotton employment share greater than
10%.

Given the sensitivity of these results, we consider two approaches to help choose
among the alternative assumptions. First, we review the evidence on migration during
the cotton shortage to assess the validity of the assumptions underlying each of these
specifications. Second, we examine how results change when we use narrower shock
windows that are closer to the census year, and so, less vulnerable to population
mis-measurement due to migration. In this case, the census year (1861) falls at the
beginning of the cotton shortage period.44
43

As mentioned previously, we choose not to weight our main results because we are concerned
that population is mis-measured. Nevertheless, weighted results are available in Appendix Table 10.
Weighting does not qualitatively affect the results.
44
Note that although our shock begins in the census year 1861, the usefulness of the census-window
strategy does not in fact rely on the shock being timed close to a census year. Rather, it exploits

27

The evidence in Section 5.2 shows that, relative to the previous decade, cotton
textile districts experienced a substantial reduction in population growth during the
the downturn. Despite this reduction, however, population in most cotton districts
increased over the 1861-1871 decade. This fact is important because it means that
intercensal population estimates will imply positive growth across all years, which is
at odds with the available evidence. The available evidence suggests that people left
the cotton districts during the cotton shortage, but that population in these areas
rebounded strongly from 1866-1871, as the cotton industry recovered.45 When this
pattern is combined with the one-to-one relationship between population and mortality embedded in the specification in Column 1 of Table 2, the result will be to bias
results towards finding that the mortality rate decreased during the shortage, simply
because the interpolated population denominator overstates the true population. Under these population growth conditions (a point that we discuss further in Appendix
A.2), the specification in Column 3 of Table 2 offers a more suitable approach to
modeling mortality. Accordingly, the results in Column 3 are our preferred results.
Another way to differentiate between the alternative results in Table 2 is to study
their robustness. In particular, in Appendix Table 9 we consider how these specifications react to the inclusion of district time trends, which are included in some
specifications in the literature following Ruhm. The results in Appendix Table 9 show
that once district time trends are included, all three of our alternative specifications
deliver results that are very similar to those produced without trends in Column 3 of
Table 2.46 This reinforces our choice of Eq. 4 as our preferred specification.

the declining accuracy of population measures as we move further and further away from a census
year, irrespective of when the shock occurs during the intercensal period. As such, this approach is
suitable for use even when shocks do not align closely with census years.
45
For example, in the 1871 Census, the Registrar for Salford, near Manchester, an important
cotton textile area, wrote that the population of the district experienced an “Increase due to the
revival of trade since the conclusion of the American war...”
46
That all three specifications deliver very similar results once time trends are included suggests
that most of the differences across specifications in this context are due to long-run population
trends.

28

As a final test, we exploit the fact that population estimates will be more accurate,
and less subject to migration-related mis-measurement, closer to census years. Table 3
presents additional results showing how the estimates obtained from each specification
change as we iteratively expand the shock period window to include years further from
the census year 1861. The top panel presents results using the log mortality rate as
the dependent variable, as in Column 1 of Table 2. The middle panel corresponds to
Column 2 of Table 2, where the outcome variable is log mortality, and log population
is on the right-hand side. The bottom panel presents results with log mortality, as in
Column 3 of Table 2.
There are two important features to note in Table 3. First, near the census year,
when population estimates are more accurate, all three specifications deliver very
similar results: the downturn results in higher mortality. Second, as we consider
larger shock windows which include years further from the census year, the results in
Panel C consistently show that the cotton shortage increased cotton-district mortality.
In contrast, the results in Panels A and B are unstable: in Panel A, they switch from
positive and statistically significant to negative and statistically significant, while
in Panel B, they switch from positive and statistically significant to negative and
insignificant. Both of these patterns provide support for our preferred specification,
that in Panel C, as it is the the least vulnerable to population mis-measurement.
Overall, the results in Tables 1-3 illustrate the sensitivity of the panel-data approach to assumptions about the relationship between population and mortality in the
short run. However, by using additional information on migration patterns, and by
looking closer to census years, when population is less vulnerable to mis-measurement,
we can select a specification that delivers consistent results that more accurately reflect the business cycle-mortality relationship. In our setting, that specification is Eq.
4, and under this specification, results indicate that mortality in the cotton districts
increased during the downturn.47 Importantly, this finding is corroborated by the
47

The robustness of this result is assessed in Appendix 11. There we make several sample restric-

29

Table 3: Results for various windows starting in 1861
Shock years:

1861
(1)

1861-62
(2)

1861-63
(3)

1861-64
(4)

1861-65
(5)

Panel A – DV: Log Mortality Rate
Cotton × shortage
Nearby × shortage

0.0246*
(0.0146)
-2.77e-05
(0.00155)

0.0334***
(0.0116)
0.00152
(0.00139)

0.000559
(0.00980)
0.00134
(0.00133)

-0.0212*
(0.0115)
0.00205*
(0.00123)

-0.0229**
(0.0114)
0.00154
(0.00117)

Panel B – DV: Log Mortality
Cotton × shortage
Nearby × shortage
Ln(Pop)

0.0405**
(0.0158)
0.00188
(0.00156)
0.727***
(0.0398)

0.0482***
(0.0122)
0.00333**
(0.00140)
0.761***
(0.0359)

0.0154
(0.0100)
0.00319**
(0.00135)
0.774***
(0.0334)

-0.00887
(0.0120)
0.00361***
(0.00128)
0.822***
(0.0308)

-0.0125
(0.0123)
0.00287**
(0.00122)
0.857***
(0.0293)

Panel C – DV: Log Mortality
Cotton × shortage
Nearby × shortage

0.0829***
(0.0203)
0.00695***
(0.00176)

0.0953***
(0.0168)
0.00909***
(0.00168)

0.0660***
(0.0152)
0.00949***
(0.00173)

0.0478***
(0.0178)
0.0108***
(0.00182)

0.0494**
(0.0195)
0.0109***
(0.00187)

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by district. All regressions include district fixed
effects and year effects. In each column, the sample runs from 1851 to the last year of the specified shock
window. N=5,929 in Column 1; 6,468 in Column 2; 7,007 in Column 3; 7,546 in Column 4; 8,085 in Column
5.

30

patterns shown in Figure 5. In addition to the downturn’s direct effects on cotton
districts, we also find evidence that mortality increased in districts proximate to cotton textile areas, consistent with the impact of the relocation of population to these
areas. It is important to recognize, however, that the increase in mortality in nearby
districts does not necessarily imply that true mortality rates rose in those areas; this
result may simply reflect an increase in the size of the at-risk population.

6

The Appalachian coal boom

Next we consider a more recent setting in which we can identify a spatially concentrated shock to local economic conditions. In particular, following Black et al. (2005)
(hereafter BMS), we study the impact of the commodity price boom that affected the
Appalachian coal-mining region of the U.S. between 1970 and 1977.48 This example
allows us to consider the impact of migration bias on the relationship between temporary local economic shocks and mortality in a setting that is more similar to most
of the previous literature.49 As before, we only briefly describe the empirical setting;
further details can be found in Black et al. (2005).

6.1

Background and Data

The Appalachian coal boom of the 1970s resulted from a combination of regulatory
changes that took place in 1969, and the rise in oil prices due to the OPEC oil embargo
tions to ensure that the treatment and control districts are as similar as possible. We also consider
alternative measures of vulnerability to the cotton price shock. Furthermore, we test whether our
findings on total mortality are driven by fertility responses to the downturn. We a positive but
statistically insignificant fertility response. Moreover, the magnitude of the response accounts for
less than 10% of the total increase in deaths. For more, see Appendix Table 13 and the related
discussion.
48
In a related paper, Black et al. (2002) study the impact of the coal boom and bust on participation in Disability Insurance. They find that disability program participation fell during the boom
and then increased during the bust.
49
In fact, the time period covered by this example partially overlaps with the period covered in
the original Ruhm (2000) paper.

31

in 1973-74.50 The left-hand panel of Figure 6 presents data from BMS showing the
evolution of coal prices across this period. Coal prices rose sharply starting in 1970
and then fell after 1982 as competition from western coal mines increased. BMS
show that these price increases were matched by a similar increase in coal industry
earnings. Accordingly, BMS divide their study into three periods—the boom (19701977), a stable peak period (1978-1982), and the bust (1983-1989). For consistency,
we adopt the same definitions.
As in our first example, the spatial distribution of the economic impact was highly
concentrated. In this case, the presence of coal reserves within a county determined
the impact of the shock. The right-hand panel of Figure 6 provides a map showing the
distribution of coal reserves across the four states studied by BMS: Kentucky, Ohio,
Pennsylvania, and West Virginia. This figure shows that the main coal reserves were
located in a band of counties stretching from southern Pennsylvania, across West
Virginia and Ohio, and into Kentucky.

Figure 6: Coal prices and the spatial distribution of coal reserves
Coal prices

Counties with coal reserves over
one billion short tons

Left-hand panel is from Black et al. (2005). The right-hand panel is produced using the USCOAL database provided
by the U.S. Geological Survey using data from surveys conducted mainly in the 1960s.

50

See Black et al. (2005). The Appalachian region also benefited from new roads during this period
as a result of the Appalachian Development Highway Program (Jaworkski & Kitchens, 2016), but
this affected the region as a whole rather than just those areas with coal resources.

32

The main data used in our analysis come from the the decennial Census of Population, and from the annual records of deaths and births given by Bailey et al. (2016)
and the Centers for Disease Control. Focusing on the four states studied by BMS,
we draw on data from the U.S. Geological Survey’s USCOAL database in order to
define coal counties as those with over one billion short tons of reserves.51 There are
72 counties that satisfy this criterion in the four analysis states. Our control counties
are those with coal reserves below the cutoff, and following BMS, we limit the set of
control counties to those counties in the four analysis states with populations ranging
from 8,000 to 225,000. This population criterion is applied to control counties in
order to obtain a set that is similar to the fairly rural coal counties, and results in
our dropping the main urban counties in these states from the control group. This
yields 202 non-coal control counties. In robustness exercises, we consider a larger set
of control counties including all non-coal counties in the four states studied by BMS
as well as additional counties in a set of four further neighboring states.
We define the coal boom as spanning the period 1970-1977, and we limit our
analysis to the pre-boom (1950-1969) and boom (1970-1977) periods. This parallels
the approach used in our first example, and also avoids questions about whether the
period after 1977 should be treated as a downturn or merely the end of a boom.52 As
in the cotton shortage example, intercensal population estimates are generated using
the Das Gupta interpolation method.53
51

This definition differs slightly from the approach used by BMS. BMS identify coal counties as
those where more than 10% of earnings came from the coal industry in 1969, a criterion that yields
32 coal counties. We prefer to use coal reserves rather than earnings because reserves are less likely
to reflect other factors affecting the counties in the period just before the coal boom. However, in
the end, both approaches yield fairly similar results.
52
In Appendix C.3, however, we do explore alternative definitions of the boom period.
53
These account for births and deaths in each county-year, and distribute decade-wide implied
net migration across intercensal years. It is worth noting that for reasons of data availability, these
interpolations use slightly less information than estimates produced by the census today, the latter of
which take advantage of additional information on migration from IRS and Medicare data. However,
in Appendix Figure 18 we provide evidence that in the 1970s, when we have both our own intercensal
estimates and the published census interpolations (the latter of which are partially adjusted for
migration), these two series are quite similar. Note that the Census does not provide annual countylevel population estimates for years prior to 1970. There is some suggestion that county-level SEER

33

6.2

Migration

Figure 7 describes the migration response generated by the coal boom and bust in
the coal and control counties. Population in the coal counties was shrinking in the
decades before the coal boom, but increased substantially from 1970-1980. Once the
boom ended, population again started to decline. These patterns suggest that how
we deal with differential initial population growth trends and longer-run migration
flows will play an important role in our results.54
Population trends in control counties do not appear to respond to the coal boom.
This suggests that either the control counties do not share migration flows with the
coal counties, or that these flows are so small relative to the size of the migrantsending regions that they have little impact in these locations. There are several
likely explanations for this pattern. First, our control counties do not include major
urban areas, which may have been the preferred destination of Appalachian migrants
before the coal boom, and a source of return migrants during the boom. Second, coal
counties were relatively small in terms of population, so even if the migration inflows
had a large effect in those counties, they may not have had any meaningful impact
elsewhere. Finally, the low costs of migration in this setting may have caused many
of those returning to the coal counties during the boom decade to have originated
form a set of locations that was much more spatially diffuse than in our cotton
(Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program) population data published by the National
Cancer Institute and used in studies like Phipps et al. (2005) may be slightly more reliable than
published U.S. Census estimates. However, these are only available beginning in 1969, and so are
unsuitable for our analysis. What’s more, even if this data were available further back in time,
it is unlikely that the sorts of small-scale improvements it makes on Census data would give us
substantially better estimates of population, given that there is already negligible difference between
the population estimates that we produce and those published by the U.S. Census Bureau, despite
the large difference in the quality of inputs (ours make no observed-migration corrections, while the
Census makes many such adjustments).
54
These migration patterns are consistent with the results of BMS, who also find evidence of an
increase in employment and population growth in the coal counties from 1970-1980, followed by a
reduction from 1980-1990. Similar results were obtained by Carrington (1996) in a study of the
impact of the temporary boom in the Alaskan economy that occurred during the construction of the
Trans-Alaska Pipeline.

34

Figure 7: Migration response to the coal boom

This figure describes the change in population for all coal counties and the control counties
in the four states in the original BMS study. Coal counties are defined as those in which
more than 10% of income came from coal in 1969. Black triangles indicate census observations. The remaining intercensal population estimates are constructed using the Das Gupta
interpolation method.

example. Regardless of cause, the fact that we find no large population response in
the control counties has important implications for our analysis, since it implies that
spillovers between migrant-sending and migrant-receiving counties are not likely to
be an important source of bias in this setting.
Figure 8 presents maps of implied net migration by county in the decade before the
coal boom, and the difference in implied net migration during the coal boom decade
relative to the preceding one.55 In the left-hand panel we see that coal districts were
experiencing strong net out-migration in the decade before the coal boom. Similar
patterns are also observed in 1950-60, as well as in the decade following the coal
boom (see Appendix C.2). The right-hand panel, however, indicates a reversal in this
trend during the 1970s boom decade. Furthermore, in Figure 8 we see no evidence that
counties proximate to coal counties experienced a stark reversal in migration patterns
55

Maps including four additional adjacent states are provided in Appendix Figures 19 and 7.

35

during the boom period, as we had observed for nearby districts in the cotton shortage
example. This suggests that spillovers between coal and nearby counties are unlikely
to be an important concern in this particular setting, consistent with the results in
Figure 7.
Figure 8: Maps of migration before and during the coal boom
Implied net migration
prior to the boom (1960-70)

Implied change in net migration
from 1960-70 to 1970-80

The left-hand panel describes implied net migration over the decade from 1960-70. Lighter colors
indicate counties experiencing net out-migration. The right-hand panel describes the change in
net migration from the 1960-70 decade to the 1970-80 decade. Darker colors indicate districts that
experienced an increase in net in-migration in the 1970s relative to the previous decade. Implied
net migration is calculated as the difference between the observed population count in a district
in a given census year and the population that we would have expected in that district-year given
the population in the previous census count plus all births and less all deaths in the intervening
years.

In Appendix Figure 21, we present evidence suggesting that migration to coal
counties was selective. During the boom, population in coal counties increased by
about 342,000, with the number of residents aged 25-34 increasing by 210,000 and the
number of residents aged 15-24 increasing by 101,000. These increases, especially the
increase among 25-34 year-olds, were much larger in percentage terms than the change
in population in the control counties.56 That the vast majority of new residents were
young adults has important implications for our study because young adults have low
56

Similar results are also reported by BMS, who find that most of the increase in population in
the coal counties from 1970-1980 was concentrated among those aged 20-29, particularly men. In
addition, Black et al. (2013) provide evidence that fertility increased in the coal counties during the
boom, a pattern which Kearney & Wilson (2017) suggest was confined to marital fertility. Despite
this, Figure 21 suggests that the impact of fertility changes was small relative to the population
changes among young workers.

36

mortality rates relative to those in other age groups. Thus, although the population
in-flows were large, they may contribute little to total mortality.57

6.3

Mortality

As in our cotton example, we begin by providing graphical evidence on the impact of
the boom—and the migration it induced—on mortality. The left-hand panel of Figure
9 shows that mortality rates in the coal counties were rising prior to the boom, and
fell rapidly during the coal boom period. While the mortality rate was higher in
the coal counties during the coal boom, this figure does not give the impression that
health became worse in the coal counties during this period. Rather, the mortality
rate in the coal counties appears to evolve roughly in parallel to the mortality rate in
control counties during the boom.
The right-hand panel of Figure 9 plots log mortality in the coal and control counties, normalized for comparability. Here we see that log mortality in both sets of
counties track each other very closely from about 1955 through the main coal boom
period. If anything, it appears that mortality in the coal counties may have dropped
relative to the control counties during the boom. This is somewhat surprising, given
evidence that population was flowing into the coal counties during the boom.
The striking difference between the left- and right-hand panels of Figure 9 tells us
that essentially all of the mortality-rate differences observed in these two groups of
counties from the mid-1950s through 1977 are due to population movements. Comparing the mortality-rate movements illustrated in Figure 9 to the population movements
in Figure 7 reinforces this result: as population in the coal counties falls in the 1950s
and 1960s, the mortality rate increases, and as population rebounds in the 1970s, the
57

In particular, in the four states used in our main analysis, the mortality rate for those aged
20-24 was 1.40 deaths per thousand in 1970 and for people aged 25-34 it was 1.44 per thousand.
In contrast, the average death rate across the entire population in that year was 10.24 deaths per
thousand, with the vast majority of deaths concentrated among those over age 55. See Appendix
Table 15 for more.

37

Figure 9: Mortality effects of the coal boom and bust
Mortality rate

Log mortality

Mortality data from Bailey et al. (2016). Population data for years ending in zero are
observed, and are taken from the Census. Population values in the intervening years are
annualized using Das Gupta interpolation.

mortality rate falls. Despite all this, deaths in the coal and control counties trend
together throughout.58
That the increase in population in the coal counties during the boom was not
matched by an increase in deaths suggests that the migrants entering these counties
during the boom were less likely to die than the average resident of these counties
on the eve of the boom. This pattern is consistent with the previously discussed
evidence that most migrants were young adults. Because these migrants had very
low mortality risk, they had little effect on the number of deaths, but their presence
in the population did make it appear that the overall mortality rate had declined.
Overall, the patterns in Figure 9 suggest that the economic shock had little impact
on total mortality, and that changes in the observed mortality rate primarily reflect
changes in the size and composition of the population.
Next, we examine the results obtained when applying the three alternative econo58

In Appendix Figure 22 we present additional evidence comparing the evolution of mortality
within different age groups in coal and control counties. These results are similar to the all-age
results shown in Figure 9—that is, the evolution of mortality looks similar in the treatment and
control counties. Note that we cannot run our analysis reliably using age-specific data, since this
data is only available disaggregated by age starting in 1968.

38

metric approaches discussed in Section 4. To illustrate the problems caused by the
migration-driven violation of the parallel trends assumption when using the log mortality rate as the dependent variable (as evidenced in the left panel of Figure 9), we
show results both without and with county time trends. Our results are presented in
Table 4. The top panel presents estimates from our three alternative specifications
without county time trends, while the bottom panel presents estimates with time
trends. Standard errors are clustered by county.59
As in the cotton example, the results in Table 4 are highly sensitive to the assumptions made about how to model the relationship between population and mortality
in the short run. Results change substantially both as we move across Columns 1
to 3, and as we include or exclude county time trends. The results obtained using
the mortality rate as the dependent variable, in Columns 1a and 1b, are particularly
sensitive to the inclusion of time trends. In contrast, results in Columns 3a and 3b
are less sensitive to the inclusion of time trends. It is also worth noting that in the
results in Columns 2a and 2b, the coefficient on the population term is well below
one, suggesting that the one-to-one relationship between population and mortality assumed by the specification used in Columns 1a and 1b is likely to be violated in this
setting. Indeed, this coefficient is consistent with the boom-time in-flows of healthy
workers who contributed less than proportionally to coal-county deaths.
Given the patterns described in Figure 9 and the evidence on migration, our
assessment is that the results in Columns 1a and 1b of Table 4 are likely to provide
misleading results that are driven primarily by changes in the size and composition of
the at-risk population. The results in Columns 2 and 3 are likely to be more reliable.
These estimates suggest that the coal boom had little effect on total mortality.
As in our cotton example, our shock begins in a census year, which provides a
convenient way to examine the stability of the results as population measures be59

Results using spatial standard errors are available in Appendix Table 16. These deliver similar
results.

39

Table 4: Estimated mortality effects of the coal boom
Dependent variable:

Ln(MR)

Ln(MORT)

Ln(MORT)

Panel A: Without county time trends
(1a)
(2a)
(3a)
Coal county × boom

0.096***
(0.017)

0.010
(0.011)
0.278***
(0.0230)

Ln(Pop)

Panel B: With county time trends
(1b)
(2b)
Coal county × boom

-0.038***
(0.010)

-0.003
(0.009)
0.267***
(0.043)

Ln(Pop)

-0.023*
(0.012)

(3b)
0.009
(0.010)

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by county.
All regressions include county fixed effects and year effects. N=7,672.

come more vulnerable to migration-related error. Specifically, examining how results
change as we expand the shock window away from the census year provides additional
evidence on how to choose between specifications. This is done in Table 5 for various
windows starting in 1970. Panel A presents results using the log mortality rate as
the dependent variable as per the standard approach, Panel B presents results using log mortality as the dependent variable while still controlling for log population,
and Panel C presents results with log mortality as the dependent variable, without
including log population.
There are two important patterns to note in Table 5. First, for windows closer
to the census year, all three approaches yield similar results: the coal boom has
very little impact on mortality. Second, as we expand the window, the results in
Panel B and Panel C continue to show evidence that the boom had little impact
on mortality, while the results in Panel A change substantially, becoming negative
and statistically significant. Both of these patterns justify our using the third, log
40

Table 5: Results for various windows starting in 1970
Shock years:

1970-1971
(1)

1970-73
(2)

1970-75
(3)

1970-77
(4)

Panel A – DV: Log Mortality Rate
Coal county × boom

-0.009
(0.010)

-0.021*
(0.011)

-0.030***
(0.010)

-0.035***
(0.011)

Panel B – DV: Log Mortality
Coal county × boom
Ln(Pop)

0.004
(0.010)
0.155**
(0.077)

-0.002
(0.011)
0.224***
(0.062)

-0.007
(0.010)
0.280***
(0.052)

-0.007
(0.010)
0.267***
(0.044)

Panel C – DV: Log Mortality
Coal county × boom

0.006
(0.010)

0.004
(0.011)

0.002
(0.011)

0.003
(0.011)

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by county. All regressions include
county fixed effects, year effects, and linear county time trends. In each column, the sample
runs from 1950 to the last year of the specified shock window. N=6,028 in Column 1; 6,576
in Column 2; 7,124 in Column 3; 7,672 in Column 4.

mortality, specification as our preferred approach. Moreover, the fact that the results
in Panel A become negative and statistically significant as we move away from the
census year is consistent with the expected effect of migration in this setting, as
the selective inflow of young, healthy workers pushes the population denominator up
while hardly affecting the total number of deaths.
The overriding message from Figure 9 and Tables 4-5 is that the boom had little
impact on mortality, but substantially affected observed mortality rates. This finding
is robust to alternative sample definitions, alternative boom periods, and alternative
shock measures (See Appendix Tables 17 and 18.) Our interpretation of these results is that the coal boom induced a large migration response, but one that was
concentrated among young workers who carried very little mortality risk. For those
who were at a higher risk of mortality (i.e., older residents), the changing economic
conditions seem to have had little effect, such that we see no evidence of a change
41

in their patterns of mortality. This is most likely because older residents, who bore
higher mortality risk, were insured against economic shocks by retirements savings
and programs such as Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid, and because they were
unlikely to have been the recipients of the rise in mining incomes.
In summary, we draw two main conclusions from the experience of the Appalachian
coal boom. First, as in the cotton downturn, we find evidence that the coal boom
caused a substantial change in migration patterns. Second, we observe changes in the
observed mortality rate across locations, but little effect on the number of deaths.
Thus, it appears that changes in mortality rates were largely statistical artifacts
driven by changes in the population denominator. Consistent with this pattern, we
find that much of the migration that took place was selective and concentrated among
young workers, a population with very little mortality risk. Overall, we conclude that
the coal boom had little effect on mortality, but that an analysis focused on the
overall mortality rates may find large and spurious results driven by the unobserved
short-term migration of young, healthy workers.

7

Conclusion

Drawing on two natural experiments in very different settings, this paper assesses
the sensitivity of estimates of the relationship between business cycles and mortality
to unobserved migration. In both settings, we find that changes in local economic
conditions generated a substantial migration response, and that this migration has the
potential to systematically bias estimates of the impact of business cycles on mortality.
The standard approach used in the literature following Ruhm (2000), which takes the
mortality rate as the dependent variable, appears to be especially vulnerable to bias
generated by migration because it imposes strong assumptions on the relationship
between population and mortality in the short run. These assumptions are likely to
be violated in the presence of migration, resulting in misleading estimates.
42

If migration bias may pose serious problems in estimating the impact of businesscycle fluctuations on mortality, how can we correct for it? An ideal solution is to use
individual-level panel data, as has been done by Gerdtham & Johannesson (2005),
Edwards (2008) and Dehejia & Lleras-Muney (2004). Unfortunately, this type of data
is only available in a very small number of modern developed countries. In settings
where such detailed data are not available, one alternative is to focus only on infant
mortality, where migration is less of a concern.60 However, the impact of businesscycle fluctuations on infant mortality may be qualitatively different from the impact
on other segments of the population. Thus, to focus on infant outcomes alone may
yield an incomplete picture of the relationship between business cycles and health
more generally. A second alternative is to focus on patterns at the national level, as
is done by Cutler et al. (2016), whose cross-country approach abstracts from difficultto-track internal migration flows. Finally, a third approach, proposed in this paper,
is to carefully study individual events that provide plausibly exogenous variation in
the incidence of temporary economic shocks, and to use the available evidence in the
empirical context to diagnose and mitigate migration bias.
Recent work by Ruhm (2015) shows that the pro-cyclical relationship between
business cycles and mortality documented in the U.S. using the standard approach
has substantially weakened since about 1980. This trend is concentrated among the
young and those in middle age. By highlighting the important influence of migration
in estimates of the relationship between business cycles and mortality, our study offers
a potential explanation for this trend. In particular, recent work (e.g., Malloy et al.
(2016)) documents a fall in the rate of internal migration that also began around 1980,
particularly among young and middle-aged workers. If rising internal migration was
partially responsible for the pro-cyclical mortality estimated by Ruhm (2015) before
60

Recent studies in this literature include Paxson & Schady (2005), Ferreira & Schady (2009),
Bhalotra (2010), Miller & Urdinola (2010), Baird et al. (2011), Cruces et al. (2012), Friedman &
Schady (2013), and Bozzoli & Quintana-Domeque (2014). Many, though not all, of these studies
find that negative economic shocks increase infant mortality.

43

1980, then the fall in internal migration rates after 1980 may explain the weakening of
the pro-cyclical relationship between recessions and mortality. More work is needed
to assess whether this is indeed the case.

44

References
Adda, Jérôme, Banks, James, & von Gaudecker, Hans-Martin. 2009. The Impact of Income Shocks
on Health: Evidence from Cohort Data. Journal of the European Economic Association, 7(6),
1361–1399.
Arnold, Arthur. 1864. The History of The Cotton Famine: From the Fall of Sumter to the Passing
of The Public Works Act. London: Saunders, Otley, and Co.
Bailey, M., Clay, K., Fishback, P., Haines, M., Kantor, S., Severnini, E., & Wentz, A. 2016 (September). U.S. County-Level Natality and Mortality Data, 1915-2007. Inter-university Consortium of
Political and Social Research.
Baird, Sarah, Friedman, Jed, & Schady, Norbert. 2011. Aggregate income shocks and infant mortality
in the developing world. Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(3), 847–856.
Bhalotra, Sonia. 2010. Fatal fluctuations? Cyclicality in infant mortality in India. Journal of
Development Economics, 93(1), 7–19.
Black, D.A., Kolesnikova, N., Sanders, S.G., & Taylor, L.J. 2013. Are Children “Normal”? Review
of Economics and Statistics, 95(1), 21–33.
Black, Dan, Daniel, Kermit, & Sanders, Seth. 2002. The impact of economic conditions on participation in disability programs: Evidence from the coal boom and bust. The American Economic
Review, 92(1), 27–50.
Black, Dan, McKinnish, Terra, & Sanders, Seth. 2005. The Economic Impact Of The Coal Boom
And Bust. The Economic Journal, 115(503), 449–476.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean, & Katz, Lawrence F. 1992. Regional Evolutions. Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1 – 61.
Borjas, G. J. 2014. Immigration Economics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Borjas, George J. 2003. The labor demand curve is downward sloping: Reexamining the impact of
immigration on the labor market. The quarterly journal of economics, 118(4), 1335–1374.
Bound, John, & Holzer, Harry J. 2000. Demand Shifts, Population Adjustments, and Labor Market
Outcomes during the 1980s. Journal of Labor Economics, 18(1), pp. 20–54.
Boyer, George R. 1997. Poor Relief, Informal Assistance, and Short Time during the Lancashire
Cotton Famine. Explorations in Economic History, 34(1), 56 – 76.
Bozzoli, Carlos, & Quintana-Domeque, Climent. 2014. The weight of the crisis: Evidence from
newborns in Argentina. Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(3), 550–562.
Carrington, William J. 1996. The Alaskan Labor Market during the Pipeline Era. Journal of Political

45

Economy, 104(1), pp. 186–218.
Chay, Kenneth Y., & Greenstone, Michael. 2003. The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality:
Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 118(3), pp. 1121–1167.
Conley, Timothy G. 1999. GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence. Journal of Econometrics, 92(1), 1 – 45.
Crafts, Nicholas, & Wolf, Nikolaus. 2014. The Location of the UK Cotton Textiles Industry in 1838:
a Quantitative Analysis. Journal of Economic History, 74(4), 1103–1139.
Cruces, Guillermo, Glüzmann, Pablo, & Calva, Luis Felipe López. 2012. Economic crises, maternal
and infant mortality, low birth weight and enrollment rates: evidence from Argentinas downturns.
World Development, 40(2), 303–314.
Cutler, D., Huang, W., & Lleras-Muney, A. 2016 (September). Economic Conditions and Mortality:
Evidence from 200 Years of Data. NBER Working Paper No. 22690.
Dehejia, Rajeev, & Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2004. Booms, Busts, and Babies’ Health. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 119(3), 1091–1130.
Economou, Athina, Nikolaou, Agelike, & Theodossiou, Ioannis. 2008. Are recessions harmful to
health after all?: Evidence from the European Union. Journal of Economic Studies, 35(5), 368–
384.
Edwards, Ryan. 2008. Who is hurt by procyclical mortality? Social Science & Medicine, 67(12),
2051–2058.
Eliason, Marcus, & Storrie, Donald. 2009. Does Job Loss Shorten Life? Journal of Human Resources,
44(2), 277–302.
Ellison, T. 1886. The Cotton Trade of Great Britain. London: Effingham Wilson, Royal Exchange.
Ferreira, Francisco HG, & Schady, Norbert. 2009. Aggregate economic shocks, child schooling, and
child health. The World Bank Research Observer, 24(2), 147–181.
Fishback, P. V., Horrace, W.C., & Kantor, S. 2006. The impact of New Deal expenditures on
mobility during the Great Depression. Explorations in Economic History, 43, 179–222.
Foote, Andrew, Grosz, Michel, & Stevens, Ann. 2017 (March). Locate Your Nearest Exit: Mass
Layoffs and Local Labor Market Response.
Forwood, WB. 1870. The Influence of Price upon the Cultivation and Consumption of Cotton During
the Ten Years 1860-70. Journal of the Statistical Society of London, 33(3), 366–383.
Friedman, Jed, & Schady, Norbert. 2013. How many infants likely died in Africa as a result of the
2008–2009 global financial crisis? Health Economics, 22(5), 611–622.
Gerdtham, Ulf-G, & Johannesson, Magnus. 2005. Business cycles and mortality: results from

46

Swedish microdata. Social Science & Medicine, 60(1), 205–218.
Griffith, Rachel, O’Connell, Martin, & Smith, Kate. 2013. Food Expenditure and Nutritional Quality
over the Great Recession. Tech. rept.
Hanlon, W. Walker. 2015. Necessity is the Mother of Invention: Input Supplies and Directed
Technical Change. Econometrica, 83(1), 67–100.
Hanlon, W. Walker. 2017. Temporary Shocks and Persistent Effects in the Urban System: Evidence
from British Cities after the U.S. Civil War. Review of Economics and Statistics, 99(1), 67–79.
Henderson, W.O. 1969. The Lancashire Cotton Famine 1861-1865. New York: Augustus M. Kelley
Publishers.
Hund, Lauren Brooke. 2012. Survey Designs and Spatio-Temporal Methods for Disease Surveillance.
Ph.D. thesis.
Jaworkski, T., & Kitchens, C.T. 2016 (March). National Policy For Regional Development: Evidence
from Appalachian Highways. NBER Working Paper No. 22073.
Kearney, Melissa S., & Wilson, Riley. 2017 (May). Male Earnings, Marriageable Men, and Nonmarital Fertility: Evidence from the Fracking Boom. NBER Working Paper No. 23408.
Kiesling, L.Lynne. 1996. Institutional Choice Matters: The Poor Law and Implicit Labor Contracts
in Victorian Lancashire. Explorations in Economic History, 33(1), 65 – 85.
Lindo, Jason M. 2015. Aggregation and the estimated effects of economic conditions on health.
Journal of Health Economics, 40, 83–96.
Malloy, R., Smith, C.S., & Wozniak, A.K. 2016. Job Changing and the Decline of Long-Distance
Migration in the United States. Demography, 54(2).
Miller, Douglas L., Page, Marianne E., Stevens, Ann Huff, & Filipski, Mateusz. 2009. Why Are
Recessions Good for Your Health?

The American Economic Review, Papers & Proceedings,

99(2), pp. 122–127.
Miller, Grant, & Urdinola, B Piedad. 2010. Cyclicality, Mortality, and the Value of Time: The Case
of Coffee Price Fluctuations and Child Survival in Colombia. The Jurnal of Political Economy,
118(1), 113.
Mitchell, Brian R. 1988. British Historical Statistics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Mitchell, Brian R, & Deane, Phyllis. 1962. Abstract of British Historical Statistics. London: Cambridge University Press.
Monras, J. 2015 (November). Immigration and Wage Dynamics: Evidence from the Mexican Peso
Crises. Working paper.
Monras, J. 2017 (April). Economic Shocks and Internal Migration. Working paper.
Muller, Andreas. 1989. Business Recession, Alcohol Consumption, Drinking and Driving Laws:

47

Impact on Oklahoma Motor Vehicle Fatalities and Fatal Crashes. American Journal of Public
Health, 79(10), 1366?1370.
Newey, Whitney K., & West, Kenneth D. 1987. A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity
and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix. Econometrica, 55(3), pp. 703–708.
Olivetti, C. 2013 (June). Human Capital in History: The American Record. NBER Working Paper
No. 19131.
Painter, Gary. 2010. What Happens to Household Formation in a Recession? 46th Annual AREUEA
Conference Paper.
Paxson, Christina, & Schady, Norbert. 2005. Child health and economic crisis in Peru. The World
Bank Economic Review, 19(2), 203–223.
Phipps, Amanda I., Clarke, Christina A., & Ereman, Rochelle R. 2005. Impact of Intercensal
Population Projections and Error of Closure on Breast Cancer Surveillance: Examples from 10
California Counties. Breast Cancer Research, 7(5), R655 – R660.
Robinson, Gregory, & West, Kirsten. 2005. Understanding Factors that Contributed to the Large
Error of Closure in Census 2000.
Ruhm, Christopher J. 2000. Are Recessions Good for Your Health?

The Quarterly Journal of

Economics, 115(2), 617–650.
Ruhm, Christopher J. 2005. Healthy living in hard times. Journal of Health Economics, 24(2),
341–363.
Ruhm, Christopher J. 2007. A Healthy Economy Can Break Your Heart. Demography, 44(4), pp.
829–848.
Ruhm, Christopher J. 2015. Recessions, healthy no more? Journal of Health Economics, 42, 17–28.
Ruhm, Christopher J, & Black, William E. 2002. Does Drinking Really Decrease in Bad Times?
Journal of Health Economics, 21(4), 659–678.
Southall, Humphrey R, Gilbert, David R, & Gregory, Ian. 1998 (Jan.). Great Britain Historical
Database : Labour Markets Database, Poor Law Statistics, 1859-1939. [computer file]. UK Data
Archive [distributor] SN: 3713.
Stevens, Ann H., Miller, Douglas L., Page, Marianne E., & Filipski, Mateusz. 2015. The Best of
Times, the Worst of Times: Understanding Pro-cyclical Mortality. American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 7(4), 279–311.
Stuckler, David, Meissner, Christopher, Fishback, Price, Basu, Sanjay, & McKee, Martin. 2012.
Banking Crises and Mortality During the Great Depression: Evidence from US Urban Populations, 1929–1937. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 66(5), 410–419.
Sullivan, Daniel, & von Wachter, Till. 2009. Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis Using

48

Administrative Data. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3), 1265–1306.
Svensson, M. 2007. Do Not Go Breaking Your Heart: Do Economic Upturns Really Increase Heart
Attack Mortality? Social Science & Medicine, 65, 833–841.
Watts, John. 1866. The Facts of the Cotton Famine. London: Simpkin, Marshall, & Co.
Woods, R. 1997 (March). Causes of Death in England and Wales, 1851-60 to 1891-1900 : The
Decennial Supplements. [computer file].
Woods, Robert. 2000. The Demography of Victorian England and Wales. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

49

A

A.1

Appendix: Literature, concepts and methods

Review of selected related literature

Below, we provide a review of select leading studies on the relationship between recessions and public health. In particular, we highlight the methodological approaches
used, the main findings, and the setting in which these results are found.

Study
1 Ruhm (2000) QJE
2

Ruhm & Black (2002)
J. Health Ec.

3 Ruhm (2003) J. Health Ec.

Data
50 states, 20 years

Dependent variable
Ln(mortality rate),
Ln(mortality)

13 years, 15‐45 states
(repeated cross‐sections of
Alcohol use
individual‐level data)
20 states (31 MSAs), 10 years
Various health indicators
(individual‐level data)

Specification
Fixed effects
Linear probability mode
with state fixed effects
and time trends
Linear probability model
with state FEs
Fixed effects at the
county level with state
time trends

Standard errors
Robust, weighted by
population

Result
Procyclical mortality

Clustered by state‐
month

Procyclical alcohol
use

Clustered by state

Countercyclical
health

Robust, weighted by
births

Recessions reduce
mortality

Clustered at state
level, weighted and
unweighted

Improved infant
health during
recessions

4

Chay & Greenstone (2003)
3 years, 1200 counties
QJE

5

Dehijia & Lleras‐Muney
(2004) QJE

Individual data, state level
explanatory variables, 50
states, 25 years

Mothers characteristics, Fixed effects at state
infant health indicators, level, with some state
time trends
prenatal care

6

Neumayer (2004)
Soc. Sci. & Medicine

20 years, 11‐16 German states

Ln(mortality rate),
mortality by cause

Fixed effects at state level
Robust, weighted by
with lagged dependent
state population
variable (Arellano‐Bond)

34‐45 states, 14 years
(repeated cross‐sections of
individual‐level data)

Smoking, overweight

Probit regressions

Robust, with
correlation within
state‐month or by
state

Smoking and obesity
are procyclical

Robust, clustered by
individual

Mortality risk
countercyclical for
men, unclear for
women

7 Ruhm (2005) J. Health Ec.

Infant mortality rate

Procyclical mortality

8

Gerdtham & Johannesson
(2005) Soc. Sci. Med.

Individual‐level panel data, 10‐
Prob. of death
16 years

Probit model, individual
level with time‐series
explanatory variable

9

Tapia Granados (2005)
European J. of Pop.

18 years, 50 provinces (Spain) Ln(mortality rate)

Fixed effects with some
province time trends

10

Gerdtham & Ruhm (2006)
Ec. and Human Bio.

23 OECD countries, 37 years

Ln(mortality rate)

Fixed effects at country
level

11

Svensson (2007)
Soc. Sci. & Medicine

21 Swedish regions, 17 years

Heart disease

Fixed effects

Robust

Mixed results

Fixed effects

Robust, AR1,
weighted by
population

Recessions decrease
coronary mortality

Fixed effects

Robust

Procyclical mortality

12

Ruhm (2007)
Demography

50 states +DC, 20 years

13

Fishback et al. (2007)
Review of Ec. and Stat.

114 U.S. cities, 1929‐1940

Coronary heart death
rates, all heart‐related
death rates
Infant mortality rate,
overall death rate

50

Weighted by
population
Robust and AR1,
weighted by country
pop.

Procyclical mortality
Procyclical mortality

Edwards (2008)
Soc. Sci. & Medicine
Economou et al. (2008)
15
J. of Economic Studies

Individual level data panel
data by state & year
13 EU countries, 20 years
1977‐1996

Miller et al (2009)
AER P&P

50 states + DC, 1978‐2004

Ln(mortality rate) by
group

8 Asia‐Pacific countries,
1976‐2003

Ln(mortality rate)

14

16

17 Lin (2009) Applied Econ.

Mortality rate

Logit regressions

Mortality rate

Fixed effects

Robust

Fixed effects Poisson at
state level, some time
trends
Fixed effects, with some
country time trends
Fixed effects in
differences

Clustered by state,
weighted by state
population
Robust, weighted by
population

Stuckler, et al. (2009)
26 EU countries, 1970‐2007 Mortality rate by cause
18
Lancet
Gonzalez & Quast (2011)
32 Mexican states, 1993‐2004 Ln(mortality rate)
19
Empir. Econ.
Stuckler et al (2012) J. of
114 cities in 36 states, 9 years Ln(mortality rate)
20
Epid. & Community Health
21 Ariizumi & Schirle (2012)

22

23

24
25
26

10 Canadian provinces, 33
years 1977‐2009

50 US states from 1976‐2008,
McInerney & Mellor (2012), Individual‐level data repeated
J. Health Econ.
cross‐sections from 1994‐
2008
Repeated cross‐sections of
Tekin et al. (2013) NBER
individual‐level data, 2005‐
Working Paper No. 19234
2005‐2011
50 states, 35 years 1976‐2010
Ruhm (2015)
(using different time
J. Health Ec.
windows)
Stevens et al (2015)
50 US states, 1978‐2006
AEJ: Policy
Ruhm (2015) NBER Working 50 US states or 3,142 US
Paper No. 21604
counties, 1976‐2013

A.2
A.2.1

Procyclical mortality
Countercyclical
mortality
Procyclical mortality
Procyclical mortality

Clustered by country Mixed

Fixed effects

Clustered by state

Procyclical mortality

Fixed effect and
distributed lag

Clustered by state

Procyclical mortality

Ln(mortality rate)

Fixed effects, with
provincen time trends

Clustered by province
Procyclical mortality
or bootstrapped

Ln(mortality rate) and
other senior health
indicators

Fixed effects with location
Unclear
time trends

Countercyclical
health among seniors
in recent decades

Variety of health
indicators (reported
health, smoking, etc.)

Fixed effects at the state
Clustered by state‐
level with some state
month
time trends

Zero recession‐
mortality relationship

Ln(mortality rate)

Fixed effects, with some
state time trends

Mortality becoming
less procyclical
recently

Ln(mortality rate) by
group
Ln(mortality rate)

Clustered by state

Fixed effects with location
Clustered by state
time trends
Fixed effects with location
Clustered by state
time trends

Procyclical mortality
Procyclical mortality

Intercensal population estimation
Assumptions about population growth in the presence of migration

A key issue in this literature has to do with the fact that in most intercensal years
(indeed, in 9 out of every 10), the available population measure is an interpolated variable that does not perfectly reflect the true underlying population. This can seriously
bias estimates of the true relationship between business cycles and health, because
in the presence of short-term migration flows, this interpolation error is systematic
51

rather than random.
Consider a hypothetical situation in which a district experiencing long-run population growth is hit by a short-run recession followed by a recovery. Further, assume
that the recession causes out-migration which is reversed during the recovery period.
These are essentially the conditions observed in the case of the cotton shortage. To
keep things simple, assume that the recession has no impact on the mortality rate.
The left-hand panel of Figure 10 describes the evolution of population in this hypothetical setting. In this example, the interpolated population builds in population
growth during the recession, even though population was falling during that period.
If that interpolated population is used in the denominator when calculating the mortality rate, as shown in the right-hand panel, then it will make it appear that the
mortality rate fell during the recession even when it did not.61 If instead we do not
use the interpolated population information (as in Eq. 4), then in this case, we will
obtain a mortality rate estimate that is closer to the true value. Thus, including the
interpolated population value in the regression does not necessarily lead to a more
accurate counterfactual.
The main conclusion to draw from this discussion is that when there is a migration
response to economic shocks, assumptions made about the evolution of population
and the relationship between population and mortality in the short versus long run
are important. Moreover, in the absence of accurate annual population estimates,
it is not necessarily true that using interpolated values will lead to more accurate
results. Indeed, erroneous assumptions about population change may introduce new
sources of bias into our calculations.

61

Note also that this interpolation does not merely result in population mis-measurement in the
recession period. Rather, by forcing part of the growth that occurred at one point in the intercensal
period into another, this approach also leads population in the recovery sub-period to be underestimated, which will further contribute to the spurious impression that the recession was good for
health.

52

Figure 10: Example
Population

A.2.2

Mortality rate

Errors of closure and Das Gupta interpolation

The results presented in this study suggest that migration bias has an important
impact on the estimated business cycle-mortality relationship in both of our empirical
settings.62 Should we be concerned that migration may cause similar issues in other
contexts? The answer to this question depends in large part on the accuracy of
intercensal population estimates.
The standard interpolation approach, termed the Das Gupta method, calculates
annual estimates of population using a base and terminal year census count combined
with annual information on births, deaths, and net internal and international migration.63 Specifically, for each intercensal year, they calculate a cumulative population
value that adds to observed population in a base census year all the net change in
population (up to that year) due to natural increase (i.e., births minus deaths) and
62

Indeed, despite the fact that we might expect this bias to be most problematic in settings—such
as historical and developing-country ones—with mobile labor forces and a poor capacity to track
such movements intercensally, our coal boom analysis nevertheless indicates that migration bias can
be an issue even in a modern rich-country setting.
63
To compute the latter two measures, census officials rely on a wealth of information, such as
Social Security and Medicare records and records of troops stationed abroad.

53

migration (i.e., internal and international migrant inflows minus internal and international migrant outflows). Working in this manner until they reach the next census
year, they obtain what is called a “postcensal estimate” for the entire 10-year period. This represents the population we would expect to find in the terminal census,
based on the observed initial census count and all known entries and exits from the
population. The difference between this postcensal estimate and the terminal year’s
observed census count is termed the error of closure, and is equivalent to -1 times the
residual implied net migration that has gone unobserved in the intercensal period.
Thus, as a final step, intercensal estimates are obtained by taking this error of closure
and then distributing it across intercensal years geometrically, thus “topping up” the
year-specific value obtained on the way to the postcensal estimate (see Methodology for the Intercensal Population and Housing Unit Estimates: 2000 to 2010, U.S.
Census Bureau (2012) for further details of the procedure).
The error of closure can be used as a diagnostic of data quality. Specifically,
the error of closure can be interpreted as the (negative of) implied net migration
that has gone unobserved: the higher the magnitude of the error of closure, the less
well observed is migration.64 Furthermore, the larger the error of closure, the more
important are assumptions about how to distribute growth across intercensal years.
To get a sense of the quality of best-available intercensal population estimates and
the likelihood of bias related to unobserved migration, we now compare the errors in
the intercensal population estimates available in our settings to the errors found in
several modern developed and developing countries. In particular, we calculate the
error of closure at several levels of geographic aggregation for three wealthy countries
(England and Wales, the United States, and Canada), and for one developing country
(India). We compare these to similar figures obtained from our historical data for
64

This is, of course, not a perfect measure of the potential for migration bias. The measure
only reflects unobserved net migration, and so it would miss migration that occurred in one part
of the census period but was revered before the next census. It will also miss selective migration.
Furthermore, other factors may contribute to this residual, including unreported births and deaths,
as well as census under-enumeration.

54

England and Wales. These errors of closure, reported in absolute value as a percentage
of final-year population, are presented in Table 6.
Here, we find evidence that migration is imperfectly observed—and so, may be
imperfectly reflected in intercensal population—even in modern rich-country settings.
Panel A shows that migration-adjusted errors of closure at the national level are nonnegligible, ranging from 0.10% to 2.42% in magnitude. Here, our historical estimates
for England & Wales (which, crucially, cannot adjust for migration), compare favorably. For contrast, modern errors of closure from India are several times higher,
ranging from 4.61-9.94%.
Naturally, errors of closure are likely to be larger at lower levels of spatial aggregation, where internal migration is more likely to go unobserved. In Column 5 of
Panel B, we present estimates for modern England and Wales at the Local Authority
District (LAD) level. Using best-available methods (i.e., those that can adjust for
observed migration), LAD-level errors of closure are on average roughly one quarter
the size of those we obtain (without adjusting for observed migration) from historical
England and Wales at the Registration District (RD) level.65 Comparing measures on
a more consistent basis (that is, where neither error of closure adjusts for migration)
reduces this accuracy gap substantially: average historical errors of closure at the RD
level are only half that for modern LADs. Indeed, comparing migration-adjusted to
non-migration-adjusted errors of closure for those modern developed-country units
for which it is available, it is clear that even while partially adjusting for migration,
best-available modern errors of closure still leave a substantial portion of migration
unaccounted for.
Furthermore, there is considerable cross-unit heterogeneity in the error of closure:
even adjusting for migration, 65% of modern English and Welsh LADs have errors
65

Errors of closure look similar for other small, sub-provincial units in modern rich countries. See,
e.g., errors of closure reported for census metropolitan areas and economic regions of Canada, which
in 2011 were as high in magnitude as 3.0% and 4.4%, respectively based on data from Statistics
Canada.

55

of closure above 1.00%. Indeed, for the City of London, the rate is 52.71%. More
importantly from an estimation standpoint, it should be noted that although this
table presents the absolute value of the error of closure, inaccuracy is liable to be
compounded where errors of closure move in opposite directions in recession-stricken
and migrant-receiving spatial units—say, because of unobserved migration from one
unit to the other.
What influences the size of the error of closure? Stratifying further, and using the
U.S. over 1990-2000 as an example, we find that at its smallest, the error of closure is
0.37%, among the relatively immobile elderly (age 85+). Meanwhile, the modern U.S.
error of closure is understandably largest in the lower end of the prime working-age
population (25-34 years old), where it is -5.92% (see Intercensal National Methodology, U.S. Census Bureau, 2010). This pattern is consistent with labor mobility and
other age-related factors that may make this age group particularly hard to track as
they move, given the sort of tax and Medicare data the U.S. Census Bureau uses
to make these migration adjustments. Indeed, the 1990-2000 census period in the
U.S. has been widely acknowledged as having an unusually large error of closure, and
this large error in turn has been attributed to precisely those issues we highlight as
concerns in this analysis: the mis-measurement of highly mobile populations—in the
case of the U.S. in the 1990s, the growing Hispanic population (Robinson & West,
2005).66 Recent studies in the medical and biostatistics literatures have also raised
the issue of denominator measurement error, highlighting in particular the issue of
measurement error in small demographic strata, such as those by age and race (see
Phipps et al. (2005) for a discussion of intercensal interpolation-driven bias in estimates of breast cancer incidence rates, and Hund (2012, Ch. 4-5) for a broader
66

Further undermining the accuracy of such analyses is the fact that those populations that may
be especially vulnerable to mis-measurement (for reasons including but not limited to their higher
geographic mobility) may also face different mortality risk profiles and access to medical and social
welfare services. Note also that these errors of closure reflect nothing of migrant selectivity—indeed,
one may mis-measure the composition of the population even where the error of closure appears to
be small in magnitude.

56

methodological discussion of related denominator issues).67
Together, these findings suggest that the bias resulting from poor intercensal
population denominators is likely to be a significant factor in a variety of settings,
even beyond the obvious historical and developing-country ones. From a practical
perspective, as both our coal boom analysis and these error-of-closure comparisons
imply, even modern rich-country studies should be concerned about denominatorinterpolation problems that could arise when studying granular, sparsely populated,68
or rapidly growing geographic regions; small strata (for instance, by age, gender, race,
and the interactions of these, especially where the sub-population in question may also
experience mortality risk that is different from that of the general population); and
populations that are vulnerable, mobile, and/or prone to under-registration (e.g. in
the modern U.S., Hispanics and immigrant populations and young working-age people more generally). What’s more, in the presence of migration spillovers, this bias
will be further magnified when using standard panel data approaches to estimation.

67

For instance, Phipps et al. (2005) suggest that “areas with a high growth rate, a large population
of retirees, or a large population of foreign-born individuals are likely to be underestimated, while
areas with high poverty, and areas with a negative growth rate are likely to be overestimated.”
Using alternative denominators, they find “the DOF-based [breast cancer incidence] rates for Marin
County were approximately 22% higher than census-based rates based on the same numerators.”
It should be noted that this 22% bias does not include the additional bias that could occur in the
presence of spillovers, which in a differences-in-differences framework could compound denominator
error if undercounts in one area lead to overcounts in the region used as a comparator.
68
In sparsely populated or difficult-to-monitor regions, errors can be even higher: for instance,
average absolute errors of closure for sub-provincial units are highest in rural provinces/territories,
such as the Northwest Territories, whose census divisions had an average absolute error of closure
of 3.5% in 2011 (data from Statistics Canada).

57

Table 6: Absolute error of closure (%)

Country
Period
EOC (Natural increase only)
EOC (Migration-adjusted)

Panel A: National
(4)
(5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

E&W

E&W

E&W

E&W

US

US

Canada

Canada

Canada

India

India

1851-1861

1861-1871

1991-2001

2001-2011

1990-2000

2000-2010

1996-2001

2001-2006

2006-2011

1991-2001

2001-2011

0.61

0.25

2.21
0.92

4.41
0.40

3.29
0.16

9.94

4.61

2.42

0.20

0.10

0.50

Panel B: Sub-national
Country
Geo Unit
Period

58

Mean EOC (Natural increase only)
Min
Max
Share < 1.00%
Share > 5.00%

E&W

E&W

E&W

E&W

E&W

E&W

US

Canada

Canada

Canada

India

RD
1851-1861

County
1851-1861

RD
1861-1871

County
1861-1871

LAD
2001-2011

County
2001-2011

State + DC
2000-2010

Province
1996-2001

Province
2001-2006

Province
2006-2011

State
2001-2011

10.68
0.02
31.91
0.03
0.78

7.23
0.32
18.68
0.13
0.69

10.44
0.01
68.44
0.05
0.76

6.56
0.20
19.55
0.13
0.60

4.97
0.01
16.02
0.10
0.44

4.93
0.82
8.85
0.02
0.49

4.26
0.16
19.28
0.20
0.33

2.26
0.01
52.71
0.35
0.10

1.10
0.02
2.69
0.53
0.00

0.96
0.00
4.80
0.73
0.00

0.73
0.00
2.20
0.54
0.00

0.95
0.00
3.20
0.62
0.00

0.97
0.00
2.10
0.54
0.00

347

55

51

13

13

13

Mean EOC (Migration-adjusted)
Min
Max
Share < 1.00%
Share > 5.00%
Observations

539

55

539

55

6.31
0.59
21.73
0.11
0.46

35

We report the absolute value (magnitude) of the error of closure in the total population, calculated as a percentage of the final-year census count of population. Figures are given for England &
Wales, the United States, Canada, and India, as well as for smaller geographic units within these countries (i.e. Registration Districts, Local Authority Districts, counties, and states/provinces).
“EOC (natural increase only)” refers to the error of closure based on accounting for births and deaths only. “EOC (migration-adjusted)” refers to the error of closure based on accounting for
births, deaths, internal and international migration, and other similar adjustments. With the exception of the figures for all of Canada and for the US in 1990-2000, which are taken directly
from data provided by Statistics Canada and the U.S. Census Bureau, respectively, the table reports the authors’ calculations based on data from the U.S. Census, the U.K. Office for National
Statistics, and the Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner of India.

B

Appendix: The Lancashire cotton shortage

B.1

Additional evidence on the effects of the cotton shortage

Figure 11 describes domestic raw cotton consumption in Britain from 1850-1875. This
is the best available measure of the change in production in the industry across this
period. The graph also describes the evolution of payments for wages and other variable costs, other than cotton, in the industry, from 1860-1868. Both of these statistics
suggest that the shock period was characterized by a large reduction, equal to roughly
half of pre-war production, in both industry production and wage payments.
Figure 11: British domestic cotton consumption and input payments, 1850-1875

Domestic raw cotton consumption data from Mitchell & Deane (1962). Wage and cost data
from Forwood (1870).

To look for other effects of the U.S. Civil War on the British economy, a natural
starting point is to look at imports and exports. The left-hand panel of Figure 12
focuses on imports. This figure shows that, once imports of raw cotton are excluded,
there do not appear to be any substantial changes in either total imports or raw
material imports to Britain. This makes sense given that raw cotton made up 67%
of total British imports from the U.S. in 1860. Of the other major U.S. exports to
Britain, only tobacco was heavily sourced from the U.S. South, and that made up
59

only 2.6% of imports from the U.S.
The right-hand panel of Figure 12 shows the behavior of exports from Britain over
the study period. There was a substantial drop in exports of textiles during the U.S.
Civil War period, which was due entirely to exports of cotton (these were relatively
good years for other textile industries such as wool and linen). However, once textile
exports are removed, there is no evidence of a substantial change in British exports
during the Civil War period.
One may expect that the U.S. Civil War would have had an impact on particular
sectors of the British economy, such as arms or warship production. However, British
producers were prohibited from selling arms to either side during the Civil War. While
it is well known that some producers were able to circumvent these restrictions, in
general they limited the impact that the conflict had on these industries.
One sector of the British economy that was substantially affected was the shipping
industry. To avoid the risk of capture by Southern privateers, many U.S. merchant
ships, which were primarily owned by Northern shipping interests, were transferred to
British ownership during the U.S. Civil War. This resulted in a substantial expansion
of the British merchant fleet, which had impacts in major shipping centers particularly
Liverpool. To account for the potential effect of these changes, in robustness exercises
we explore the impact of dropping Liverpool and London, the two most important
British ports, from our data.

B.2

Responses to the cotton shortage

Contemporary reports offer a mixed view of the impact that the cotton shortage had
on health. Some 19th century observers, such as Arnold (1864), report that there
was a “lessened death-rate throughout nearly the whole of the [cotton] district, and,
generally speaking, the improved health of the people.” In the words of the Registrar
of Wigan, these gains were attributed primarily to “more freedom to breathe the
60

Figure 12: British imports and exports, 1854-1869
Imports to Britain

Exports from Britain

Data from Mitchell (1988).

fresh air, inability to indulge in spirituous liquors, and better nursing of children.”69
On the other hand, there were also reports of negative health effects due to poor
nutrition and crowded living conditions.70 Seasonality features prominently in these
reports, with conditions worsening during the winters, when the shortage of clothing,
bedding, and coal for heating increased individuals’ vulnerability to winter diseases
such as influenza.
69

Quoted from the Report of the Registrar General, 1862. The importance of childcare is highlighted in a number of reports, such as Dr Buchanan’s 1862 Report on the Sanitary Conditions of
the Cotton Towns (Reports from Commissioners, British Parliamentary Papers, Feb-July 1863, p.
304), which discusses the importance of the “greater care bestowed on infants by their unemployed
mothers than by the hired nursery keepers.”. This channel was likely to be particularly important in
the setting we study because female labor force participation rates were high, even among mothers.
Using 1861 Census occupation data, we calculate that nationally, 41% of women over 20 were working and they made up 31% of the labor force. This rate was much higher in major cotton textile
areas. In districts with over 10% of employment in cotton textiles in 1861, the average female labor
force participation rate for women over 20 was 55% and women made up 38% of the labor force.
For comparison, these are similar to the levels achieved in the U.S. in the 1970s and 1980s (Olivetti,
2013), though of course the nature of the work done by women was quite different.
70
Dr Buchanan, in his Report on the Sanitary Conditions of the Cotton Towns, states that “There
is a wan and haggard look about the people...” (Reports from Commissioners, British Parliamentary
Papers, Feb-July 1863, p. 301). Typhus and scurvy, diseases strongly associated with deprivation,
made an appearance in Manchester and Preston in 1862 after being absent for many years, while
the prevalence of measles, whooping cough, and scarlet fever may have also increased (Report on
the Sanitary Conditions of the Cotton Towns, Reports from Commissioners, British Parliamentary
Papers, Feb-July 1863).

61

The response of both individuals and institutions to the recession caused by the
cotton shortage played an important role in influencing health outcomes during this
period. Workers who found themselves unemployed responded, first, by reducing costs
and dipping into any available savings, and later, by pawning or selling items of value,
including furniture, household goods, clothing and bedding (see Watts (1866, p. 214)
and Arnold (1864)). Evidence suggests that many workers exhausted these private
resources before turning to public relief—indeed, some previously proud workers were
even found begging or busking on the streets (Henderson, 1969, p. 98-99). Even
those who remained employed generally suffered substantial reductions in income,
due to working short-time or to the substitution of Indian for U.S. cotton, a practice
which slowed down production and reduced pay, which was largely based on piece
rates. Finally, as discussed briefly in Section 5.2, many left cotton districts in search
of work in other areas.
The recession also generated an unprecedented institutional response aimed at
relieving the suffering in cotton districts. Contemporary reports largely credit public
relief efforts for the fact that no widespread famine occurred during the recession.71
Relief funds came in two main forms. First, funds were provided at the local level
through the Poor Law Boards, the primary system for poor relief in Britain during this
period.72 However, because Poor Law funds were associated with pauperism, provided
funds for only the barest level of subsistence, and required “labour tests” such as rockbreaking, which cotton workers found demeaning, there is evidence that workers tried
to avoid drawing on this stigmatized source of support (Kiesling, 1996; Boyer, 1997).
The second source of funds was a large number of charitable contributions. These
funds could take the form of cash, vouchers, and in-kind assistance, and came from
71

For example, the Registrar General’s report of 1864 states that (p. xv), “that famine did not
bear the fruit which in the history of nations it has too often borne, the spectacle of thousands struck
by fever and death,—is mainly due to that legal provision for the poor which Christian civilization
has established, and to the spontaneous munificence of a people amongst whom the seeds of charity
have been liberally scattered.”
72
These funds were provided by taxes levied on local property owners. See Watts (1866) for a
description of the workings of the Poor Law Boards during the Cotton Famine.

62

voluntary subscriptions from across the country and even as far away as Australia
(Watts, 1866). Direct relief was not the only institutional response. Additional relief
programs included schools for children and adults, such as girl’s sewing schools, as
well as public works employment for unemployed cotton workers, though most public
works employment began in 1863, after the worst of the crisis had passed.73
At the height of the recession in the winter of 1862, reports indicate that roughly
500,000 persons depended on public relief funds, with over 270,000 of these supported
by the local Poor Law boards and an additional 230,000 reliant on the voluntary relief
funds (Arnold, 1864, p. 296). The number of persons supported by public sources
would fall to 264,014 by mid-summer 1863, and by 1865, the number of persons on
relief fell back to where it had been at the beginning of the crisis (Arnold, 1864;
Ellison, 1886).
Despite the best attempts of institutions and individuals to cope with the crisis—
for instance, through short-time work, public relief funds, in-kind transfers, and public
works employment—these efforts were insufficient in the face of such an intense and
unexpected shock. Accordingly, migration became a popular means of adjustment as
many erstwhile cotton operatives left cotton districts in search of work in other areas.

B.3

Data used in the cotton shock analysis

To assess the health consequences of the cotton shortage, we construct a new panel
of annual district-level mortality spanning 1851-1865. These detailed data, which we
digitized from original reports of the Registrar General, include information on both
the age and cause of death for over 600 registration districts covering all of England
73

See Arnold (1864) for a discussion of public works. The availability of public works expanded
substantially starting in the summer of 1863, when Parliament passed the Public Works (Manufacturing Districts) Act. This Act used the central government’s borrowing authority to provide
long-term low interest rate loans to municipal governments so that they could undertake needed
public works projects using unemployed cotton operatives. Most of these projects were aimed at
improvements to roads and water or sewer systems.

63

and Wales. The registration district-level tabulations are the finest geographic level
covering the demography of all of England and Wales annually in this period. Previously available data from the Registrar General’s reports, digitized by Woods (1997),
are reported only at the decade level, and so is insufficiently detailed for our analysis.
For an in-depth discussion of the Registrar General’s data, see Woods (2000).
We also collect information from the Registrar General’s reports on district population and births. The population data are based on information from the census
years 1851, 1861 and 1871, while the births data were collected annually. When calculating mortality rates, we interpolate intercensal population using the Das Gupta
method, per U.S. Census Bureau best practices (see Methodology for the Intercensal
Population and Housing Unit Estimates: 2000 to 2010, U.S. Census Bureau, 2012, as
well as the discussion in Appendix A.2.2).
In our main analysis, we take the entire U.S. Civil War, 1861-1865, as shock period.
As noted above, contemporary reports suggest that most of the adverse impacts of
the U.S. Civil War were concentrated in the first three years of the event, but we focus
primarily on the entire Civil War period so as to avoid concerns that our main results
may be dependent on the choice of shock years that we consider. In particular, as part
of the government response to the cotton shortage, a number of public works projects
focused on sanitary improvements were undertaken during the recession. Most of
these did not come into operation until late in the 1861-1865 period. In addition,
migration occurring during the shock period was also likely to have affected mortality
patterns in the post-shock period.74 Focusing on the pre-shock and shock periods
avoids concerns about how to treat these factors.
74

For instance, if, as contemporary sources suggest, people returned to cotton districts shortly
after the end of the cotton shortage, then there will be mean reversion in the population. Hence,
comparisons of the cotton shortage period with the recovery (i.e., post-1865) period will suffer from
some of the same population mis-measurement issues we highlight in our analysis: namely, the
number of deaths will appear higher during recovery than during the shortage, because population
has rebounded. Thus, this issue amounts to contamination of observations over time rather than
over space. As such, it parallels the problems we raise in making comparisons between cotton and
nearby (i.e., indirectly treated) districts during the cotton shortage period itself.

64

In order to establish the spatial distribution of the shock, we measure the importance of the cotton textile industry in each registration district prior to the U.S.
Civil War. This is done using data from the full-count 1851 Census of Population,
which includes information on occupation, by district, for every person in England
and Wales. Since the location of industries is highly persistent over time, we use
use data from 1851 rather than from 1861 to avoid the possibility that our measure
may be influenced by events occurring in cotton districts at the time of enumeration.
Nevertheless, we provide robustness results using occupation data from the 1861 Census. Using these occupation data, we calculate the number of cotton textile workers
as a share of the total working population for each district, which provides us with
a cross-sectional measure of the importance of the cotton textile industry in each
district on the eve of the shortage.
One factor complicating the use of these data is the change in district boundaries
over time. To deal with this issue, we manually review the boundary changes for
every district over our study period and combine any pair of districts experiencing a
boundary change that resulted in the movement of over 100 people from one to the
other. This leaves us with 539 consistent districts in the main analysis.75 Summary
statistics for these 539 districts appear in Table 7.

75

One area where boundary changes create major issues is in a set of districts around Leeds. Ultimately, to obtain a consistent series we combine several neighboring districts into a single “Greater
Leeds” district.

65

Table 7: Summary Statistics

Panel A: Full sample of districts
(1)
(2)
Mean
Standard
deviation
Average annual deaths (full sample)
809.23
1050.19
Cotton employment share (1851 census)
0.017
0.07
Nearby cotton employment (1851 census) 4569.01 20,175.54
Population (1851 census)
33,260.87 35,019.68

34
11,256
0
0.51
0
158,490
2493 284,126

Panel B: Cotton districts only
1943.89
1546.46
Average annual deaths prior to shock
Average annual deaths during shock
2133.1
1684.46

207
199

(3)
Min

(4)
Max

7957
8900

Full sample includes 8,085 district-year observations spanning 1851-1865 for 539 unique districts. For the statistics that only draw
on district-level data, there are District-level annual death data transcribed from annual reports of the Registrar General. Cotton
employment share is simply the share of the total workforce (in 1851) that was employed in the cotton industry. Nearby cotton
employment refers to the total number of workers in the 0-25 km radius of each district that were employed in the cotton industry in
1851. Nearby cotton employment is set to 0 for cotton districts (those with an 1851 cotton employment share greater than 10 percent).
Pre-shock period is 1851-1860 while the shock period is 1861-1865.

B.4

Additional results on migration during the cotton shock

B.4.0.1

Internal migration Additional evidence on migration during the cotton

shock can be gleaned from the location-of-birth information provided in the census.
Specifically, changes in the share of the population born in one location who are
resident in another can be used to provide evidence on net migration between locations. The location-of-birth data are only available at the county level, so in Figure
13, which is reproduced from Hanlon (2017), we compare the largest cotton textile
county, Lancashire, with the neighboring wool textile county of Yorkshire. The figure
indicates that the number of Yorkshire residents who were born in Lancashire increased substantially from 1861-1871, while the number of Lancashire residents born
in Yorkshire stagnated. This suggests an out-migration of Lancashire residents during
the U.S. Civil War, as well as reduced in-migration to Lancashire.
66

Figure 13: Evidence of migration for Yorkshire and Lancashire from birthplace data

This graph, which is reproduced from Hanlon (2017), presents data on the birthplace of county
residents from the Census of Population.

Next, we consider some results that help us think about how migration patterns
varied across age groups. Figure 14 describes the share of the population in each age
category up to 79 in the cotton districts. The most prominent feature in this graph
is that there was a substantial excess of young workers in the 20-24 age group in
cotton districts in 1861, which had largely disappeared by 1871. This suggests that
the migration response to the shock was strongest among young adults.
67

Figure 14: Share of population in each age group in cotton districts

Population data are from the Census of Population for 1861 and
1871. Cotton districts are identified as those with over 10 percent of workers employed in cotton textile production in the 1851
Census, as in the main analysis.

An alternative view of the same pattern is provided in Figure 15, which compares
the share of population by age group in cotton districts, nearby districts, and all
other districts. This is done for 1861 in the top panel and for 1871 in the bottom
panel. In 1861, cotton districts had a much larger share of young workers, particularly
in the 15-19 and 20-24 age groups, than the other districts. By 1871, most of that
difference had disappeared. It is also worth noting that in 1871, the nearby districts
had substantially more population in the 25-29 and 30-34 age groups than the “allother” districts. This pattern is consistent with the migration of workers who were
in the 15-19 and 20-24 age group and living in cotton districts in 1861, into nearby
districts where, by 1871, they appear in the 25-29 and 30-34 age groups.
68

Figure 15: Share of population in each age group by type of district
1861

1871

Population data are from the Census of Population for 1861 and 1871. Cotton districts are identified
as those with over 10 percent of workers employed in cotton textile production in the 1851 Census.
Nearby districts are those within 25 km of cotton districts.

B.4.0.2

Emigration from Britain Tracking emigration from Britain in response

to the cotton shock is more difficult that tracking internal migration. What information is available was collected at the ports of embarkation and reported in the
69

British Parliamentary Papers. Figure 16 uses data from the 1868 report to the House
of Commons, which provides total emigration numbers for 1853-1867. This graph
shows that the total number of emigrants leaving Great Britain fell almost continuously from 1851-1861 and then increased substantially from 1861-1863. Unfortunately,
we do not know what areas these emigrants were coming from, though we do know
that most emigrants were Irish by birth. The English made up roughly one-third of
emigrants across this period. However, by 1860 there were many Irish and Scottish
living in cotton districts, so international emigrants from cotton districts need not be
English.

Figure 16: Emigration from Britain, 1852-1867

Data from the British Parliamentary Papers (1868, no. 045515).

B.5

Additional results on mortality during the cotton shock

B.5.0.1

Graphical evidence on mortality rates Figure 17 presents results

similar to those shown in Figure 5 of the main text, but using mortality rates rather
than mortality.
70

Figure 17: Mortality rates during the cotton shortage
Cotton, nearby and control districts

Combining cotton and nearby districts

Mortality data from the reports of the Registrar General. Data cover all of England & Wales.
Population denominators are based on Census data and iterpolated using information on
births and deaths from the Registrar General’s reports using the Das Gupta method. Cotton
districts are those with more than 10% of employment in cotton textile production in 1851.
Nearby districts are non-cotton districts within 25 km of the cotton districts.

B.5.0.2

Alternative measures of nearby cotton exposure Table 8 considers

several alternatives to identifying nearby cotton districts. In Column 1 we add to our
baseline specification variables capturing the effect of cotton employment in the 25-50
km, 50-75km, and 75-100 km bins. There we see that the effects are concentrated
in the 0-25 km bin. In Column 2 we replicate this specification; however, instead of
using log(nearby cotton employment) we use a series of indicators for whether the
district was within 0-25 km, 25-50 km, 50-75 km, or 75-100 km of a cotton district.
Further, in Columns 3 and 4 we consider continuous measures of cotton exposure.
Specifically, for each non-cotton district, we calculate the distance to all other districts
and then discount cotton employment for further away districts. In aggregate, these
results suggest that those more proximate to cotton areas saw an increase in mortality,
which is consistent with the graphical and contemporary evidence on the patterns of
migration.
71

Table 8: Alternative measures of nearby cotton exposure
Dependent variable is ln(MORT)
1[Cotton district] ×
Cotton shortage

(1)
0.059***
(0.022)

0-25 km exposure ×
Cotton shortage

0.012***
(0.002)

25-50 km exposure ×
Cotton shortage

-0.004
(0.003)

50-75 km exposure ×
Cotton shortage

-0.001
(0.003)

75-100 km exposure ×
Cotton shortage

0.004
(0.003)

(2)
0.031
(0.019)

1[0-25 km of cot. dist.] ×
Cotton shortage

0.077***
(0.024)

1[25-50 km of cot. dist.] ×
Cotton shortage

0.054***
(0.018)

1[50-75 km of cot. dist.] ×
Cotton shortage

0.039**
(0.018)

1[75-100 km of cot. dist.] ×
Cotton shortage

0.051***
(0.015)

Nearby cot. emp. discounted as
exp(-distance/10000) × Cotton shortage

(3)
0.241***
(0.056)

(4)
0.050**
(0.020)

1.221***
(0.287)

Nearby cot. emp. discounted as
1/(distance×10) × Cotton shortage

2.378***
(0.461)

District effects
Year effects
Observations
R-squared

Yes
Yes
8,085
0.209

Yes
Yes
8,085
0.206

Yes
Yes
8,085
0.201

Yes
Yes
8,085
0.205

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered at the district level in parentheses. Data cover 539 districts from 1851-1865.
Downturn period is 1861-1865. Cotton districts are defined as those with a cotton employment share greater than 10%. Nearby cotton
exposure is calculated as the log of (1 + total cotton employment in other districts that lie within 25km). This variable is set to zero
for cotton districts. Mortality data are from annual reports of the Registrar General.

72

B.5.0.3

Adding district-level time trends Table 9 presents results including

district-specific time trends. Relative to Table 2, we see that all three specifications
reveal similar patterns, and in fact, these patterns are most consistent with the specification that omits population in Table 2.

Table 9: Accounting for spillovers to nearby districts with time trends

Dependent variable:
Cotton district × shortage
Nearby cotton emp. × shortage

Ln(MORT. RATE)
(1)

Ln(MORTALITY)
(2)

Ln(MORTALITY)
(3)

0.079***
(0.017)
0.007***
(0.002)

0.069***
(0.016)
0.007***
(0.002)
-0.385**
(0.170)

0.072***
(0.016)
0.007***
(0.002)

8,085
0.239

8,085
0.421

8,085
0.420

Ln(Pop)
Observations
R-squared

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by district. Data cover 539 districts
from 1851-1865. All regressions include district fixed effects, year fixed effects, and district-specific
time trends. Shock period is 1861-1865. Cotton districts are defined as those with a cotton
employment share greater than 10%.

B.5.0.4

Results weighted by population A number of papers in this literature

weight their results by population, largely because the outcome of interest is given in
rates. Given our concerns regarding the mis-measurement of intercensal population,
our main specifications do not weight by population. However, in Table 10, we present
results weighted by population, and show that although point estimates are slightly
smaller here than in our main results, the qualitative story remains the same.
73

Table 10: Weighted results accounting for spillovers to nearby districts

Dependent variable:
Cotton district × shortage
Nearby cotton emp. × shortage

Ln(MORT. RATE)
(1)

Ln(MORTALITY)
(2)

Ln(MORTALITY)
(3)

-0.018*
(0.011)
0.003*
(0.002)

-0.009
(0.012)
0.004**
(0.002)
0.836***
(0.048)

0.038*
(0.022)
0.011***
(0.003)

8,085
0.239

8,085
0.421

8,085
0.420

Ln(Pop)
Observations
R-squared

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by district. Data cover 539 districts
from 1851-1865. All regressions include district fixed effects, year fixed effects, and are weighted
by population. Shock period is 1861-1865. Cotton districts are defined as those with a cotton
employment share greater than 10%.

B.5.0.5

Robustness of the counter-cyclical result Table 11 presents some

additional robustness results for the cotton shock example. We focus on results that
include variables capturing the impact of the cotton shock in nearby districts, which is
our preferred specification. In the first column we impose a population density cutoff
which limits the set of comparison districts to be more similar to the cotton districts,
which tended to be relatively dense urban areas. Specifically, we use a population
density cutoff of 0.89, which is the minimum density among cotton districts. In the
second column we drop London, Liverpool, Leeds and Manchester from the data.
London is a clear outlier because of its size and status as the capital. Liverpool is
dropped because as the main port for cotton shipments it may have also been affected
by the shock. Leeds is dropped because it experienced several border changes during
the 1861-1871 decade. Manchester is dropped because it was an outlier relative to
other cotton districts; it was the largest cotton town and the main market for the
industry. In Column 3, we use a shorter pre-shock period. In Column 4 we define
cotton districts as those with an employment share greater than 5%, and in Column 5
74

we define cotton districts based on 1861 Census data. Both columns show an increase
in mortality for both cotton and nearby districts, however, the increase for cotton
districts is not statistically significant when we define cotton districts as those with
greater than 5% employment share.
Table 11: Assessing the robustness of the cotton shortage results
Dependent variable is ln(MORT)
(1)
Population
density
>0.089
1[Cotton district] ×
Cotton shortage

0.048**
(0.020)

(2)
No London,
Liverpool,
Leeds, or
Manchester
0.039**
(0.018)

0-25 km exposure ×
Cotton shortage

0.009***
(0.002)
Yes
Yes
7,905
0.212

District effects
Year effects
Observations
R-squared

(3)
(4)
(5)
Data from
Cotton dist
Cotton emp.
1856-65
defined as
based on
only
emp. share>5% 1861 census
0.067***
(0.017)

0.020
(0.018)

0.051***
(0.019)

0.009***
(0.002)

0.011***
(0.002)

0.010***
(0.002)

0.011***
(0.002)

Yes
Yes
7,680
0.197

Yes
Yes
5,390
0.272

Yes
Yes
8,085
0.207

Yes
Yes
8,085
0.205

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered at the district-level in parentheses. Data cover 539 districts from 1851-1865.
Downturn period is 1861-1865. Cotton districts are defined as those with a cotton employment share greater than 10%. Nearby cotton
exposure is calculated as the log of (1 + total cotton employment in other districts that lie within 25km). This variable is set to zero
for cotton districts. Mortality data are from annual reports of the Registrar General.

B.5.0.6

Alternative standard error adjustments Table 12 presents estimated

results corresponding to Table 1 in the main text, but using two additional approaches
to dealing with standard errors. In this table, the parentheses contain standard errors
clustered by district, which is the approach used in the main text. This approach
is the most similar to the one taken in most existing studies in this literature. In
square brackets, we report standard errors clustered by county, which is the next
largest geographic unit. There are 55 counties in our data. In the curly brackets,
we present standard errors that allow for serial correlation using the approach from
Conley (1999), up to a cutoff distance of 25 km. All three approaches yield fairly similar results, though allowing spatial correlation does increase the confidence intervals
75

somewhat.
Table 12: Assessing the importance of standard error adjustments
Dependent variable:

Ln(MR)
(1)

Ln(MORT)
(2)

Ln(MORT)
(3)

Cotton district × shortage

-0.023
(0.011)
[0.010]
{0.020}

-0.013
(0.012)
[0.012]
{0.020}

0.049
(0.019)
[0.026]
{0.020}

Cotton emp. within
0-25km × shortage

0.002
(0.001)
[0.002]
{0.001}

0.003
(0.001)
[0.002]
{0.001}

0.011
(0.002)
[0.003]
{0.002}

Ln(Pop)

-0.857**
(0.029)
[0.028]
{0.032}

District effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Standard errors clustered by district in parentheses. Standard errors clustered
by county in brackets. 25 km spatially corrected standard errors in curly brackets. Data cover 539 districts from 1851-1865. Downturn period is 1861-1865.
Cotton districts are defined as those with a cotton employment share greater
than 10%.

B.5.0.7

Contribution of changes in fertility and infant mortality to total

mortality Although we treat fertility responses and age-specific mortality effects
as beyond the scope of this paper, we report these two results here so that we may
comment on their potential contribution to our overall finding of counter-cyclical total
mortality in the cotton shortage setting. Specifically, we might wonder if changes in
fertility and infant mortality rates changed the size and composition of the population
enough to raise the average mortality risk of the population, and so drive the observed
rise in mortality during the cotton shortage.
Table 13 presents results on the effects of the cotton shortage on the log of births
(which are observed annually), and on the infant mortality rate (or IMR, given as
76

the number of infant deaths, observed annually, per 1,000 live births). Crucially,
the infant mortality rate abstracts from migration bias due to mis-measurement of
the denominator, since in every year, the denominator is observed rather than constructed. We find that the cotton shortage resulted in an insignificant increase in
births in cotton districts, and a significant increase in births in nearby districts. This
is consistent with layoffs in a heavily female industry, and with the short-distance
migration of young families from cotton districts to nearby areas. We also find that
the downturn had a beneficial impact on infant health, significantly lowering the infant mortality rate in cotton districts. This, too, is consistent with the substitution
effects of maternal time dominating any adverse income effects due to job loss, since
in this period infant health interventions were more time-consuming than they were
financially costly.
These results suggest that a cotton district saw a roughly exp(0.0247) = 2.50%
increase in the number of infants born during the downturn. Taking into account the
regression’s constant (6.656), this is equivalent to roughly 19.44 additional births each
year. Our preferred results in Table 2 suggest that a cotton district saw a exp(0.0494)
= 5.06% increase in total mortality during the downturn, equivalent to roughly 26.56
additional deaths each year (based on a control-district baseline of exp(6.162) deaths).
Given the estimated infant mortality rate in cotton districts during the downturn
(135.5 - 5.141 = 130.359 infant deaths per 1,000 births), this would mean that the
increase in cotton-district fertility implies roughly 2.53 extra deaths per year, or less
than 10% of the total annual increase in cotton-district mortality during the downturn.
What’s more, since infant mortality rates in this period were much higher than
mortality rates for young children, it is unlikely that this cohort, whether through
their larger initial cohort size or their higher rate of cohort survivorship, would have
been large enough to drive the total mortality result as they moved through the age
distribution in the few years that followed.
Thus, to sum up, while endogenous fertility responses may contribute to our main
77

results on the adverse mortality effects of the cotton shortage, they explain very little
of this increase in total mortality.
Table 13: Assessing the effect on fertility and the infant mortality rate
Dependent variable:

Ln(Births)
(1)

IMR
(2)

0.0247
(0.0168)

-5.141***
(1.778)

0.00919***
(0.00214)

0.351
(0.251)

6.656***
(0.00487)

135.5***
(0.837)

Cotton district × shortage
Cotton emp. within 0-25km × shortage
Constant

District effects
Yes
Yes
Year effects
Yes
Yes
Observations
8,085
8,085
R-squared
0.264
0.066
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered at the district level in
parentheses. Data cover 539 districts from 1851-1865. Downturn period is 1861-1865.
Cotton districts are defined as those with a cotton employment share greater than
10%. The infant mortality rate (IMR) is given as the number of infant deaths per
1,000 live births.

C

Appendix: The Appalachian coal boom

C.1

Data used in the coal boom analysis

The mortality data used in our analysis of the coal boom come from the Bailey
et al. (2016) files deposited at ICPSR. These files contain annual county-level data
on mortality.76 In addition to deaths, the Bailey et al. (2016) data also provide the
number of births, which we use when constructing intercensal population estimates.
The second type of data used in our study is a set of population data from the
Census. These data are available at the county level for every decade. For intercensal
76

Our analysis uses the location of residence mortality data.

78

years, we generate estimated population values using the Das Gupta method, which
uses the previous and next census population values for each county as well as birth
and death information.77
In the main analysis we use data starting covering 1950-1977. Summary statistics
for the main variables used in the analysis across these years are presented in Table
14.

Table 14: Summary statistics for variables used in the main coal boom analysis
Variable
Mortality rate (per 1000)
Log mortality rate
Mortality
Log mortality
Population
Log population
N

Mean
10.239
2.307
432.16
5.734
43,189
10.335

Std. Dev.
1.93
0.201
411.531
0.793
40,276
0.803
7,672

Min.
3.568
1.272
43
3.761
8,008
8.988

Max.
19.568
2.974
2681
7.894
231,122
12.351

The interpolated population values used in the main analysis were generated by
the authors using census population data together with births and deaths; no corrections were made for observed migration, since we do not have access to this data.
The Census Bureau starts to provide annual county-level population estimates (i.e.,
adjusting for observed migration) starting in 1970. In Figure 18, we compare our
intercensal population estimates for the coal and control counties to those published
by the Census Bureau. This figure shows that our estimates (without adjusting for
migration) are quite similar to those produced by the Census Bureau (which use tax
and similar records to adjust for migration in the manner described in Appendix
A.2.2).
77

In the few instances in our sample where mortality or population data are missing in Bailey
et al. (2016), we supplement this with data from the Centers for Disease Control, such that we have
fully balanced temporal and spatial coverage within our sample.

79

Figure 18: Comparing our population estimates to the best-available estimates produced by the U.S. Census Bureau

In addition to the data used in the main analysis, we have also collected mortality
data by age group. Unfortunately, however, we have only found these data at the
county level starting in 1968, so we do not have a long enough pre-shock period
to replicate the analysis that we applied to the total mortality data. Instead, in
Appendix C.3 we present graphs describing the evolution of mortality within age
categories from 1968 through the coal boom period.
Table 15 describes mortality rates by age group. We focus on mortality rates in
1970 in order to take advantage of the census population figures in that year and we
use only data from the counties used in the main analysis to construct these figures.
The main take-away from Table 15 is that mortality rates among those in their 20s
and 30s were much lower than for older age groups. This is an important fact because,
as discussed in the next appendix section, this group was the most likely to migrate
in response to the coal boom.

Table 15: Mortality rate by age group in 1970 (per thousand)
0-4
4.821

5-9
0.43

10-14
0.387

15-19
0.994

20-24
1.405

25-34
1.475

80

35-44
3.054

45-54
7.385

55-64
17.454

65-74
38.554

Over 75
102.823

C.2

Additional results on migration during the coal boom

Figure 19 presents a map showing the difference in net migration by county in the
1970-80 decade compared to the 1960-70 decade including more surrounding states
than the map in Figure 7. The additional states we include here are Maryland,
Tennessee, and Virginia. Dark colors indicate counties that experienced an increase
in in-migration in the coal boom decade, 1970-1980, relative to the decade before.

Figure 19: Difference in net migration with additional states

Figure 20 presents maps showing net migration based on the error of closure in the
decade before the coal boom, the decade covering most of the boom, and the decade
after the boom. Light colors indicate counties experiencing net out-migration. We
can see that the coal counties experienced a clear pattern of out-migration during the
decades before and after the boom, but that this pattern of out-migration completely
disappeared during the 1970-1980 period.
81

Figure 20: Estimated net migration before, during and after the coal boom
Two decades before the coal boom – 1950-1960

Decade before the coal boom – 1960-1970

During the coal boom – 1970-1980

After the coal boom – 1980-1990

Next, we look at the distribution of migrants into the coal counties by age groups.
Figure 21 plots the percentage change in population in the coal and control counties
between 1970 and 1980. This shows that population growth in the coal counties
during this period was concentrated in the 25-34 age group. While this age group
also experienced growth in the control counties, this was less rapid than in the coal
counties. Moreover, in terms of numbers, the change in population aged 25-34 in the
82

coal counties accounts for 100,259 people out of a total population increase of 180,903
during the 1970-1980 decade. The 15-24 year old age group accounted for another
43,870 of this increase. Thus, a substantial majority of the population increase in the
coal counties from 1970-1980 was concentrated among young adults.
Figure 21: Percentage change in population by age group

C.3

Additional results on mortality during the coal boom

C.3.0.1

Alternative standard error adjustments In the main text we present

results with standard errors that are clustered by county to allow for serial correlation.
In Table 16 we present alternative standard errors that allow for spatial correlation
between counties within 100 km of each other, following Conley (1999), and serial
correlation for up to two years on each side of the observation year, following Newey
& West (1987). We focus only on results with county time trends because of evidence
that the parallel trends assumption is violated when time trends are not included.
These alternative standard errors are presented in square brackets. In general these
standard errors are smaller than those obtained when clustering by county, so we
present the more conservative clustered standard errors in the main text.
83

Table 16: Estimated effects of the coal boom with alternative standard errors
Dependent variable:

Ln(MR)
(1)

Ln(MORT)
(2)

Ln(MORT)
(3)

Coal county × boom

-0.0375
(0.00958)
[0.00858]

-0.00306
(0.00906)
[0.00712]
0.267
(0.0427)
[0.0332]

0.00947
(0.0104)
[0.00780]

Ln(Pop)

Standard errors clustered by county in parenthesis. Spatial
standard errors allowing correlation for counties within 100 km
and serial correlation up to two lags in square brackets. All
regressions include county fixed effects, year effects and county
time trends. N=7,672.

Table 17: Coal boom regression results with additional control counties
Dependent variable:

Ln(MR)
(1)

Ln(MORT)
(2)

Ln(MORT)
(3)

Coal county × boom

-0.0288***
(0.00958)

0.00253
(0.0102)
0.181
(0.164)

0.00947
(0.0103)

Ln(Pop)

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by
county. All regressions include county fixed effects, year effects
and county time trends. N=12,330.

C.3.0.2

Results with additional control counties Table 17 presents results

with additional control counties. Specifically, we add to the original BMS sample set
of counties in three neighboring states, Maryland, Tennessee, and Virginia. We focus
only on results with county time trends because of evidence that the parallel trends
assumption is violated when time trends are not included.

C.3.0.3

Alternative definitions of coal counties Table 18 explores the ro-

bustness of our results to alternative definitions of coal counties. We consider two
alternative definitions—those with over 2.5 billion tons of reserves, and those with over
84

Table 18: Coal boom regression results with alternative coal-county definitions

Coal counties are those with more
than 2.5 billion tons of reserves
(42 coal counties)

Coal counties are those with
10% of earnings from coal in 1969
(32 coal counties)

Dependent variable:

Ln(MR)
(1)

Ln(MORT)
(2)

Ln(MORT)
(3)

Ln(MR)
(4)

Ln(MORT)
(5)

Ln(MORT)
(6)

Coal county × boom

-0.0347***
(0.0106)

-0.00739
(0.00988)
0.267***
(0.0437)

0.00258
(0.0108)

-0.0478***
(0.0124)

0.0234
(0.0151)
0.248***
(0.0468)

0.0469***
(0.0156)

Ln(Pop)

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by county. All regressions include county
fixed effects, year effects and county time trends. N=7,672.

10% of earnings coming from coal in 1969, as in BMS. The results in columns 1-3 are
qualitatively identical to the results in the main text. When we use an earnings-based
definition, (Columns 4-6) the main change is in results obtained using log mortality
as the outcome without including log population as a control, in Column 6, where
we see evidence that mortality may have increased during the recession. However, it
is worth noting that this increase is sensitive to the inclusion of time trends; without time trends the coefficient obtained from the specification in Column 6 is much
smaller and not statistically significant.

C.3.0.4

Weighted results Table 19 presents results from regressions in which

each observation is weighted by county population. Though weighting is typical in
many of the studies in this literature, we do not weight our main regression results
due to reasons discussed in Section 4. However, as a comparison between Table 19
and Table 4 in the main text shows, our decision not to weight our main results does
not substantially alter our findings.

C.3.0.5

Alternative boom periods The next set of results looks at alternative

definitions of the coal boom period. While in our main analysis we follow Black
85

Table 19: Weighted regression results for the coal boom
Dependent variable:

Ln(MR)

Ln(MORT)

Ln(MORT)

Panel A: Without county time trends
(1a)
(2a)
(3a)
Coal county × boom

0.106***
(0.0163)

0.0191*
(0.0107)
0.347***
(0.0374)

Ln(Pop)

Panel B: With county time trends
(1b)
(2b)
Coal county × boom

-0.0406***
(0.0106)

-0.00233
(0.00882)
0.275***
(0.0339)

Ln(Pop)

-0.0274*
(0.0140)

(3b)
0.0122
(0.0108)

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by county.
All regressions include county fixed effects and year effects. N=7,672.
Regressions are weighted by interpolated county population.

et al. (2005) in treating 1970-1977 as the main coal boom period, a look at the price
data shown in Figure 6 suggests that one could alternatively think of the boom as
lasting well into the 1980s. In Table 20 we look at results using two alternative
definitions of the boom period, one stretching to 1982, when prices begin to fall, and
the second lasting until 1988, when coal prices had returned near to their pre-boom
level. In general, we can see that these extended periods deliver results that are
similar to those obtained in the main text. In particular, we continue to find that
results are highly sensitive to assumptions about population. The main differences in
these results is that, when the period is extended to 1988, our preferred specification
in Column 6b provides some evidence that mortality increased in the coal counties.
It is interesting to note that we don’t see any similar pattern when we only include
years 1970-1982, which suggests that this effect is being driven entirely by the “bust”
period from 1982-1988.
86

Table 20: Coal boom results using alternative boom periods

Boom period:
Dep. variable:

Coal county×boom

Ln(MR)

1970-1982
Ln(MORT)

(1a)

(2a)

0.0909***
(0.0169)

0.0120
(0.0122)
0.351***
(0.0293)

(1b)

(2b)

-0.0360***
(0.0094)

-0.00023
(0.0092)
0.216***
(0.0389)

Ln(Pop)

Coal county×boom
Ln(Pop)

Ln(MORT)

Ln(MR)

1970-1988
Ln(MORT)
Ln(MORT)

Panel A: Without county time trends
(3a)
(4a)
(5a)
-0.0306**
(0.0132)

0.0932***
(0.0178)

0.0134
(0.0137)
0.421***
(0.0277)

Panel B: With county time trends
(3b)
(4b)
(5b)
0.0096
(0.0103)

-0.0147*
(0.0085)

0.0107
(0.0088)
0.205***
(0.0385)

(6a)
-0.0445***
(0.0152)

(6b)
0.0173*
(0.0094)

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by county. All regressions include county fixed
effects and year effects. In Columns 1-3, N=9,042. In Column 4-6, N=10,686.

C.3.0.6

Mortality by age group Figure 22 presents graphs showing the evolu-

tion of log mortality for different age groups in the coal counties and control counties.
In each graph we plot log mortality for the two series on separate axis, since there
are more control counties with a larger overall population, but we use scales covering
the same range for comparability.
For children, we can see that the number of deaths are falling in both locations although there is an increase in deaths around 1971 that is more pronounced in the coal
counties. One likely explanation for this is that births in the coal counties increased in
the early 1970s relative to the nearby counties. For young adults mortality is quite flat
and similar across the two groups of counties, though there is some evidence of higher
mortality in the coal counties towards the end of the boom and in the following years.
Among working age adults over 24, the number of deaths was smoothly decreasing
in both sets of counties across the study period, though this decline was somewhat
more rapid in the coal counties. Among older adults, both locations experienced a
87

Figure 22: Mortality by age categories in the coal and control counties
Children 0-14

Young adults 15-24

Prime age adults 25-54

Older adults over 55

brief increase in mortality from 1972-1974. This timing corresponds to the recession
of 1973-75 caused by the oil embargo and provides further suggestive evidence that
mortality may increase, rather than decrease, during recessions, particularly for the
elderly. The number of deaths also increased in both locations starting in the 1980s.
Overall, there does not appear to be any clear changes in relative mortality between
the treatment and control counties during the coal boom period.78

78

As mentioned earlier in the appendix, it is not possible to run reliable econometric analysis
with age-specific data on the coal boom, since age-disaggregated mortality data are only available
beginning in 1968, leaving us with a very short pre-boom period.

88

