                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              SOCIAL SECURITY AND SAVING:
                                       AN UPDATE

                                           Sita Slavov
                                          Devon Gorry
                                           Aspen Gorry
                                        Frank N. Caliendo

                                       Working Paper 23506
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23506


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2017




This research was supported by the Mercatus Center at George Mason University. The findings
and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors. We thank Muzhdah Karimi for
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23506.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Sita Slavov, Devon Gorry, Aspen Gorry, and Frank N. Caliendo. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Security and Saving: An Update
Sita Slavov, Devon Gorry, Aspen Gorry, and Frank N. Caliendo
NBER Working Paper No. 23506
June 2017
JEL No. D14,H31,H55

                                          ABSTRACT

Typical neoclassical life-cycle models predict that Social Security has a large and negative effect
on private savings. We review this theoretical literature by constructing a model where
individuals face uninsurable longevity risk and differ by wage earnings, while Social Security
provides benefits as a life annuity with higher replacement rates for the poor. We use the model
to generate numerical examples that confirm the standard result. Using several benefit and tax
changes from the 1970s and 1980s as natural experiments, we investigate the empirical
relationship between Social Security and private savings and find little to support the strong
predictions from the theoretical model. We explore possible reasons for the divergence between
theoretical predictions and empirical findings.

Sita Slavov                                      Aspen Gorry
Schar School of Policy and Government            Department of Economics and Finance
George Mason University                          Utah State University
3351 Fairfax Drive, MS 3B1                       Logan, UT 84322-3565
Arlington, VA 22201                              aspen.gorry@gmail.com
and NBER
sslavov@gmu.edu                                  Frank N. Caliendo
                                                 Department of Economics and Finance
Devon Gorry                                      Utah State University
Department of Economics and Finance              Logan, UT 84322-3565
Utah State University                            frank.caliendo@usu.edu
3565 Old Main Hill
Logan, UT 84322-3565
devon.gorry@usu.edu
    I.         Introduction



         Projections by the Social Security Administration suggest that the Old Age and Survivors Insurance

(OASI) trust fund will be depleted in 2035. To shore up the program’s finances, some policy makers

propose cutting benefits relative to current law. However, other policy makers express concern that

benefit cuts will harm lower-income retirees and instead propose expanding the Social Security system

by increasing benefits for large segments of the population, with these increases funded by raising payroll

taxes. Because Social Security requires contributions from workers and provides benefits during

retirement, theory predicts that expanding the program will crowd out private saving for individuals who

are not liquidity constrained. Besides retirement income, Social Security also provides life insurance in the

form of benefits paid to the dependent children of deceased workers. Theory predicts that expanding

Social Security will also crowd out private life insurance purchases among those who are not liquidity

constrained. In this paper, we review the existing theory and then explore the empirical evidence for its

predictions.

         Understanding the effect of Social Security on private saving and life insurance holdings is

important for a few reasons. First, behavioral responses are an important factor in evaluating how well

Social Security meets its objectives. Any potential welfare gains from mandatory saving and risk sharing

through Social Security depend on the degree to which households attempt to unwind their Social Security

contributions through reductions in private saving and insurance holdings. For instance, Hosseini (2015)

shows that the large welfare gains from mandatory annuitization are mostly washed out by the distortions

that it causes to the equilibrium price of annuity contracts, as adverse selection causes high mortality

individuals to exit the private annuity market. Second, the impact of changes in Social Security rules to

maintain fiscal solvency in the face of a demographic shock depend on how individuals respond (Kitao

2014; Bagchi 2016). Finally, if Social Security causes large reductions in personal savings, then growth in
the generosity of the Social Security system in recent decades may help to explain the precipitous decline

in the aggregate personal saving rate in the U.S. from near 10% in the 1980s to close to zero in more

recent years (Parker 1999; Gokhale, Kotlikoff, and Sabelhaus 1996).

        To motivate our empirical work, we provide a brief review of the predictions of a basic,

neoclassical life-cycle model. We use a variant of Yaari's (1965) classic model to review the theoretical

effect of Social Security on private savings by income class. The model features rational individuals who

face uninsurable longevity risk and differ by their level of earnings. Social Security provides longevity

insurance because it pays benefits as a life annuity. Moreover, it redistributes wealth from high to low

wage earners because the benefit-earning rule is progressive. We document that Social Security has a

large effect on private asset holdings at retirement among all income groups below the tax cap.

        Next, we empirically examine the impact of plausibly exogenous variation created by the 1977

and 1983 Social Security reforms, as well as a reduction in the life insurance value of Social Security that

was phased in between August 1981 and April 1985. The 1977 reform reduced benefits for individuals

born in 1917 and later, but not for individuals born in 1916 and earlier. The 1983 reform increased payroll

taxes for self-employed individuals relative to wage earners; it also increased the full retirement age for

individuals born in 1938 and later. An increase in the full retirement age is equivalent to a cut in Social

Security wealth. The reduction in the life insurance value of Social Security comes from a 1981 reform that

eliminated dependents benefits for college students aged 18-21 beginning in 1982 with a phase out period

completed in 1985.

        There is a large macroeconomic literature that assesses the impact of Social Security (and Social

Security reform) on private savings. This literature uses calibrated, dynamic general equilibrium models

(e.g., Blau 2016; Conesa and Garriga 2008; and Kitao 2014). Relative to the macroeconomic literature that

focuses primarily on aggregate savings behavior, our review of theoretical predictions focuses on the

differential impact of Social Security on private savings across different income groups.
        Numerous microeconometric studies have also estimated the relationship between Social

Security wealth (or pension wealth more generally) and private saving. Some early studies use aggregate

time series data (e.g., Feldstein 1974, 1996; Leimer and Lesnoy 1982), while others use micro data

(Feldstein and Pellechio 1979; Diamond and Hausman 1984; Bernheim 1987; Bernheim and Levin 1989;

Gale 1998; Gustman and Steinmeier 1998; Kotlikoff 1979). These studies find mixed results. Some find

that Social Security wealth crowds out private saving almost one for one; others suggest that Social

Security wealth reduces private saving somewhat, but not one for one, so that total household saving

(public plus private) increases in the presence of Social Security.

        One shortcoming of this approach – which relies on examining the correlation between Social

Security wealth and private saving, after controlling for observables – is that there are likely numerous

unobservable factors that influence both Social Security wealth and saving preferences. Our contribution

is to use plausibly exogenous policy-induced variation in Social Security wealth to estimate the impact on

saving. Similar studies have been done for other countries (e.g., Attanasio and Brugiavini 2003; Aguila

2011; Feng, He, and Sato 2011; Attanasio and Rohwedder 2003), and these studies have found that public

pensions tend to crowd out private savings in Italy, Mexico, China, and the United Kingdom. However,

evidence for the U.S. is much more limited. Engelhardt and Kumar (2011) examine the impact of defined

benefit pension wealth on non-pension saving for the U.S., using variation in the benefit accumulation

rules for such plans. They find that increases in pension wealth reduce non-pension saving. However, they

do not focus on Social Security.

        In contrast to previous microeconometric studies based on policy-induced variation in public and

private pension wealth, we find very little evidence that policy-induced variation in Social Security has

affected private saving. There is some evidence that payroll tax increases in 1983 may have reduced

saving, but there is not much evidence that the benefit changes enacted in 1977 and 1983 had an impact
on saving. We also find no evidence that the elimination of dependent benefits for college students

reduced life insurance holdings.

          We explore several possible explanations for our lack of a finding. First, our standard errors are

large, so we cannot rule out the possibility that there is an economically meaningful effect. Second, it is

possible that individuals chose to delay retirement, rather than save more, in response to the benefit cuts

that we study. Third, it is possible that individuals simply lack knowledge about their Social Security

benefits and were unaware of the policy changes. Fourth, the timing of information about the policy

changes could play a role in determining when behavioral changes are observed in the data. If the policy

changes were anticipated in advance, behavior may have adjusted well before the policy changes were

implemented. Finally, expectations may also affect the timing of behavioral responses. For example,

Ricardian equivalence suggests that individuals fully anticipate policy changes designed to restore

actuarial balance to the Social Security program. Thus, adjustment to these policy changes may occur long

before they are implemented or even discussed publicly.

          The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews the predictions from a

standard neoclassical life cycle model. Section III presents our empirical methods. Section IV presents our

empirical results. Section V provides a discussion exploring why the empirical findings differ from the

theoretical results. Section VI concludes.



    II.       Brief review of predictions from a standard, neoclassical life-cycle model



          This section reviews a standard version of a life-cycle consumption savings model to understand

the theoretical implications of Social Security on private savings. Before we begin, we emphasize that

there is no such thing as the neoclassical life-cycle model; instead, it is a framework for analyzing the

effects of public policies on decision-making and welfare. The framework assumes that individuals behave
rationally given the risks and policies that they face. Beyond this assumption, we do not attempt to include

every feature that has been considered in the large literature using such models to study consumption

and savings behavior. We focus on a stylized setting where private insurance is missing, capital markets

are complete, and labor supply is inelastic.

        Age is continuous and is indexed by . At each moment in time an infinitely divisible cohort of unit

mass is born. Individuals are born at = 0 and die no later than = 1. The probability of surviving to age

 from the perspective of age 0 is ( ), where (0) = 1 and (1) = 0. Individuals receive an exogenous

and constant flow of wage income       up to the exogenous retirement date      , and they receive constant

Social Security benefits ( ) in the form of a life annuity after retirement. Wage income is taxed at the

Social Security tax rate . Individuals differ only by wage income. Each individual draws their income from

the p.d.f. ( ) with support [0,1].

        An individual's consumption is ( ) and flow utility from consumption is ( ( )), where ′ > 0

and   ′′ < 0. Annuity markets are completely closed and saving is done in a zero-interest storage

technology ( ). The assets of the deceased are bequeathed to survivors. Bequest income per new born

  is collected at = 0. Factor prices are fixed because we focus on a small, open economy.

        We study stationary equilibria in which individuals behave rationally in an environment where

they face longevity risk, the Social Security budget is balanced, and the transmission of wealth across

generations is consistent in the sense that the aggregate assets of the deceased equal the inheritances of

the living. We will compare equilibrium assets at retirement with and without Social Security.



        a.        Equilibrium



        At = 0 individuals learn their wage type      , and they take as given , ( ), and        and choose

( ( ), ( ))   ∈[ , ]   according to:
                                                        ( ) ( ( ))       ,


         subject to

                                   ( ) = (1 − ) − ( ),                   ∈ [0,       ],

                                       ( ) = ( ) − ( ),              ∈ [ , 1],

                                             (0) = , (1) = 0.



         The Social Security system runs a balanced budget and hence the tax rate               must satisfy the

government's budget constraint for a given benefit-earning rule ( )




                                           ( )          =      ( ) ( )           ,




where     is the ratio of workers to retirees,      ≡       ( )      /       ( ) . There are no inefficiencies in

financing Social Security. The government can store wealth at zero interest just like the private market.

However, Social Security pays an above-market implicit rate of return because it pools the contributions

of the deceased to pay an annuity to the living.

         The inheritances of the living must equal the assets of the deceased. We follow the standard

assumption that bequest income is spread evenly across the surviving population. Equilibrium bequest

income     solves the following implicit function




                                   =          ( ) − ( )           ( | , )                 .
         For a given income distribution         ( ) and Social Security benefit rule                   ( ), a Stationary

Equilibrium consists of (i) individual consumption and saving decisions { ∗ ( | ),             ∗
                                                                                                   ( | )} for each wage

                                                                                                    ∗
type    that satisfy individuals' optimization problem, (ii) a Social Security tax rate                 that balances the

                                                                              ∗
government's aggregate budget constraint, and (iii) bequest income                that balances the inheritances of

newborns with the assets of the deceased.



         b.      Numerical Example



         The parameters that we need to select in order to generate numerical examples are the

retirement age        , the survival function ( ) which in turn pins down the ratio of workers to retirees ,

the utility function ( ), the wage density ( ), and the Social Security benefit rule ( ). Once these

parameters are chosen, we can solve for the equilibrium quantities { ∗ ( | ),            ∗
                                                                                             ( | ),      ∗
                                                                                                             ,   ∗
                                                                                                                     }.

         We imagine an individual who works from age 25 to age 65, and dies no later than age 100. Hence,

    = 40/75. We follow Caliendo, Gorry, and Slavov (2016) and set the unconditional survival probabilities

                  .
to ( ) = 1 −           .1 We use CRRA utility ( ) =         /(1 − ) with       = 3.

         The Social Security benefit-earning rule is a piecewise linear function of an individual's wage.

There are three kinks or bend points which change each year based on average wage growth, but we

follow Alonso-Ortiz (2014) and others and assume that the bend points are the following constant

multiples of the economy-wide average wage, 0.2, 1.24, and 2.47. Social Security replaces 90% of the

individual's wage up to the first bend point, 32% of wage income between the first and second bend

points, and 15% of wage income between the second and third bend points. The third bend point, 2.47,




1
 This survival function is estimated from Social Security Administration cohort mortality tables for men born in
1990.
corresponds to the maximum taxable earnings (beyond which individuals do not pay payroll taxes or

receive additional benefits). Therefore, Social Security replaces 0% of wages beyond the third bend point.

        Finally, wages follow a beta distribution with density



                                              (1 − )
                              ( )=                                ,      ∈ [0,1].
                                              (1 − )



There are two parameters,     and , to choose. To abstract from the portion of the income distribution

above the third bend point (or maximum taxable earnings), we assume that the top wage earner with

  = 1 earns 2.47 times that of the average earner. In addition, the 2015 US Census reports a Gini

coefficient of 0.479 on the distribution of income. This gives us two targets with which to calibrate   and




                                                                 1
                                           ( )=             =        ,
                                                    +           2.47



                                     1
                               =                 ( ) ( )| − |             = 0.479.
                                   2 ( )



        By setting   = /1.47 we match the desired mean. Given this restriction,       = 1.8 delivers a Gini

coefficient of 0.3463, somewhat less than the desired target but about the best we can do given the

(truncated) beta distribution that we have assumed. We would expect the model to somewhat understate

the true degree of inequality given that we are ignoring individuals above the maximum taxable income.

        Using this benefit-earning rule, together with the survival function ( ) and the wage density

                                                        ∗
 ( ), we find that the balanced-budget tax rate is          = 19.463%. This is somewhat larger than the
current tax in the U.S. (10.6%), but of course the current rate is not sufficient to balance the expected

future budget under current life expectancies. According to the 2016 Social Security Trustees Report,

eliminating the infinite horizon actuarial shortfall in the retirement and disability programs combined

would require a 4.2 percentage point increase in the payroll tax. That increase – which overestimates the

additional payroll tax needed to eliminate the shortfall in the retirement program alone – would still result

in a tax rate that is below the one in our model. However, our analysis also ignores the mass of individuals

who max out their Social Security contributions each year and would increase the overall revenue. To test

for sensitivity, we compute results by setting the tax to 10.6% and ignoring the budget balance and find

that the qualitative results that we emphasize do not change.

        We compare two equilibria. The first equilibrium features a Social Security program as described

above. The second equilibrium has no Social Security with      = ( ) = 0 for all      . Everything else is the

same across the two equilibria.

        Table 1 reports equilibrium assets at retirement as a fraction of lifetime income (wage income

plus bequest income) for individuals at each of the three bend points, as well as for average earners.

Without Social Security, all individuals save about 41% of their lifetime income. The impact of Social

Security on private savings is enormous in this theoretical model. The effect is especially large among the

poor who face the highest replacement rates. Social Security wipes out as much as half of the private

savings of those near the earnings cap, and it wipes out all of the private savings of those at the first bend

point. Note that while the declines in private savings as a percent of lifetime income are especially large

for the poor, the aggregate reduction in dollars saved still may be smaller as their wages are much lower

than other income groups considered. Including other features will alter the precise quantitative effect of

Social Security on private savings, but as long as individuals have perfect foresight, they tend to unwind a

significant portion of mandatory saving with reductions in private saving. Indeed, in our model if we were
to abstract from longevity risk and wage heterogeneity, then Social Security taxation would crowd out

private saving one for one.

           In addition to private savings, Social Security may also affect insurance holdings. In theory, Social

Security will reduce the demand for both life insurance and demand for annuity insurance. In our model,

bequests are accidental rather than the result of an explicit bequest motive. With the addition of an

explicit bequest motive, individuals would demand private life insurance. The magnitude of the demand

for life insurance would depend on the strength of the bequest motive and on the level of life insurance

provided publicly through Social Security. Hence, Social Security may crowd out private life insurance

holdings in addition to its crowding out of private savings (Hong and Ríos-Rull 2007; Li 2016). Similarly,

Social Security also reduces the demand for private annuities, because the program offers significant

annuitization through its payment of benefits as a life annuity. This effect is particularly large for those

with high mortality. Since Social Security disproportionately causes those with the highest mortality to

exit the private annuity market, it worsens adverse selection problems in the private annuity market

(Hosseini 2015).



    III.       Empirical Methods



           Our empirical strategy relies on plausibly exogenous variation from three policy experiments. Our

first policy experiment, the 1977 reform, resulted in reduced benefits for individuals born in 1917 and

later. The purpose of the reform was to correct a mistake in a 1972 law that had introduced automatic

cost-of-living adjustments for Social Security benefits. The indexation formula in the 1972 law resulted in

cost-of-living adjustments that far exceeded inflation for individuals who had not yet claimed. The

correction made in 1977 was phased in for individuals born between 1917 and 1921. The lower benefits
paid to those born between 1917 and 1921, relative to those born in 1916 and earlier, are sometimes

referred to as the “notch,” with individuals in the 1917-1921 birth cohorts referred to as “notch babies.” 2

         Our second policy experiment, the 1983 reform, increased payroll taxes for self-employed

individuals relative to wage earners. Figure 1 shows the total statutory Old Age, Survivor, and Disability

Insurance (OASDI) payroll tax rate faced by employees (including employer and the employee shares) as

well as the self-employed. Starting in 1984, it is clear that the payroll tax rate for the self-employed rose

sharply relative to that of employees. The 1983 reform also increased the full retirement age for

individuals born in 1938 and later.3 While benefits could still be claimed as early as 62 with an actuarial

reduction, the increase in the full retirement age effectively reduced the monthly benefit payable at each

possible claiming age.4 Thus, holding taxes and benefit levels at full retirement age constant, the increase

in the full retirement age was equivalent to cutting the present value of lifetime benefits.

         Our third policy experiment comes from a 1981 reform that reduced dependents’ benefits paid

to children. Prior to August 1981, the children of deceased, retired, or disabled workers could receive

Social Security dependent benefits if they were either under 18, or 18-21 and a full-time high school or

college student. Legislation passed in August 1981 started the process of phasing out benefits for college

students aged 18-21, with the phase-out complete by April 1985. Benefits for secondary school students




2
  The error in the indexation formula effectively double-indexed benefits for individuals who had not yet claimed in
1972. Thus, double indexation primarily affected individuals born between 1910 and 1916, who turned 62 in 1972
or later but were not affected by the 1977 reform. We do not use the 1972 error as a policy experiment as individuals
born before 1910 received ad hoc cost-of-living adjustments. See Social Security Administration (2004) and Krueger
and Pischke (1992) for additional details.
3
  See https://www.ssa.gov/planners/retire/retirechart.html.
4
  The 1983 reform also gradually increased the delayed retirement credit, or the actuarial increase in the monthly
benefit for each year of delayed claiming beyond full retirement age. The increases in the delayed retirement credit
were phased in for individuals born in 1925 and later. However, very few individuals delay benefits beyond full
retirement age (see, e.g., Goda et al. 2017). Also, the combination of the increases in the delayed retirement credit
and the full retirement age in most cases reduce the benefit that individuals born in 1938 and later can receive
regardless      of     the      age     at     which      they     claim.      For     additional     details,    see
https://www.ssa.gov/oact/ProgData/ar_drc.html.
older than 18 were eliminated by August 1982.5 This reform reduced the expected present value of the

life insurance benefits available from Social Security for individuals with dependent children.

           We use the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and the National Longitudinal Survey (NLS) to

evaluate changes in savings due to decreases in benefits resulting from the 1977 reforms, and we use the

Consumer Expenditure (CE) quarterly interview surveys to evaluate changes in savings due to the 1983

reform and the 1981 elimination of student benefits.



        a. Panel Study of Income Dynamics



           The PSID is an ongoing panel survey of U.S. households that began in 1968. The survey has been

conducted each year until 1997 and every other year thereafter. We use data from 1968-1980. There are

two family wealth variables available in 1968-1972 and again in 1975, 1979, and 1980.6 First, families

report whether they currently have savings equal to two months of income or more. Second, they report

whether they have, at any point in the past five years, had savings equal to two months of income or

more. The PSID also includes information on family money income and the ages of the head and spouse.

We deflate income, expressing it in 1980 dollars, using the average Consumer Price Index for All Urban

Consumers (CPI-U) over the survey year. In all of our analysis, we use the PSID longitudinal family weights.

           We begin by estimating the following difference-in-differences model:

                     =          +             +               +           +    +     +        (1)

Here,       is one of the indicators that family has savings equal to two months or more of income in year

    ;       is a dummy equal to 0 for years before 1977 and 1 for 1977 and later;        is a treatment dummy

equal to 1 if the household head was born in 1917 or later and zero otherwise;                  is family money


5
 See DeWitt (2001) for additional details.
6
 These wealth variables are not available beyond 1980, although more detailed wealth variables are consistently
available starting in the 1990s.
income;           is a set of dummies for the age of the head of household;          is a year effect;   is a family

fixed effect; and         is a stochastic error term. The coefficient of interest is    , which is expected to be

positive. That is, the probability of having savings equal to two or more months of income is higher for

individuals whose benefits were cut following the 1977 reform. We would expect a higher income to cause

higher savings. The age dummies control for the age profile of assets. The family fixed effects control for

unobservable family heterogeneity, such as differences in the rate of time preference. The year dummies

control for changes in macroeconomic conditions, differences in survey conditions, and other common

factors that affect reported savings for all families in specific years.

           Equation (1) does not take into account the degree of reduction in benefits that each post-1917

cohort experienced. Thus, we also estimate

                      =            +            +               +          +     +     +         (2)

where       is the percentage reduction in monthly benefits payable at full retirement age experienced by

individual as a result of the 1977 amendments. The reduction in monthly benefits is zero percent for

individuals born before 1917, 13 percent for individuals born in 1917, 19 percent for individuals born in

1918, 26 percent for individuals born in 1919, and 29 percent for individuals born in 1920 or later. 7



      b. National Longitudinal Survey



           The NLS is a panel survey of men representative of the United States population. We use the

cohort of older men who were 45-59 in 1966, the first year of the surveys. Additional rounds of the survey

continued either annually or biannually until 1983 and a final round was conducted in 1990. To measure

savings, we use respondents’ reported values of savings (including checking or savings accounts, or

accounts with savings and loan companies or credit unions), bonds, and investments (which include


7
    We obtain the percentage reduction in benefits from https://www.ssa.gov/history/notchfile3.html.
bonds, stocks and mutual funds). These values are reported in 6 different years, four years prior to the

policy and 2 years after the policy. We also create a total savings variable which is the sum of savings and

investments. As with the PSID data, we deflate these variables using the CPI-U, expressing them in 1980

dollars. In all the analyses, we use NLS custom longitudinal weights.

         We estimate the following difference-in-differences model:

                    =          +            +               +           +     +     +        (3)

where       represents an individual i’s savings, bonds, investments, or total savings in year t;          is a

dummy equal to 0 for years before 1977 and 1 for 1977 and later;        is a treatment dummy equal to 1 if

the individual was born in 1917 and later and zero otherwise;               is an individual’s reported income;

        is a set of individual age dummies to control for differences in savings behavior common across

ages;     is a year effect to control for macroeconomic conditions, differences in surveys, or common

factors that impact savings in a given year;       is an individual fixed effect to control for unobserved

individual heterogeneity that is constant across years; and     is a stochastic error term. The coefficient of

interest is again   . This coefficient should be positive if individuals compensate for lower expected Social

Security payments by saving more.

         To account for the degree of reduction in benefits, we also estimate the following:

                    =          +            +              +            +     +    +         (4)

where     is the percentage reduction in benefits as outlined above.



    c. Consumer Expenditure Surveys



         The CE quarterly interview surveys are a rotating panel in which households report their income

and expenditures in different categories for up to four consecutive quarters. We use the National Bureau

of Economic Research (NBER) extracts of the CE. The NBER extracts aggregate the quarterly information
provided by each household and member to create annual income and spending variables in a set of broad

categories (see Harris and Sabelhaus 2000). Each survey includes a family-level file that includes aggregate

consumption and income information for the family, as well as a member-level file that includes

demographic and earnings information for each member. We use data from 1980 through 1995. 8 We

restrict the sample to families who are designated as “complete income reporters” and families who are

interviewed for a full four quarters. We drop student households. We merge the family-level files to the

individual-level files, and for each family we retain the member with the highest earnings (defined as

wages plus business and farm income) and define that individualas the household head.9 We drop any

families in which the household head has zero earnings, is not working, is working in the public sector, or

is not the survey-designated head or spouse.10

         As described by Harris and Sabelhaus (2000), we construct comprehensive measures of family

consumption and before-tax family income by summing the various categories of consumption and

income provided in the survey.11 We also construct three measures of saving. The first defines saving as

income minus taxes minus consumption. The second defines saving as the change in net worth. 12 The third




8
  Data are not available on families entering the survey during the third and fourth quarters of 1985 and 1995.
9
  If the high earner is not unique, we order the high earners according to their relationship to the survey-designated
household head as follows: head, spouse, child, grandchild, in-law, brother/sister, mother/father, other relative, and
unrelated individual. We then retain the first high earner. In more than 80 percent of families, the high earner is the
survey-designated household head. In almost 95 percent of families, the high earner is the survey-designated
household head or spouse.
10
   Under the 1983 reform, federal employees began to be covered by Social Security. However, we cannot distinguish
federal employees from state or local employees. Many state and local employees are covered by Social Security,
but others are not.
11
   For income, we add up wages, business income, farm income, rent, dividends, interest, pension income, Social
Security benefits, Supplementary Security Income, unemployment compensation, workers compensation, welfare
payments, scholarships, food stamps, contributions from others (including alimony and child support), lump sums
(e.g., from inheritances), and insurance refunds. We then subtract contributions made to others (including alimony
and child support).
12
   The change in net worth sums pension and retirement contributions, changes in checking and savings account
balances, changes in stocks and bonds, investments made in a farm or business, net properties purchased, additions
and alterations made to properties, and the net reduction in debt.
defines saving as contributions to retirement accounts. We deflate these dollar amounts to 1980q1 dollars

using the average CPI-U over the four quarters that each family is in the survey.

        We estimate the following difference-in-differences model:

                       =           +             +               +             +       +          (5)

Here,     is defined as total savings for family in year ,           is an indicator for years after 1983,     is a

dummy for the treatment group (defined as either self-employed individuals, who experienced a tax

increase, or individuals born in 1938 or later, who experienced an increase in full retirement age),

is a set of age dummies for the head of household,    is a set of year dummies, and         is a stochastic error

term.

        To determine the impact of the degree of tax increase or benefit reduction, we modify equation

(5) as follows:

                  =            +             +          +    +                                               (6)

                  =        +           ∗     +               +             +       +                         (7)

Equation (6) replaces the first two terms on the right-hand-side of equation (5) with                   , the exact

OASDI statutory tax rate (employer plus employee share) faced by the head of household. The tax rate

varies in each year only according to the employment status (self-employed versus wage earner) of the

head of household. Equation (7) replaces the treated dummy in equation (5) with                , the exact post-

reform full retirement age faced by the head of household, thereby allowing larger increases in the full

retirement age to have larger effects on saving.

        We examine the impact of the elimination of student benefits by comparing life insurance

premiums paid for households with and without dependent children. Using data on individual family

members, we identify households with children who are living at home. Unfortunately, the data do not

allow us to identify whether there are any children who are not living at home, such as college students

who live in dorms. While it is college students who were most immediately affected by the elimination of
student benefits, the reform still lowered the present value of the benefit paid to all children at or below

college age. We estimate the following difference-in-differences model:

                    =                 +            +                         +                  +

                                                 +            +     +      (8)

Here,       is life insurance premiums (in 1980q1 dollars) paid by household in year ,                       is an

indicator for time periods from the third quarter of 1981 through the first quarter of 1985 (the period

over which student benefits were being phased out),               is an indicator for time periods after the first

quarter of 1985 (when student benefits had been fully eliminated), and                 is an indicator for having

kids under the age of 18 living at home.13 If the student benefit elimination reduced life insurance holdings

for affected families, we would expect       and       to be positive.

           Because the reform primarily affected benefits for college students, life insurance value was

primarily reduced for children who were likely to attend college. This allows us to add a third difference

by using the head of household’s education level to proxy for the likelihood of children under 18 attending

college. We do this by estimating (8) with three-way interactions between time periods during and after

the reform, having kids under 18, and an indicator for the head of household having some college

education. Theory predicts that the coefficient on these three-way interactions will be positive.



     IV.      Empirical Results



              a. Panel Study of Income Dynamics




13
  Having children 18-21 living at home is relatively uncommon. Results are largely similar if        is defined as
having kids 21 and younger living at home.
           Table 2 shows the results from estimating equation (1) for the full sample (column 1) as well as

various subsamples. As identified in the last two rows of the table, the subsamples restrict the head of

household’s year of birth to 1910-1923 (the 7 cohorts on either side of the reform), the survey year to

1972-1981, or both. The first four columns present results for the first measure of saving: whether the

household currently has two months of income in savings. The next four columns present results for the

second measure of savings: whether the household had two months of income saved at any point during

the previous five years. None of the coefficients on the interactions between post-1977 and the treatment

group indicator are statistically significant, though the point estimates are mostly positive as theory would

predict. However, as shown in Table 3, when the treatment group indicator is replaced with the percent

reduction in benefits (equation (2)), the signs of the coefficients are mixed, and the coefficients are still

insignificant. Excluding fixed effects produces similar results, with uniformly insignificant coefficients.

Thus, we find no evidence that the 1977 reform reduced the probability of having 2 months of income

saved. However, the size of the standard errors does not allow us to conclude that the reform had no

effects.



               b. National Longitudinal Study



           Table 4 shows the results from estimating equation (3). The interaction coefficient of interest is

positive but small and insignificant for the savings regression. Moreover, the coefficients for the bonds,

investments, and total savings regressions are all negative and insignificant. Overall, the evidence

suggests that people did not increase their savings behavior in response to reduced Social Security

benefits.

           Table 5 shows the results from estimating equation (4). The interaction coefficients for the savings

and bonds specifications are both positive, but insignificant. Again, the coefficients on the investments
and total savings specifications are negative and insignificant. These regressions also suggest that the

reduction in Social Security benefits did not have large impacts on people’s savings behaviors. However,

the large standard errors do not allow us to conclude that the reform had no economically meaningful

effects.

           Additional specifications tested for heterogeneity across education and income groups, since it is

possible that particular education and income groups responded to Social Security reductions. However,

we did not find any significant changes to savings behavior for different groups.



               c. Consumer Expenditure Survey



           Table 6 shows the impact of the payroll tax increase for the self-employed on savings (equation

(5)). In the first two columns, the dependent variable is total payroll (Social Security and Medicare) taxes

paid by the household head as a share of the household head's earnings. Payroll taxes for wage earners

are multiplied by two to account for the employer’s contribution. The coefficient on the interaction term

in these equations indicates the increase in the average payroll tax rate for the self-employed relative to

wage earners following the 1983 reform. As Figure 1, which was based on statutory tax rates, suggests,

observed tax rates indeed increased for the self-employed relative to wage earners. 14 Columns (3) and (4)

suggest that following the 1983 reform, the self-employed reduced their saving by $1,733 (if all age groups

are included in the analysis) or $2,381 (if only individuals aged 40-64 are included in the analysis) relative

to wage earners. These two columns measure savings as disposable income minus consumption. 15 The



14
   Observed tax rates differ from statutory tax rates because they also include contributions to Medicare, and
because the measure of earnings reported in the data may not correspond exactly to income that was subject to the
payroll tax, possibly due to the payroll tax cap, noncompliance, or measurement error.
15
   Since taxes – including payroll taxes – are subtracted from gross income to arrive at disposable income, and since
payroll tax rates increased for the self-employed following the reform, one might be concerned that there is a
mechanical relationship between the savings definition and the reform. But this specification is consistent with the
theory, which predicts that the payroll tax increase reduces saving rather than consumption.
two other definitions of savings suggest a more mixed picture – either no statistically significant change

or a statistically significant increase (when savings is measured as the change in assets and only individuals

aged 40-64 are included in the analysis). Thus, we have evidence that the payroll tax increase reduced

saving by one definition of saving. However, this finding is not robust across alternative definitions of

saving.

          Table 7 presents estimates of equation (6), in which the key independent variable is the exact

statutory tax rate faced by the head of household. The results in columns (1)-(2) show that again, as

expected, the observed average tax rate for the head of household is highly correlated with the statutory

tax rate. The results in columns (3)-(8) are similar to those in Table 6. They suggest that the reform reduced

one measure of saving (disposable income minus consumption) for the self-employed, with mixed results

for the remaining definitions of saving. Between 1983 and 1984, the statutory payroll tax rate increased

by 2.75 percentage points for the self-employed relative to wage earners. The results in column (3)

suggest that this tax increase caused a $1,676 ($60,956 x .0275) decrease in saving for the full sample. The

results in column (4) suggest that the tax increase caused a $2,272 ($82,613 x .0275) decrease in saving

for individuals aged 40-64.

          Table 8 shows the results from estimating equation (5) for the full retirement age increase. The

interactions between the indicator for being born in 1938 or later and the years after the reform have

mixed signs and are statistically insignificant. Table 9 shows similar results for equation (7), where the

indicator for the treated group is replaced with the individual’s full retirement age. Thus, we find no

evidence that the reduction in lifetime benefits induced by the increase in the full retirement age led to

an increase in saving. However, the standard errors are large, so we cannot rule out the possibility that

there was an effect.

          Finally, Table 10 shows the results from estimating equation (8). In the first column, the

coefficients on the interaction terms between having kids and being in the transition or post-reform
period have the expected positive sign. However, they are not individually or jointly significant. In the

second column, the three-way interactions between having kids, being in the transition or post-reform

periods, and having some college education also have the expected positive sign. Furthermore, the

coefficients on the two-way interactions between having kids and being in the transition or post-reform

periods are smaller in magnitude (and negative), suggesting that the reform had an effect for individuals

with some college education but not those without. However, the coefficients on the three-way

interaction terms are again not individually or jointly significant. We conclude again that, while we cannot

rule out the possibility that the reform affected life insurance purchases, we have no evidence to suggest

that it did.




    V.         Discussion



         As we have shown, the standard neoclassical model generates large predicted declines in savings

from the introduction of Social Security in aggregate. Theory also predicts that the life insurance aspect

of Social Security causes declines in life insurance holdings. On the other hand, our empirical analysis

reveals that changes in Social Security policy do not have a statistically significant impact on saving or life

insurance holding. There are several reasons why such policy changes may generate less dramatic changes

in observed savings than the predicted results from the model.

         First, our standard errors are large. In our life insurance regressions, the coefficients of interest

all have the expected signs; they are just not statistically significant. In all our regressions, our standard

errors do not rule out the possibility of an economically meaningful effect that is consistent with theory.

In recent decades, datasets like the Health and Retirement Study and Survey of Consumer Finances have

started to provide more detailed pictures of household savings and asset holdings. In comparison, the
datasets we use provide much less detail about saving behaviors, although they are the best available

datasets that cover the period of the reforms we study. It is possible that the quality of the savings data

from the 1970s and early 1980s is simply too noisy to precisely estimate these relationships.

        Second, it is possible that individuals chose to delay retirement, rather than save more, in

response to the benefit cuts studied. That may especially be the case for the 1983 reform, which cut

lifetime benefits by raising the full retirement age. For example, Behaghel and Blau (2012) show that

individuals tend to retire at whatever age is designated the full retirement age, possibly because they view

this age as either a reference point or a recommendation by the government. On the other hand, Kruger

and Pischke (1992) find little evidence that the 1977 reform had an impact on the labor force participation

of affected older males.

        Third, it is possible that individuals simply lack knowledge about their Social Security benefits and

were unaware of the policy changes. While Smith and Couch (2014) show that younger workers are aware

of the broad provisions of Social Security – for example that it provides benefits to retirees and the families

of deceased workers – Leibman and Luttmer (2015) find that many individuals are unaware of its specific

design features. Gustman and Steinmeier (2004) further show that even older individuals make large

errors in estimating their Social Security benefit levels. Thus, it is likely that many individuals are unaware

of or do not pay attention to how changes in policy rules affect their benefits, particularly for small benefit

changes. Lack of knowledge or attention is consistent with finding weak evidence of responsiveness to a

tax increase but no evidence of responsiveness to a benefit cut. Since payroll taxes are deducted

immediately from individuals’ paychecks (or calculated and paid quarterly or annually for self-employed

individuals), a tax increase is likely to be more salient and well-understood than a benefit cut.

        Fourth, the timing of information about the policy change can be important in identifying any

effects. If individuals learn about policy changes before they are implemented, then behavioral responses

may not align with the timing of the policy change. As discussed by the Social Security Administration
(n.d.), the problems created by the flawed indexation formula of the 1972 law became apparent almost

immediately. The Social Security Trustees report of 1974 suggested that the program had a large long-

term actuarial imbalance; by 1976 it had become “overwhelmingly clear” that reform would be required.

Over this period, there was much public discussion about how to correct the flaw in the 1972 law.

However, our identification strategy rests on the fact that the 1977 reform affected different groups in

different ways. And it is not clear to what extent the exact design of the reform – including which cohorts

would be affected and by how much – could have been anticipated, as numerous alternative proposals

were considered. Similarly, the financial shortfall that led to the 1983 reform was also apparent well in

advance, and proposals to cut benefits were debated as early as 1981 (see Light 2005). Proposals to

eliminate student benefits were considered as early as the late 1970s (DeWitt 2001). But here too, it is

not clear to what extent the exact design of the reform could have been anticipated.

        Fifth, individuals also likely lack information about whether the policy change is transitory or

permanent. Households can easily observe that tax rates and benefit levels change frequently. For

example, Shoven and Slavov (2006) document that promised internal rates of return vary considerably

over each cohort’s lifetime due to policy changes. Individuals may not respond much to any one change

if they are not sure how long that change will last.

        Finally, expectations may also affect the timing of behavioral responses. Expectations could

matter in several ways. First, any policy change should be taken in context of the overall Social Security

budget. Our theoretical model assumes a balanced government budget. However, our empirical work

relies on benefit cuts and tax increases designed to restore fiscal balance. In an environment where

Ricardian equivalence holds, the timing of policy changes to restore long-run fiscal balance to the Social

Security system should not influence behavior if it does not change individual expectations about future

policy. As discussed above, the actuarial shortfalls that triggered the 1977 and 1983 reforms were

apparent well in advance, although it is not clear to what extent the differences in impact across
individuals (on which our identification rests) could have been anticipated. Alternately, Dominitz, Manski,

and Heinz (2003) argue that many individuals do not expect to receive any Social Security benefits, so

changes in rules may not influence behavior. More generally, several papers including Gomes, Kotlikoff,

and Viceira (2007), van der Wiel (2008), and Caliendo, Gorry, and Slavov (2016) study the impact of

uncertainty on savings decisions and welfare.



    VI.     Conclusions




    In this paper, we review the theoretical implications of Social Security on private savings, establishing

that Social Security strongly crowds out private savings behavior. With these theoretical predictions in

mind, we empirically evaluate the effect of Social Security on savings and insurance purchasing behavior

using three different policy changes. Despite the strong theoretical predictions, we find little evidence to

support that Social Security crowds out private savings. We posit that lack of knowledge about Social

Security program details in general or the specific implications of the policy change in particular could

mitigate any effect of the policy on individual savings behavior.
References:

Aguila, Emma (2011), “Personal Retirement Accounts and Saving,” American Economic Journal: Economic
         Policy, 3(4), pp. 1-24.

Alonso-Ortiz, Jorge (2014), “Social Security and Retirement across the OECD,” Journal of Economic
       Dynamics and Control, 47, 300-316.

Attanasio, Orazio P. and Agar Brugiavini (2003), Social Security and Households' Saving, Quarterly Journal
        of Economics, 118(3), pp. 1075-1119.

Attanasio, Orazio P. and Susann Rohwedder (2003), “Pension Wealth and Household Saving: Evidence
        from Pension Reforms in the United Kingdom,” American Economic Review, 93(5), pp. 1499-1521.

Bagchi, Shantanu (2016), "Is the Social Security Crisis Really as Bad as We Think?" Macroeconomic
        Dynamics, 20(3), 737-776.

Bernheim, B. Douglas (1987), “The Economic Effects of Social Security: Toward a Reconciliation of Theory
       and Measurement,” Journal of Public Economics, 33(3), pp. 273-304.

Bernheim, B. Douglas and Lawrence Levin (1989), "Social Security and Personal Saving: An Analysis Of
       Expectations," American Economic Review, 79(2), pp. 97-102.

Blau, David M. (2016), “Pensions, Household Saving, And Welfare: A Dynamic Analysis of Crowd Out,”
        Quantitative Economics, 7(1), pp. 193-224.

Caliendo, Frank N., Aspen Gorry, and Sita Slavov (2016), “The Cost of Uncertainty about the Timing of
       Social Security Reform.” NBER Working Paper 21585.

Conesa, Juan C. and Carlos Garriga (2008), “Optimal Fiscal Policy in the Design of Social Security Reforms,”
       International Economic Review, 49(1), pp. 291–318.

Diamond, Peter A. and Jerry A. Hausman (1984), “Individual Retirement and Savings Behavior,” Journal of
      Public Economics, 23(1-2), pp. 81-114.

Dominitz, Jeff, Charles F. Manski, and Jordan Heinz (2003), “Will Social Security be There for You?: How
       Americans Perceive their Benefits,” NBER Working Paper 9798.

Engelhardt, Gary V. and Anil Kumar (2011), “Pensions and Household Wealth Accumulation,” Journal of
       Human Resources, 46(1), pp. 203-236.

Feldstein, Martin (1974), “Social Security, Induced Retirement, and Aggregate Capital Accumulation,”
        Journal of Political Economy, 82(5), pp. 905-926.

Feldstein, Martin (1996), “Social Security and Saving: New Time Series Evidence,” National Tax Journal,
        49(2), pp. 151-164.
Feldstein, Martin and Anthony Pellechio (1979), “Social Security and Household Wealth Accumulation:
        New Microeconometric Evidence,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 61(3), pp. 361-368.

Feng, Jin, Lixin He, and Hiroshi Sato (2011), “Public Pension and Household Saving: Evidence from Urban
         China,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 39(4), pp. 470–485.

Gale, William G. (1998), “The Effects of Pensions on Household Wealth: A Reevaluation of Theory and
       Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(4), pp. 706-723.

Gokhale, Jagadeesh, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and John Sabelhaus (1996), "Understanding the Postwar
       Decline in U.S. Saving: A Cohort Analysis." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 315-407.

Gomes, Francisco J., Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Luis M. Viceira (2007), “The Excess Burden of Government
       Indecision,” NBER Working Paper 12859.

Gustman, Alan L. and Thomas L. Steinmeier (1998), “Effects of Pensions on Savings: Analysis with Data
      from the Health and Retirement Study,” NBER Working Paper no. 6681.

Harris, Ed and John Sabelhaus (2000), “Consumer Expenditure Survey. Family Level extracts 1980:1-
        1998:2, National Bureau of Economic Research, Unpublished Manuscript.

Hong, Jay H. and José-Víctor Ríos-Rull (2007), “Social Security, Life Insurance and Annuities for Families,”
        Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(1), 118-140.

Hosseini, Roozbeh (2015), "Adverse Selection in the Annuity Market and the Role for Social Security."
       Journal of Political Economy, 123, 941-984.

Kitao, Sagiri (2014) "Sustainable Social Security: Four Options," Review of Economic Dynamics, 17(4), pp.
        756-779.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. (1979), “Testing the Theory of Social Security and Life Cycle Accumulation,” American
        Economic Review, 69(3), pp. 396-410.

Leibman, Jeffrey B. and Erzo F. P. Luttmer (2015), “Would People Behave Differently if They Better
       Understood Social Security? Evidence from a Field Experiment,” American Economic Journal:
       Economic Policy, 7(1), pp. 275-299.

Leimer, Dean R. and Selig D. Lesnoy (1982), “Social Security and Private Saving: New Time Series
       Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 90(3), pp. 606-629.

Light, Paul C. (2005), “The Crisis Last Time: Social Security Reform,” Brookings Institution, March 5,
        retrieved May 18, 2017 from https://www.brookings.edu/opinions/the-crisis-last-time-social-
        security-reform/.

Li, Yue (2016), “Social Security Survivors Benefits and Life Insurance,” Working paper, University of Albany.
Parker, Jonathan (1999), "Spendthrift in America? On Two Decades of Decline in the U.S. Saving Rate." In
        Ben Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg (editors), NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 14, 317-370.

Shoven, John B. and Sita Nataraj Slavov (2006), “Political Risk Versus Market Risk in Social Security,” NBER
       Working Paper no. 12135.

Social Security Administration (2004), “The ‘Notch’ Provision,” SSA Publication No. 05-10042.

Social Security Administration (n.d.), “The Commission on the Social Security "Notch" Issue,” retrieved
        May 18, 2017 from https://www.ssa.gov/history/notchfile1.html.

Van der Wiel, Karen (2008), “Preparing for Policy Changes: Social Security Expectations and Pension
       Scheme Participation,” Institute for the study of Labor, IZA DP No. 3623.

Yaari, Menachem (1965), “Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance and the Theory of the Consumer.” Review of
        Economic Studies, 32(2), 137-150.
Figure 1: Statutory Payroll Tax Rate by Employment Status

            .12     .11
  Statutory Tax Rate
    .09      .1
            .08
            .07




                          1980      1985                    1990            1995
                                                   Year

                                   Wage Earner              Self-Employed
Table 1: Assets at Retirement as a Fraction of Lifetime Income by Wage Type
                                     Wage Type
                     .2E(w)   E(w)       1.24E(w) 2.47E(w)

No Social Security     41%      41%        41%      41%
Social Security        -6%      11%         12%     18%
Table 2: Impact of Receiving Benefit Cut on Savings and Consumption (PSID)
                               (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)        (6)           (7)            (8)
                               P(Currently Have Two Months' Income Saved)           P(Had Two Months' Income Saved in Past 5 Years)

Post-1977 * Treated         -0.00606    0.000113     0.0384      0.0603     0.00307     0.00787                 0.0435        0.0623
                            (0.0360)    (0.0617)    (0.0501)    (0.0684)    (0.0277)   (0.0489)                (0.0397)      (0.0554)
Family Income             3.16e-06*** 3.30e-06*** 2.64e-06*** 4.09e-06*** 1.19e-06*** 1.14e-06**              1.05e-06**    1.57e-06**
                           (6.47e-07)  (9.09e-07)  (8.64e-07)  (1.26e-06)  (3.50e-07) (5.53e-07)              (4.88e-07)    (7.33e-07)

Observations                 19,024        4,742         10,374        2,412        18,834         4,700        10,316         2,399
Number of Families           2,601          604          2,601          604         2,601           604         2,601           604

Cohorts                           All      1910-1923       All       1910-1923       All         1910-1923          All       1910-1923
Years                         1968-1980 1968-1980      1972-1980     1972-1980    1968-1980 1968-1980           1972-1980     1972-1980
Notes: All regressions also include year dummies, household head age dummies, and family fixed effects. Longitudinal weights used.
Standard errors clustered by family in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 3: Impact of Percentage Reduction in Benefits on Savings and Consumption (PSID)
                               (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)           (7)            (8)
                               P(Currently Have Two Months' Income Saved)         P(Had Two Months' Income Saved in Past 5 Years)

Post-1977 * Reduction       -0.0940      -0.179      0.0764       0.116     -0.0284     -0.104                   0.137         0.186
                             (0.128)     (0.248)     (0.187)     (0.301)     (0.102)    (0.197)                 (0.153)       (0.253)
Family Income             3.17e-06*** 3.28e-06*** 2.64e-06*** 4.09e-06*** 1.19e-06*** 1.14e-06**              1.05e-06**    1.58e-06**
                           (6.48e-07)  (9.09e-07)  (8.65e-07)  (1.26e-06)  (3.51e-07) (5.54e-07)              (4.89e-07)    (7.30e-07)

Observations                 19,024        4,742         10,374        2,412        18,834         4,700        10,316         2,399
Number of Families           2,601          604          2,601          604         2,601           604         2,601           604

Cohorts                           All      1910-1923       All       1910-1923       All         1910-1923          All       1910-1923
Years                         1968-1980 1968-1980 1972-1980 1972-1980 1968-1980 1968-1980 1972-1980 1972-1980
Notes: All regressions also include year dummies, household head age dummies, and family fixed effects. Longitudinal weights used.
Standard errors clustered by family in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 4: Impact of Receiving Benefit Cut on Savings (NLS)
                                 (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)
                               Savings           Bonds         Investments      Total Savings

Post*Treated                    261.4             -25.48           -2,144           -2,310
                               (1,946)           (349.8)          (4,272)          (4,951)
Income                        0.118***         0.0246***         0.299***         0.560***
                               (0.043)           (0.006)          (0.111)          (0.126)

Observations                     18,740          20,577          20,621             21,006
Notes: All regressions include year dummies, age dummies, and individual fixed effects. Survey
years include 1966, 1969, 1971, 1976, 1981, and 1990. Robust standard errors in parentheses
and survey weights are used.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 5: Impact of Percentage Reduction in Benefits on Savings (NLS)
                                (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)
                              Savings          Bonds          Investments      Total Savings

Post*Reduction                  3,471            207.3            -3,730           -3,117
                               (7,428)          (1,393)         (16,937)         (19,347)
Income                        0.118***        0.0246***         0.300***         0.561***
                               (0.043)          (0.006)          (0.111)          (0.126)

Observations                   18,740           20,577           20,621           21,006
Notes: All regressions include year dummies, age dummies and individual fixed effects. Survey
years include 1966, 1969, 1971, 1976, 1981, and 1990. Robust standard errors in parentheses
and survey weights are used.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 6: Impact of Receiving Tax Increase on Saving (CE)
                                       (1)               (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)               (6)            (7)            (8)
VARIABLES                                    Tax Rate              Income - Taxes - Consumption              ∆Assets                Retirement Contributions

Self-Employed                       -0.0454***       -0.0448***     -2,184***       -2,554**         729.4          -1,241           -209.2          -486.0
                                     (0.00118)        (0.00174)       (704.9)        (1,082)        (894.5)         (1,492)          (205.2)         (441.4)
Self-Employed x Post 1983           0.0203***        0.0189***       -1,733**        -2,381*         800.5         4,032**            179.6           467.4
                                     (0.00142)        (0.00215)       (837.7)        (1,306)        (1,186)         (1,931)          (205.0)         (433.2)
Family Income                      -4.51e-07***     -5.10e-07***    0.381***        0.373***       0.120***        0.181***        0.0304***       0.0354***
                                     (2.10e-08)       (3.44e-08)     (0.0100)       (0.0153)       (0.0420)        (0.0696)        (0.00185)       (0.00293)

Observations                          25,950           12,230         25,950         12,230         25,950             12,230       25,950           12,230

Household Head Ages                     All            40-64            All           40-64           All              40-64           All           40-64
Notes: Dependent variable in columns (1)-(2) is household head's payroll taxes as a share of household head's earnings. Dependent variable in columns (3)-(6) is
household saving in 1980q1 dollars. All regressions also include year dummies, household head age dummies, and household head cohort dummies. Attrition adjusted
weights used. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 7: Impact of Statutory Tax Rate on Saving (CE)
                                       (1)               (2)          (3)             (4)             (5)               (6)            (5)            (6)
VARIABLES                                    Tax Rate            Income - Taxes - Consumption                ∆Assets                Retirement Contributions

Statutory Tax Rate                   0.708***        0.653***      -60,956**        -82,613*        31,293         141,108**          6,316          16,023
                                     (0.0497)        (0.0754)       (28,779)        (44,556)       (41,984)         (68,477)         (7,125)        (14,798)
Family Income                     -4.51e-07***    -5.10e-07***      0.381***       0.373***        0.120***        0.181***        0.0304***       0.0354***
                                    (2.10e-08)      (3.44e-08)      (0.0100)        (0.0153)       (0.0420)         (0.0696)       (0.00185)       (0.00293)
Self-Employed                      -0.0251***      -0.0260***      -3,918***       -4,932***        1,547*          2,792**          -29.55          -20.11
                                   (0.000809)       (0.00119)        (448.0)         (717.3)        (804.5)          (1,280)         (59.51)         (97.12)

Observations                         25,950             12,230      25,950          12,230          25,950             12,230       25,950           12,230
                                     0.175              0.120       0.331           0.295           0.027              0.042        0.103            0.094
Household Head Ages                    All              40-64         All           40-64             All              40-64          All            40-64
Notes: Dependent variable in columns (1)-(2) is household head's payroll taxes as a share of household head's earnings. Dependent variable in columns (3)-(6) is
household saving in 1980q1 dollars. All regressions also include year dummies, household head age dummies, and household head cohort dummies. Attrition adjusted
weights used. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 8: Impact of Receiving FRA Increase on Saving (CE)
                                         (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)            (5)            (6)
VARIABLES                           Income - Taxes - Consumption                ∆Assets                Retirement Contributions

Born in 1938 or later x Post 1983     -45.68            778.8          -1,101            302.8           116.9            1.239
                                      (545.5)          (1,580)         (925.2)          (2,308)         (330.0)          (184.0)
Family Income                        0.376***         0.345***        0.122***         0.103***       0.0304***        0.0331***
                                     (0.0100)         (0.0177)        (0.0417)         (0.0366)       (0.00187)        (0.00506)

Observations                           25,950           4,662          25,950             4,662         25,950           4,662

Household Head Cohort                    All         1933-1942           All          1933-1942           All          1933-1942
Notes: Dependent variable is household saving in 1980q1 dollars. All regressions also include year dummies, household head age
dummies, and household head cohort dummies. Attrition adjusted weights used. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 9: Impact of Full Retirement Age on Saving (CE)
                                         (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)            (5)            (6)
VARIABLES                           Income - Taxes - Consumption                ∆Assets                Retirement Contributions

Full Retirement Age x Post 1983       -2.904            228.0          -92.04*           79.79           5.638           -1.072
                                      (31.81)          (299.4)         (51.67)          (432.7)         (17.89)          (35.58)
Family Income                        0.376***         0.346***        0.122***         0.103***       0.0304***        0.0331***
                                     (0.0100)         (0.0177)        (0.0417)         (0.0366)       (0.00187)        (0.00506)

Observations                           25,950           4,662          25,950             4,662         25,950           4,662

Household Head Cohort                    All         1933-1942           All          1933-1942           All          1933-1942
Notes: Dependent variable is household saving in 1980q1 dollars. All regressions also include year dummies, household head age
dummies, and household head cohort dummies. Attrition adjusted weights used. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 10: Impact of Eliminating Student Benefits on Life Insurance Premiums Paid (CE)
                                                          (1)                  (2)
VARIABLES                                                 Life Insurance Premiums

Have Kids                                            87.31***               76.76**
                                                      (24.65)               (31.11)
Have Kids x (1981q3 - 1985q1)                          20.35                 -10.11
                                                      (29.10)               (36.51)
Have Kids x Post 1985q1                                9.047                 -0.239
                                                      (27.03)               (33.57)
College                                                                       27.36
                                                                            (43.38)
College x (1981q3 - 1985q1)                                                  -59.38
                                                                            (46.35)
College x Post 1985q1                                                        -14.07
                                                                            (45.20)
College x Have Kids                                                           34.42
                                                                            (55.78)
College x Have Kids x (1981q3 - 1985q1)                                       53.85
                                                                            (63.71)
College x Have Kids x Post 1985q1                                             16.67
                                                                            (60.45)
Family Income                                        0.0103***            0.0101***
                                                     (0.000941)           (0.000983)

Observations                                           25,950              25,950
Notes: Dependent variable is household life insurance premiums paid in 1980q1 dollars. All
regressions also include year dummies, household head age dummies, and household
head cohort dummies. Attrition adjusted weights used. Robust standard errors in
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
