                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               HEALTH PLAN PAYMENT IN MEDICAID MANAGED CARE:
                  A HYBRID MODEL OF REGULATED COMPETITION

                                         Timothy Layton
                                       Alice K. Ndikumana
                                          Mark Shepard

                                       Working Paper 23518
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23518


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2017




This essay was prepared as a chapter in "Risk Adjustment, Risk Sharing, and Premium
Regulation in Health Insurance Markets: Theory and Practice" edited by Thomas McGuire and
Richard van Kleef and published by Elsevier. We thank the editors for helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23518.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Timothy Layton, Alice K. Ndikumana, and Mark Shepard. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Health Plan Payment in Medicaid Managed Care: A Hybrid Model of Regulated Competition
Timothy Layton, Alice K. Ndikumana, and Mark Shepard
NBER Working Paper No. 23518
June 2017
JEL No. I13,I18

                                           ABSTRACT

Medicaid, the government program for providing health insurance to low-income and disabled
Americans, is the largest health insurer in the United States with more than 73 million enrollees.
It is also the sector of the U.S. public health insurance system that relies most heavily on the tools
of regulated competition with more than 60% of its enrollees enrolled in a private health plan in
2014. However, regulated competition in Medicaid differs from the typical model, emphasizing
the tools of competitive procurement -- such as competitive bidding, the threat of exclusion from
the market, and auto-assignment of enrollees to plans -- to attempt to improve efficiency, instead
of relying primarily on the forces of consumer demand. In this paper, we discuss how Medicaid
combines the tools of competitive procurement with the tools of regulated competition and some
potential consequences of this hybrid model.

Timothy Layton                                    Mark Shepard
Harvard Medical School                            Harvard Kennedy School
Department of Health Care Policy                  Mailbox 114
180 Longwood Avenue                               79 JFK Street
Boston, MA 02115                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                          and NBER
layton@hcp.med.harvard.edu                        mark_shepard@hks.harvard.edu

Alice K. Ndikumana
Harvard Medical School
Department of Health Care Policy
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
andikumana@g.harvard.edu
1. Introduction

    Medicaid, the public program for providing low-income and disabled Americans with health

insurance coverage, is the largest payer for health care services in the United States. As of

August 2016, over 73 million Americans (almost one quarter of the U.S. population) were

enrolled in the Medicaid program (CMS 2016a). In 2015, total Medicaid spending exceeded

$550 billion (almost one-fifth of total U.S. healthcare spending) (Kaiser Family Foundation

2016).

    Unlike Medicare, a federal program that is nationwide and uniform across states, Medicaid

is a joint state-federal program. The federal government provides substantial funding for the

program and in return regulates which populations must be covered by a state’s Medicaid

program and what benefits must be provided. States, in turn, have significant flexibility to cover

additional populations and provide additional benefits. Importantly, states can also choose

whether to provide Medicaid benefits through a publicly managed fee-for-service (FFS) program

or to contract out the provision of Medicaid benefits to private managed care organizations

(MCOs), also known as Medicaid Managed Care (MMC) plans. Over time, states have

increasingly moved toward managed care, with around 60% of Medicaid recipients enrolled in a

private managed care plan by 2014 (CMS 2016b). As part of these MMC programs, states often

let individuals choose among multiple competing MMC plans and/or between a private MMC

plan and a public FFS Medicaid plan – an arrangement similar to competition between private

Medicare Advantage plans and Traditional Medicare.

    As in the other individual health insurance markets covered in this volume, Medicaid

managed care exhibits some features of regulated competition, though, as we explain below,
                                               1
MMC uses a unique and interesting flavor of regulated competition that leverages procurement

rules to introduce the forces of competition at the initial procurement stage rather than at the

level of consumer plan choice. In a sense, state Medicaid agencies can use their regulatory

position to construct a low-cost, high-quality “network of health plans” – analogous to how

health plans themselves attempt to construct low-cost, high-quality networks of healthcare

providers.

     State experimentation with regulated competition in Medicaid began in the early 1970s, with

California leading the way (Sparer 2012). Growth was slow until the “managed care revolution”

of the 1990s when managed care enrollment increased dramatically both in Medicaid and in

other sectors of the U.S. health insurance market. However, managed care in Medicaid continued

to grow dramatically even during the subsequent “managed care backlash” in the late 1990s and

2000s. By 2014, 60% of Medicaid recipients were enrolled in a private MMC plan (CMS

2016b).1 Most of the initial enrollment in MMC was concentrated among pregnant women,

mothers, and children, but more recently MMC enrollment has been growing among aged,

disabled, and chronically ill Medicaid recipients (MACPAC, 2011).

     In addition to the expansion of managed care enrollment, there has been an increase in the

use of regulated competition principles by MMC programs. Initially, when states adopted

managed care, payments to health plans were negotiated individually with each plan on an

annual basis; risk adjustment was primitive and limited to demographics and eligibility category;



1
 Often estimates of Medicaid managed care penetration of 70% or higher are cited by policymakers and researchers.
The “greater than 70%” estimates include additional forms of “managed care,” specifically the use of “primary care
case management” (PCCM) programs. These programs are essentially government-run fee-for-service plans with
bonuses to primary care providers for each Medicaid PCCM enrollee in their panel. The use of this type of
“managed care” arrangement does not fit the mold of regulated competition, and, thus, for the purpose of this paper
we do not count it as managed care.
                                                           2
and “competition” consisted of one plan competing with the public FFS plan. Today, plan

payments are often either based on competitive bids or set administratively, more sophisticated

risk adjustment is widely used, and competition among MMC plans is more robust in many

areas. Increasingly, MMC programs look like traditional health insurance markets organized

around the principles of regulated competition – including markets like Medicare Advantage and

national health insurance systems in the Netherlands, Germany, and Switzerland.

    While MMC is adopting more features of regulated competition, its design is also rooted in

its history as a public program for the poor. In many ways, state Medicaid programs treat MMC

plans as contractors administering welfare benefits rather than as competitors in a regulated

health insurance market. This theme shows up in several ways in MMC programs. First, there are

generally no premiums in Medicaid. The program is largely free to recipients. While a few states

have adopted nominal premiums for select (and small) populations, these premiums are charged

for entry into Medicaid, not based on a recipient’s plan choice. In other words, even when they

exist, Medicaid premiums do not vary across plans. This implies that insurers cannot “pass

through” any savings to Medicaid enrollees in the form of lower premiums. As we discuss

below, this policy effectively rules out the standard form of price competition used in typical

markets and which was a key principle of Enthoven and Kronick’s (1989) regulated competition

model. Instead, this channels consumer-driven competition into the quality-dimension of the

product. This forces state Medicaid agencies to employ other tools to restrain spending growth,

such as administrative rate-setting, exclusion of high price plans from the market, and auto-

assignment targeted to lower-price plans.

    Second, most benefits (including cost sharing and covered services) are fixed across plans,

following a state-specified schedule. Per federal rules, this schedule has minimal cost-sharing,
                                                 3
removing demand-side incentives from the insurer’s toolkit for encouraging efficient use of

health care. This design is based on the idea that almost any cost sharing is considered

“unaffordable” for indigent Medicaid recipients and therefore an undue barrier to accessing care.

Insurers do, however, have flexibility to design medical provider networks (subject to minimum

network adequacy rules), prescription drug formularies, and utilization review/care management

practices.

    Finally, health plan choice differs substantially from the traditional model of regulated

competition. Many Medicaid recipients fail to actively choose an MMC plan, leaving the state to

administratively assign them to one – assignment which is often random or quasi-random. States

often use this assignment policy as part of the contracting process with MMC plans. A common

policy is to use assignment to equalize market share, effectively ensuring all plans with a

contract receive an adequate number of enrollees. More recently, as we describe in more detail

below, states have also begun to experiment with assignment rules that are tied to elements of a

plan’s bid such as the plan’s capitation rate or plan quality ratings.

    It is also important to understand that unlike Medicare, Medicaid differs substantially across

states, making it not one program but 52 programs (50 states + D.C. and Puerto Rico). States

differ both in whether they use managed care at all and in which features of regulated

competition they adopt. For example, some states like Connecticut do not contract with private

managed care plans, relying exclusively on the public fee-for-service plan. This is becoming less

common, however, with only ten states not enrolling at least some Medicaid recipients in a




                                                     4
private MMC plan in 2014 (CMS, 2016b).2 On the other hand, states like New York have robust

managed care programs that use regulated competition principles like plan choice, open

enrollment periods, and risk adjustment. Then there are states like Missouri, which uses

administratively-set government payments to plans but restricts entry to three plans per region

via a competitive procurement process aimed at extracting the highest level of quality out of the

competing health plans. Using the state’s power over entry into the market as a tool to improve

outcomes is an example of how procurement policy can shape competitive dynamics in Medicaid

markets. This tool perhaps represents a new instrument to be considered in the “regulated

competition” toolkit. This can also be thought of as a form of “selective contracting,” analogous

to the way health plans use the threat of exclusion from their provider networks to induce

competition among providers.

    Because of these significant differences across states, instead of going into great detail

describing a particular state’s payment system, below we attempt to describe broadly how plan

payment works across different types of states. The remainder of this paper is organized as

follows. Section 2 discusses the organization of the MMC system. Section 3 discusses health

plan payment design, and section 4 discusses the (very limited) research evaluating MMC plan

payment. Section 5 concludes by discussing ongoing issues and reforms.



2. Organization of the health insurance system

    The organization of the Medicaid Managed Care (MMC) health insurance system is

complex. State MMC programs vary in plan design requirements, procurement methods, and


2
  Throughout this paper we do not consider state Programs of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE) as
comprehensive Medicaid Managed Care plans. This differs from the CMS definition.
                                                      5
plan options for beneficiaries. Each state, subject to federal regulations, defines a set of covered

health services, allowable cost sharing amounts, and provider network adequacy requirements

for participating managed care plans. Some states contract with any insurer that complies with its

requirements. Other states are selective, contracting only with insurers that win a competitive

procurement process on the basis of price and/or other features of plan bids, such as the use of

alternative payment models, care management practices, and other state priorities. Prices (also

known as “capitation rates”) paid by the state Medicaid program to insurers may be determined

through the competitive plan selection process or may be set administratively or through

negotiation with private insurers.

    Once a menu of plans has been determined, Medicaid recipients either choose a plan or are

assigned to a plan, following the regulations of their state. If recipients choose their plan, their

choice may be influenced by marketing, outreach programs, and brokers or “navigators”

provided by Medicaid. In this section we will discuss plan design, procurement and choice in

greater detail to provide an overview of how the Medicaid Managed Care health insurance

market operates.


2.1 Plan Design Regulations

    State Medicaid programs determine which benefits must be covered by managed care plans.

This decision consists of three components. First, states decide which services will be covered in

their Medicaid programs beyond the services required by the federal government (if any).

Second, states decide who will provide the services: a private MMC plan, a specialty MCO, or

the state’s fee-for-service Medicaid program. Third, the state chooses certain parameters

regulating how managed care plans provide the services.


                                                   6
Covered Services

     The federal government defines a set of mandatory benefits that states are required to

provide for Medicaid enrollees, outlined in Table 1a. For example, Early and Periodic Screening,

Diagnostic, and Treatment (EPSDT) services are required for enrollees under 21 years of age to

facilitate early identification and diagnosis of physical and mental disorders, as well as early

initiation of the appropriate treatment. States are also required to provide pregnancy related

services, including pre-natal care, delivery, post-partum care, and family planning. Federal rules

prohibit cost sharing for both EPSDT and pregnancy-related services.

     States may elect to also provide optional benefits for Medicaid enrollees, listed in Table 1b.

While prescription drug coverage is technically optional, all states provide the benefit, though 22

states require nominal copayments for covered drugs (KFF, 2017a). Other notable optional

benefits include adult dental, physical therapy and rehabilitation, and optometry. Federal

regulations require that benefits are equivalent across beneficiaries and across the state in

duration, amount and scope (MACPAC, 2017).


Managed Care Carve-Outs

     When states adopt managed care, they may not do so for all covered Medicaid services.

Often, some covered benefits are “carved out” of managed care plan contracts and instead

provided and financed via a separate insurance scheme, such as a limited benefit plan3 or

traditional FFS Medicaid. The most commonly carved out benefits are prescription drugs,

behavioral health, and dental services. Table 2 outlines which states carved out each of these


3
  States may contract with insurers to provide a subset of benefits or services to enrollees, such as behavioral health,
transportation, dental or prescription drugs. These contracts, referred to as “limited benefit plans” or “prepaid health
plans,” are generally paid through capitation. Enrollment into limited benefit plans may include managed care
enrollees, fee for services enrollees, or both.
                                                              7
services in 2014. States may carve out benefits that they conclude would be more effectively

administered and financed outside of a comprehensive managed care plan. Carve-outs may also

have the beneficial property of protecting services that may be vulnerable to risk selection. Frank

et al. (1996) and Frank et al. (2000) note that MMC plans have strong incentives to inefficiently

ration services that are predictably used by high-cost, unprofitable individuals. By removing

these services from the MMC plan contracts and financing them separately, states can ensure

access to these services is maintained under MMC.

        Table 18.1a Mandatory Covered Benefits
                                      Table 1a: Mandatory Covered Benefits

        Mandatory Benefits
        Inpatient hospital services                         Laboratory and X-ray services

        Outpatient hospital services                        Nursing facility services (for ages 21 and over)

        Physician services                                  Nurse midwife services

        Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic, and     Certified pediatric or family nurse practitioner
        Treatment services (for individuals under age 21) services
        Family planning services and supplies             Rural health clinic services

        Federally qualified health centers                  Tobacco cessation counseling and
                                                            pharmacotherapy for pregnant women
        Freestanding birth centers                          Non-emergency transportation to medical care

        Home health services

        Source: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS)
        https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/benefits/list-of-benefits/index.html




                                                        8
    Table 18.1b Optional Covered Benefits
                                  Table 1b: Optional Covered Benefits

    Optional Benefits
    Prescribed drugs                                     Dentures

    Intermediate care facility services for individuals Personal care services
    with intellectual disabilities
    Clinic services                                     Private duty nursing services

    Occupational therapy services                        Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly
                                                         (PACE) services

    Optometry services                                   Chiropractic services

    Physical therapy services                            Critical access hospital services
    Targeted case management services                    Respiratory care for ventilator dependent
                                                         individuals
    Prosthetic devices                                   Primary care case management services
    Hospice services                                     Services furnished in a religious non-medical
                                                         health care institution
    Inpatient psychiatric services for individuals       Tuberculosis-related services
    under age 21
    Dental services                                      Home and community based services
    Eyeglasses                                           Health homes for enrollees with chronic
                                                         conditions
    Speech, hearing, and language disorder services Other licensed practitioners’ services
    Inpatient hospital and nursing facility services for Emergency hospital services in a hospital not
    individuals age 65 or older in institutions for      meeting certain Medicare or Medicaid
    mental diseases                                      requirements
    Other diagnostic, screening, preventive, and
    rehabilitative services

    Source: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS)
    https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/benefits/list-of-benefits/index.html



Behavioral health care is the most prominent example of a service often carved out of managed

care contracts. Specialized behavioral health providers are often separate from the rest of the

health care system – such as psychiatric hospitals or outpatient behavioral health clinics. Some

                                                     9
professionals are non-physician health care providers who specialize in behavioral health, such

as clinical social workers and psychologists. This separate nature of the behavioral health system

is one reason why states may carve out these services from MMC plans.4 While carving out

behavioral health has been the norm in MMC, a growing number of states have reversed course,

“carving in” behavioral health into MMC plan contracts. Among the 42 states that offered MMC

plans in 2014, 16 states carved out behavioral health (CMS 2016b) whereas in 2010, 21 of 36

states offering MMC plans carved out behavioral health (Gifford 2011).

     States may also carve out benefits in response to federal policies. For example, prior to the

Affordable Care Act (ACA), prescription drugs provided through MMC plans were not eligible

for the Medicaid drug rebate program, which required pharmaceutical companies to provide

substantial discounts to Medicaid programs. As of 2010, the rebate program was expanded to

include drugs financed through MMC, prompting some states (such as New York) to carve

prescription drug coverage into managed care plan contracts (MACPAC, 2011; KFF 2011).


Regulation of MMC Plan Benefits

     Premiums and cost sharing are restricted to nominal levels in MMC plans, and prohibited for

certain services and populations. Medicaid serves low-income individuals and families, for

whom cost sharing typical in commercial insurance plans is perceived as unaffordable. Because

of this, states impose maximum allowable amounts for premiums and cost sharing that vary by

service, income level, and beneficiary type, in accordance with federal regulations. Cost sharing

is prohibited for emergency services, family planning services, pregnancy-related services, or



4
 Behavioral health carve-outs are used in the private health insurance market as well. Large employers may contract
separately with a managed behavioral health organization. Alternatively, an employer sponsored health plan may
subcontract with a managed behavioral health organization.
                                                          10
                                         Table 2: Benefit Carve Out
Table 18.2 Benefit Carve Out                                      Legend ✓ carved in               ✗ carved out

                      State Comprehensive MCO               Dental            Behavioral Health       Prescription Drugs
                 Alabama                                       --                      --                      --
                    Alaska                                     --                      --                      --
                  Arizona              ✦                       ✓                       ✗                      ✓
                 Arkansas                                      --                      --                      --
                California             ✦                       ✗                       ✗                      ✓
                 Colorado              ✦                       ✗                       ✗                      ✓
             Connecticut                                       --                      --                      --
                Delaware               ✦                       ✓                       ✓                      ✓
    District of Columbia               ✦                       ✓                       ✓                      ✓
                   Florida             ✦                       ✓                       ✗                      ✓
                  Georgia              ✦                       ✓                       ✓                      ✓
                   Hawaii              ✦                       ✓                       ✓                      ✓
                      Idaho            ✦                       ✓                       ✓                      ✓
                    Illinois           ✦                       ✗                       ✓                      ✗
                  Indiana              ✦                       ✗                       ✓                      ✗
                       Iowa            ✦                       ✗                       ✗                      ✓
                   Kansas              ✦                       ✓                       ✓                      ✓
                 Kentucky              ✦                       ✓                       ✗                      ✓
                Louisiana              ✦                       ✗                       ✗                      ✗
                    Maine                                      --                      --                      --
                Maryland               ✦                       ✓                       ✗                      ✓
         Massachusetts                 ✦                       ✓                       ✓                      ✓
                 Michigan              ✦                       ✗                       ✗                      ✓
               Minnesota               ✦                       ✓                       ✓                      ✓
              Mississippi              ✦                       ✓                       ✗                      ✓
                 Missouri              ✦                       ✓                       ✓                      ✗
                 Montana                                       --                      --                      --
                Nebraska               ✦                       ✗                       ✗                      ✗
                  Nevada               ✦                       ✓                       ✓                      ✓
        New Hampshire                  ✦                       ✗                       ✓                      ✓
              New Jersey               ✦                       ✓                       ✓                      ✓
             New Mexico                ✦                       ✓                       ✓                      ✓
                New York               ✦                       ✓                       ✓                      ✓
          North Carolina                                       --                      --                      --
           North Dakota                ✦                       ✓                       ✓                      ✓
                       Ohio            ✦                       ✓                       ✓                      ✓
                Oklahoma                                       --                      --                      --
                  Oregon               ✦                       ✓                       ✓                      ✓
           Pennsylvania                ✦                       ✓                       ✗                      ✓
              Puerto Rico              ✦                       ✓                       ✗                      ✓
            Rhode Island               ✦                       ✗                       ✓                      ✓
          South Carolina               ✦                       ✗                       ✓                      ✓
           South Dakota                                        --                      --                      --
               Tennessee               ✦                       ✗                       ✓                      ✗
                     Texas             ✦                       ✗                       ✓                      ✗
                       Utah            ✦                       ✗                       ✗                      ✓
                 Vermont               ✦                       ✓                       ✓                      ✓
                  Virginia             ✦                       ✗                       ✓                      ✓
             Washington                ✦                       ✗                       ✗                      ✓
           West Virginia               ✦                       ✓                       ✗                      ✓
               Wisconsin               ✦                       ✓                       ✓                    Varies
                Wyoming                                        --                      --                      --
     Total Comp. MCO:                  42                      --                      --                      --
       Total Carved In:                --                      26                      26                     34
     Total Carved Out:                 --                      16                      16                      7
                   Source: Compiled from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) Managed Care State Profiles
                             https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/managed-care/state-profiles/index.html
                                                              11
preventive services for children (Brooks 2016). Furthermore, the sum of premium and cost

sharing liabilities cannot exceed 5% of a family’s income. (Medicaid and Children’s Health

2013).

    Some cost sharing, however, is allowed in a few cases. For example, some states allow the

use of variable copayments for prescription drugs to steer beneficiaries to more cost effective

drugs included on a preferred drug list. Federal regulations limit the maximum allowable copay

for prescription drugs to $4 for preferred drugs and $8 for non-preferred drugs, though state

limits may be more restrictive. MMC plans may also elect to include lower cost sharing than the

maximum allowed by the state. As a result, cost sharing may vary between MMC plan offerings

and the fee-for-service option, or between participating MMC plan offerings.

    While cost sharing is strictly regulated, MMC plans have more flexibility in other areas of

plan benefit design. The most important area is provider network design. Medicaid plan provider

networks are perceived as some of the narrowest in the American health insurance market

(though hard evidence to support this perception is limited), indicating that MMC insurers use

this tool to limit health care costs among their enrollees (Draper 2004; Mershon 2016). In

practice, the de facto networks for these plans may be even smaller than the set of providers

listed in the network. A 2013 study by the US Department of Health and Human Services found

that about half of listed providers in managed care networks did not offer appointments to

enrollees (OIG 2014).

    Managed care plans are permitted to limit provider networks in accordance with network

adequacy standards. Federal regulations require that all states define access standards for MMC

plans to ensure that enrollees have adequate and timely access to all covered services. States

must also develop a plan to monitor access, including an external review of access standards.
                                                 12
Network adequacy standards must require MMC plans to consider anticipated enrollment,

utilization and geographic location when constructing their provider network. If a covered

service cannot be delivered by an in-network provider, a managed care plan must cover the

service at an out-of-network provider with no additional cost to the beneficiary (OIG 2014).

    MMC plans are generally health maintenance organizations (HMO) which do not cover out-

of-network services when an in-network provider is available. However, federal regulations

require that MMC plans must cover out-of-network care for emergency and family planning

services, both of which are also exempt from patient cost sharing. MMC plans are required to

communicate which benefits may be obtained out-of-network and how to obtain those benefits.

For example, insurers may require prior authorization for non-emergency services obtained at an

out-of-network provider when an in-network provider was not available. Out-of-network

providers are prohibited from billing the patient for the difference between the amount

reimbursed by the MMC plan and the provider’s customary charge. Additionally, payments to

providers for out-of-network care are not governed by predetermined contracts. As a result,

costly case-by-case negotiations between insurers and providers may arise to determine

reimbursement. The 2005 Deficit Reduction Act attempted to address this issue by requiring

providers to accept payments made for out-of-network emergency services at the equivalent

Medicaid fee-for-service rate (Center for Medicaid and State Operations, 2006). Some states

have established policies to govern reimbursement for non-emergency out-of-network payments

as well. For example, in Florida, a Medicaid plan must reimburse an out-of-network provider the

lesser of the Medicaid fee-for-service rate or the provider’s customary charges (Lewin Group).

    Federal network adequacy regulations discussed so far leave states considerable flexibility to

develop state-specific network adequacy standards, leading to significant variations across states.
                                                  13
Common criteria for network adequacy used by states include distance or time of travel to

provider, availability of appointments within a given time frame, and a defined ratio of providers

to enrollees. Standards may or may not be specified differently for different types of providers,

such as a primary care provider (PCP) or obstetrician. Additionally, for a given network

adequacy criterion, the exact requirement may vary significantly across states. For example, in

2013, among states that had a provision for the maximum enrollee-to-PCP ratio, the maximum

allowed ratio varied from 100 enrollees per PCP to 2,500 enrollees per PCP (OIG, 2014).



                  Textbox 1: MO HealthNet – Missouri’s Medicaid Program

 In most regions of Missouri, non-disabled adults and children as well as disabled Medicaid
 recipients are required to enroll in a private comprehensive MMC plan. Prior to 2012,
 Missouri allowed “any willing plan” to participate in its Medicaid managed care program, and
 paid plans using administratively-set rates. Rates were adjusted using demographic factors.
 There were three rating regions, and plans could choose which regions to enter. In each of the
 eastern and western regions, there was at least one hospital-owned plan in the program.

 Starting in 2013, Missouri switched to a competitive bidding system. Under the new system,
 the state awards only three managed care contracts, and the plans must operate in all three
 rating regions. Plan bids do not include prices, however. Instead, bids are purely technical
 proposals that outline provider networks and how the plans will achieve a set of priorities
 outlined by the state including the adoption of medical homes and alternative payment models.
 This results in a procurement process that is highly subjective. The process is an example of a
 state that uses the threat of exclusion to attempt to extract higher levels of quality out of health
 plans for a given administratively-set payment.

 Despite the subjectivity involved in the process, the threat of exclusion turned out to be highly
 credible: one large plan owned by Molina that had participated in MO HealthNet for a number
 of years was excluded in 2013, despite Molina’s attempts to force the state to accept its
 contract via litigation. The three plans chosen to participate in the market were HealthCare
 USA (owned by Aetna), Home State Health Plan (owned by Centene), and Missouri Care
 (owned by Wellcare). Because the chosen plans were required to operate in all three regions of
 the state, local hospital-owned plans were effectively eliminated from the program.

 Plan payments under the newly reformed program include a few interesting features. First, the
 state began to risk adjust payments using the Medicaid Rx risk adjustment model. The state
 decided to use the pharmacy-only model initially due to concerns about the completeness of
                                                    14
    diagnosis data for some health plans (Dockendorf et. al. 2014). Starting in 2015, the state
    began to pay under the CDPS+Rx model which incorporates both diagnoses and pharmacy
    information for risk adjustment. Second, plan payments include quality withholds, where the
    state doesn’t pay plans the full payment until after the year is over and the state determines
    whether the plan met certain quality thresholds.



2.2 Competitive Procurement

       States use varying procurement methods to select insurers for MMC programs. Some states

contract with all insurers that meet specified requirements. Most states, however, use competitive

procurement to select insurers on the basis of cost and/or other features of plan bids such as

quality and proposals for fulfilling particular state priorities such as the adoption of alternative

models of provider payment. States generally contract with MCOs for one to three years and may

include an option for one-year renewals.5

       Table 3 indicates which states use competitive vs. non-competitive selection methods. In a

competitive procurement model, states issue a request for proposals (RFP) that informs insurers

about the Medicaid program requirements and solicits a cost bid and/or a technical proposal from

insurers. The cost bid may include factors such as the insurer’s historical financial performance,

administrative costs, projected costs for delivering Medicaid benefits, or a proposed capitation

rate. States may communicate a range of acceptable (i.e. “actuarially sound”) capitation rate bids

in the RFP. In some cases, the cost bid is used to determine the capitation rate. Alternatively,

some states use competitive procurement to select plans, but capitation rates are set

administratively or through negotiation.6 Next, the technical proposal outlines the insurer’s plan

for delivering covered services in accordance with the state’s regulations, incorporating


5
  For instance, Florida and Missouri have used one-year contracts with two one-year renewals for a total contract
length of three years. Virginia has used one-year contracts.
6
  More details on rate-setting methods are provided in Section 3.
                                                         15
information on provider networks and alternative provider payment models (e.g., use of medical

homes or Accountable Care Organizations). Bids are reviewed by state Medicaid programs, and

insurers are selected using state-specific rubrics that weigh the cost bid and technical proposal.7

     The insurers that participate in MMC programs vary significantly in size, scope, and

structure. Prior to 1997, there was a “75/25” rule that required MMC insurers have at least 25

percent of their membership in the private, commercial health insurance market. The Balanced

Budget Act of 1997 eliminated the “75/25” rule, making it possible for Medicaid-only insurers to

participate (MACPAC, 2011). This flexibility has led to the rise of insurers like Centene and

Molina that focus almost exclusively on the MMC market. Nonetheless, more traditional,

predominantly commercial insurers continue to participate in Medicaid managed care (KFF

2017b). For example, in 2016, Aetna and United Healthcare have MMC contracts with 12 and 22

states, respectively (KFF, 2017b). Insurers also vary by geographic scope, with some operating

in a single state or region (or even metropolitan area) and others operating across states.

     Another notable feature of Medicaid managed care insurance markets is the prevalence of

small, local provider-owned insurers. Some safety-net hospitals and community health centers,

which serve a high share of low-income, Medicaid-eligible patients, also operate MMC plans.

These plans may operate within relatively small geographic areas – e.g., Metroplus in New York

City or Chinese Community Health Plan (CCHP) in San Francisco. While providers have entered

the insurance market with Medicaid plans, some Medicaid insurers have likewise entered the

provider market by building their own health centers in areas with a high density of Medicaid




7
  In some states, such as Missouri, the MMC plan bids do not include a cost bid, thereby focusing the bid entirely on
the technical proposal.
                                                           16
                               Table 3: Procurement and Enrollment Options
Table 18.3 Procurement and Enrollment Options

                                                                                    Enrollment Option in Managed Care
        State           Comprehensive MCO    Procurement Method             Adult                 Child              Disabled
             Alabama                                   --                     --                    --                   --
               Alaska                                  --                     --                    --                   --
              Arizona          ✦             Competitive Selection         Varies                 Varies              Varies
             Arkansas                                  --                     --                    --                   --
            California         ✦                      **                 Mandatory              Mandatory             Varies
            Colorado           ✦                      **                  Voluntary             Voluntary            Voluntary
         Connecticut                                   --                     --                    --                   --
            Delaware           ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
District of Columbia           ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Not Eligible
               Florida         ✦                      **                 Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
              Georgia          ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Not Eligible
               Hawaii          ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
                Idaho          ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Not Eligible
               Illinois        ✦             Competitive Selection        Voluntary             Voluntary           Mandatory
              Indiana          ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Not Eligible
                  Iowa         ✦                      **                 Mandatory              Mandatory           Not Eligible
               Kansas          ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
            Kentucky           ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
            Louisiana          ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory             Varies
                Maine                                  --                     --                    --                   --
            Maryland           ✦                Non-Competitive          Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
      Massachusetts            ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory             Varies
            Michigan           ✦             Competitive Selection         Varies               Mandatory           Mandatory
          Minnesota            ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory             Varies
          Mississippi          ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
             Missouri          ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
            Montana                                    --                     --                    --                   --
            Nebraska           ✦                Non-Competitive          Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
              Nevada           ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
    New Hampshire              ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
          New Jersey           ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
         New Mexico            ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
            New York           ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
      North Carolina                                   --                     --                    --                   --
       North Dakota            ✦                      **                 Not Eligible          Not Eligible         Not Eligible
                  Ohio         ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
           Oklahoma                                    --                     --                    --                   --
              Oregon           ✦                      **                 Mandatory              Voluntary            Voluntary
        Pennsylvania           ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
         Puerto Rico           ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Voluntary           Mandatory
        Rhode Island           ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
      South Carolina           ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
       South Dakota                                    --                     --                    --                   --
           Tennessee           ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
                 Texas         ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
                  Utah         ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
             Vermont           ✦                     Other               Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
              Virginia         ✦             Competitive Selection       Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
         Washington            ✦             Competitive Selection         Varies                 Varies            Mandatory
       West Virginia           ✦                Non-Competitive          Mandatory              Mandatory           Not Eligible
           Wisconsin           ✦                     Other               Mandatory              Mandatory           Mandatory
            Wyoming                                    --                     --                    --                   --

            Legend ** = procurement method unknown
                    Non-competitive Procurement Method - States that use non-competitive procurement contract with any MCO that that
                    agrees to meet their requirements.
                    Other Procurement Method - States use different procurement methods for different populations or regions or an
                    alternative procurement method.
            Source: Compiled from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) Managed Care State Profiles
                    https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/managed-care/state-profiles/index.html

                                                                17
eligibility. Examples of these are Trusted Health Plan in the District of Columbia and L.A. Care

in Los Angeles.


2.3 Plan Choice

    Plan choice in Medicaid varies significantly across states on a variety of dimensions. First,

the enrollment options available to Medicaid beneficiaries vary by state and beneficiary type.

Table 3 shows how these enrollment options vary across states. Medicaid beneficiaries are either

(a) required to enroll in a managed care plan (“mandatory”), (b) given a choice between MMC

and the publicly managed FFS Medicaid program (“voluntary”), or (c) excluded from MMC

(“not eligible”). Federal rules require states that use MMC to provide Medicaid recipients with

some form of choice, either between FFS and MMC or among different MMC plans. In the

1990s, Medicaid managed care served mainly low-income children and families, often via

mandatory enrollment but sometimes as a voluntary choice. Aged and disabled Medicaid

beneficiaries, who tend to have more complex health needs, were generally served by FFS

Medicaid. More recently, states have started to enroll aged and disabled beneficiaries into

managed care plans (MACPAC, 2011). Table 3 indicates that of the 42 states with Medicaid

managed care programs in 2014, 28 of them required all disabled Medicaid recipients to enroll in

an MMC plan.

    Second, the enrollment process varies by state and recipient type. In some states, all new

enrollees are pre-assigned to a managed care plan and then given a period of time during which

they are allowed to switch. In others, there is an initial enrollment choice period (just after

eligibility verification) for new enrollees to select a plan. During this choice period, recipients

are covered by the FFS program. After the choice period, enrollees who do not make an active


                                                  18
plan choice are “auto-assigned” to a plan using algorithms that vary by state. This enrollment

process varies across states and within a state by recipient type. For example, pregnant women in

Louisiana are pre-assigned, whereas other beneficiaries have a 30-day enrollment choice period.

     In many states, auto-assignment –using an algorithm to automatically enroll Medicaid

recipients who do not actively choose a plan in a (typically randomly) selected plan – is very

common. A recent survey of state Medicaid programs found that the median state has an auto-

assignment rate of 45%, with the auto-assignment rates for ten states exceeding 60% (Smith

2016). Auto-assignment algorithms sometimes consider existing provider-patient relationships

and may also consider geographic location and enrollment of family members. In some states,

preferential auto-assignment rewards plans with superior cost or quality performance. In many

states, however, preferential auto-assignment focuses on balancing market shares across MMC

plans – i.e., assigning more enrollees to the plans that fewer people have actively chosen.8 If

enrollment in managed care is not mandatory, enrollees who do not make a plan selection may

instead be enrolled in FFS Medicaid.9 Once the initial plan assignment has been made, enrollees

are often given a period of time to freely switch plans, after which they are often ‘locked-in’ to a

managed care plan for 6-12 months. However, the allowed time when enrollees can switch plans

also varies across states. Even during the “open enrollment” period during which recipients can

switch plans, assignments are relatively “sticky,” with low levels of switching. However,

switching is more likely among sicker recipients who tend to move from lower-quality to higher-


8
  This policy therefore rewards plans that – based on revealed preference in enrollees’ active plan choices – appear
to be less desirable. While this policy seems odd, it is consistent with the theme of MMC plans as contractors or
partners in administering a welfare program (rather than competitors in a market). Auto-assigning more enrollees to
smaller plans helps prop up these insurers, making them more likely to succeed and giving them more leverage in
contract negotiations with providers.
9
  Massachusetts auto-assigns Medicaid recipients first to FFS vs. MMC and then those individuals who are assigned
to MMC are auto-assigned to a specific MMC plan.
                                                           19
quality plans, indicating that while auto-assignment may weaken adverse selection problems, it

does not remove them entirely (Geruso, Layton, and Wallace 2017; Marton, Yelowitz, and

Talbert 2017).

    Plan choice can be influenced by marketing, outreach programs and support from insurance

brokers. Most states allow insurers to conduct marketing and outreach campaigns aimed at

enrolling Medicaid-eligible populations. Provider-owned insurers generally use their own

emergency rooms or community health centers to identify and enroll eligible but uninsured

patients. Most states also use third-party enrollment brokers who help beneficiaries compare plan

options and make a selection (CMS, 2016b).

    In summary, the plan choice process in Medicaid differs significantly from the process in

other settings such as employer-sponsored insurance, Medicare Advantage, and the ACA

Marketplaces. The large share of passive enrollees means that state-defined auto-assignment

rules play an outsized role in shaping insurer competitive incentives. This represents both a

distinction from standard insurance markets – where demand is based on enrollee preferences

and choices – and a powerful tool for states to use to shape the competitive environment.



                 Textbox 2: MassHealth – Massachusetts’ Medicaid Program

Massachusetts operates a state-run Primary Care Clinician (PCC) plan alongside a set of
private comprehensive Medicaid managed care plans. Many Medicaid recipients have a choice
between the PCC and MMC plans, though the childless adults covered under Massachusetts’
Medicaid expansion do not have the PCC option. Unlike most states, recipients who neglect to
choose a plan are auto-assigned to both PCC and MMC plans rather than exclusively to MMC
plans. In March 2015 about half of Massachusetts Medicaid recipients were enrolled in a
private MMC plan.

Massachusetts contracts with six health plans: Boston Medical Center (BMC) HealthNet Plan,
Fallon Community Health Plan, Health New England, Neighborhood Health Plan, Network
Health, and Celticare (owned by Centene, and only available in the CarePlus program open to
                                                 20
Massachusetts’ Medicaid expansion population). Plans are not required to participate in all
regions of the state. Two of the five plans, BMC HealthNet and Neighborhood Health Plan,
are hospital-owned. The state does not restrict the number of health plans, but does require all
plans to go through a procurement process. The state also contracts with a specialty managed
care plan, MA Behavioral Health Partnership, to provide behavioral health services to
individuals in the PCC plan.

Massachusetts pays plans based on regional administratively-set rates. Payments to health
plans are risk adjusted using the DxCG risk adjustment system. The state is currently
developing a variant of their current risk adjustment model that incorporates “Social
Determinants of Health” information.




3. Health plan payment design

    Health plan payment policies in Medicaid are complex and vary significantly across states.

Medicaid managed care insurers are generally paid a monthly, risk-adjusted per enrollee

payment (also known as a capitation rate) and may also receive supplemental payments for

certain services or populations. In the rate development process, a “base payment” is developed

based on the expected cost of the average Medicaid enrollee. The base payment is either set

administratively or set as part of the procurement process (through competitive bidding or

negotiation). The base payments are typically risk adjusted by multiplying the payment by

individual (or group) risk scores to account for the health risks of a given insurer’s Medicaid

enrollees. Risk adjustment factors include demographic factors, health status, and eligibility

type. Some states also use risk sharing methods such as risk corridors, reinsurance or stop-loss

programs. Though states have flexibility to define state-specific health plan payment policies,

federal regulations have led to some similarities across states. We discuss development of the

base payment rate first, and then outline risk adjustment in more detail.


                                                   21
3.1 Rate Development

     Beginning in 2002, federal regulations required that capitation payments to MMC insurers

be certified as “actuarially sound” based on cost and utilization data from Medicaid enrollees or

a comparable population (MACPAC 2011). As part of the rate development process, states work

with actuaries to develop a range of capitation rates based on national or state health care cost

trends, provider reimbursement levels, fee-for-service data, and encounter data collected from

participating insurers.10 The base capitation rates paid to insurers must lie within this range.

     There are three basic methods for setting insurer capitation rates. Table 4 shows which states

use each method. Some states use a single rate-setting method, whereas other states use a

combination of multiple methods.              In the first, administrative rate setting, states select a

capitation rate within the actuarially sound range and communicate it to insurers during

procurement. This method gives the state more control over its costs and avoids the

administrative hassles of a bidding process. Rather than using its bargaining position to minimize

costs while providing a given level of quality, the state has a set level of Medicaid spending and

uses its position to maximize quality given that spending level.

     A second method is for the state to conduct a competitive bidding process in which the

actuarially sound range effectively serves as a price floor and ceiling.11 Interestingly, some states

do not reveal the actuarially sound range during bidding but impose it on rates after bids are

collected. The bidding method introduces price competition into Medicaid procurement and lets


10
   Encounter data includes records of services provided to enrollees in a given plan. As the quality of encounter data
has improved over the years, some states have begun relying exclusively on encounter data (rather than fee-for-
service data) for determining the actuarially sound rate range.
11
   Rate ceilings are a natural check on high prices, especially since beneficiaries do not pay higher premiums for
plans that are more expensive to the state. Rate floors seem less natural given the state’s desire to save money. Our
understanding is that they are intended to prevent an MMC plan from mistakenly charging an unsustainably low
price and then being forced to drop out mid-way through a contract period.
                                                            22
the state save money if insurers submit low bids. However, just a handful of states use

competitive bidding to set rates – perhaps due to a perception that plans that bid very low also

offer lower-than-acceptable levels of quality.

    The final method for rate setting is to conduct a negotiation with MMC plans. In these cases,

states generally begin negotiations at the low end of the actuarially sound range. Insurers then

present their case for higher capitation rates, citing evidence of plan performance or quality.

Negotiation was historically the norm for rate setting in MMC. However, today it is used in only

a few states. The initial rate agreed upon during a competitive bid or negotiation is generally

adjusted annually during the duration of the contract period to account for benefit changes and

medical cost inflation.


3.2 Risk Adjustment

    Starting from the base capitation payment (just discussed), states use various factors to

adjust payment rates to account for differing health status of enrollees in each plan. Demographic

factors – such as age, sex, geography, and Medicaid eligibility category – are generally included

in rate adjustment. Over time, more states have incorporated medical diagnoses into risk

adjustment. Risk scores are generated for each enrollee based on the included variables, and the

average risk score of a plan’s enrollees determines its risk-adjusted capitation rate. The precise

method by which this occurs varies across states, as we describe below.

    Diagnosis information may be gleaned from medical claims, encounter data, or pharmacy

claims. The type of risk adjustment model chosen by a given state depends on the type and

quality of claims data available to the state. For example, Florida moved from using Medicaid

Rx (a model based on pharmacy claims) to the Chronic Disability Payment System (CDPS, a


                                                  23
Table 18.4 - Rate Setting and Payment    Table 4: Rate Setting and Payment

                  State Comprehensive MCO           Administrative          Negotiated        Competitive Bid      Pay for Performance
              Alabama                                      --                   --                  --                      --
                Alaska                                     --                   --                  --                      --
               Arizona             ✦                                                                ✓
             Arkansas                                      --                   --                  --                      --
             California            ✦                       ✓
             Colorado              ✦                       ✓                   ✓
          Connecticut                                      --                   --                  --                      --
             Delaware              ✦                       ✓                   ✓                                            ✓
 District of Columbia              ✦                       ✓                   ✓
                Florida            ✦                                                                                        ✓
               Georgia             ✦                       ✓                                                                ✓
                Hawaii             ✦                                           ✓                    ✓                       ✓
                 Idaho             ✦*
                Illinois           ✦                       ✓
               Indiana             ✦                                                                ✓                       ✓
                   Iowa            ✦*
                Kansas             ✦                                                                ✓
             Kentucky              ✦                       ✓
             Louisiana             ✦                       ✓
                 Maine                                     --                   --                  --                      --
             Maryland              ✦                       ✓                                                                ✓
       Massachusetts               ✦                       ✓
             Michigan              ✦                       ✓                                                                ✓
           Minnesota               ✦                       ✓
           Mississippi             ✦                       ✓
              Missouri             ✦                       ✓                                                                ✓
             Montana                                       --                   --                  --                      --
             Nebraska              ✦                       ✓
               Nevada              ✦                       ✓
     New Hampshire                 ✦                       ✓
           New Jersey              ✦                       ✓                                                                ✓
          New Mexico               ✦                                                                ✓                       ✓
             New York              ✦                       ✓                                                                ✓
       North Carolina                                      --                   --                  --                      --
        North Dakota               ✦*
                   Ohio            ✦                       ✓                                                                ✓
            Oklahoma                                       --                   --                  --                      --
               Oregon              ✦                       ✓                   ✓                                            ✓
         Pennsylvania              ✦                       ✓                   ✓                                            ✓
          Puerto Rico              ✦                       ✓
         Rhode Island              ✦                       ✓                                                                ✓
       South Carolina              ✦                       ✓                                                                ✓
        South Dakota                                       --                   --                  --                      --
            Tennessee              ✦                                                                ✓                       ✓
                  Texas            ✦                       ✓                                                                ✓
                   Utah            ✦                       ✓
              Vermont              ✦                       ✓
               Virginia            ✦                       ✓
          Washington               ✦                       ✓
        West Virginia              ✦                       ✓
            Wisconsin              ✦                       ✓
             Wyoming                                       --                   --                  --                      --
                  Total            42                      32                   6                   6                       18
                Legend * = rate setting method unknown
                  Note: Some states use a combination of rate setting methods
                Source: Compiled from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) Managed Care State Profiles
                         https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/managed-care/state-profiles/index.html

                                                                 24
model based on medical diagnoses codes) after the reporting of encounter data improved.

Moreover, a single state may use different risk-adjustment models for different populations. A

study of 20 managed care programs in 2010 found that 17 states used a risk-adjustment model

incorporating health status, though the exact models used varied by state (Courtot, 2012). CDPS,

a risk-adjustment model originally developed for Medicaid plan payment, was most frequently

used model. Eleven study states used CDPS, and three states used Adjusted Clinical Groups

(ACG). Other models used include Ingenix Symmetry, Medicaid Rx, Clinical Pharmaceutical

Groups (CRxG), and Diagnostic Cost Groups (DxCG).

    States also differ in whether they implement risk adjustment based on concurrent diagnoses

or diagnoses from the prior year (prospective) and in whether they use individual or “aggregate”

risk adjustment (Winkelman and Damler 2008). Under all risk-adjustment methods, an average

risk score for the plan is generated, and plan payments are equal to the base payment multiplied

by the average risk score. The methods differ in how the average risk score is generated. Under

individual risk adjustment – the standard method used in programs like Medicare Advantage and

the ACA Marketplaces – plan payments are adjusted based on the risk scores of the individuals

actually enrolled in the plan for each month. In this case, the plan’s average risk score is the

mean risk score of all of its enrollees in a given month. This method makes prospective risk

adjustment difficult due to relatively short enrollment spells of most Medicaid recipients.

Because of this difficulty, many states use “aggregate” risk adjustment, where a plan’s per

member per month payment in year t is adjusted based on the average risk score of its population

during year t-1. In this case, the plan’s average risk score is the mean risk score of all of its

enrollees during the prior year. In other words, plan payments are not adjusted based on the risk

scores of their current enrollees but based on the risk scores of their prior enrollees. This solves
                                                   25
the problem of short enrollment spells, but may make risk adjustment less accurate if the risk

composition of a population changes across years. According to a 2008 survey, at that time most

states used prospective aggregate risk adjustment (Winkelman, 2008).

    Health plans may also receive payment adjustments in the form of incentive payments or

efficiency adjustments. Some states incorporate incentive payments into capitation rates to

reward insurers for meeting performance benchmarks. This payment model is often referred to as

“pay-for-performance.” Often, these payments are implemented as “quality withholds” where the

state withholds a portion of a plan’s payment until they can determine whether the plan met the

quality benchmarks for the year. Similarly, states may adjust capitation payments for efficiency

factors to incentivize plans to meet efficiency targets or reward plans for achieving cost savings.

For example, rates may be adjusted to account for targeted or achieved reduction in unnecessary

inpatient admissions.


            Textbox 3: Chronic Illness and Disability Payment System (CDPS)

     The Chronic Illness and Disability Payment System was developed to enable states to
calculate risk adjusted payments to health plans for their Medicaid beneficiaries. CDPS groups
ICD-9-CM diagnostic codes into 20 major diagnostic categories, which are further subdivided
into subcategories by expected expenditure (i.e. high-cost, medium-cost, low-cost). To develop
CDPS, regression analysis of Medicaid claims was used to identify which diagnosis in year
one predicted expenditure in subsequent years. Then, clinical consultants helped to identify
poorly defined diagnoses that were omitted from the set of diagnostic predictors to help
mitigate the likelihood of inaccurate reporting. The model also features separate weights based
on demographic and eligibility information, such as disability status.

CDPS uses individual diagnosis and demographic data to calculate individual risk scores
which are used to adjust the payments made to health plans. CDPS+Rx is a revised version of
CDPS that combines diagnostic predictors from CDPS with pharmacy claims based predictors
using the Medicaid Rx risk adjustment model. Pennsylvania has used the CDPS+Rx risk
adjustment model (Courtot, 2012). CDPS and CDPS+Rx can be used concurrently, based on
current claims, or prospectively based on previous claims. (Kronick, 2000)



                                                  26
3.4 Risk Sharing

    In addition to risk-adjusted capitation payments to MMC plans, some states also use risk

sharing methods such as risk corridors, stop-loss protection, and reinsurance for extremely high

cost cases. Other policies related to risk sharing include service and population carve-outs and

supplemental payments to health plans for certain services. The objectives of these policies vary,

with risk corridors and stop-loss protection intended to protect insurers against financial risk and

carve-outs and supplemental payments intended at least in part to weaken selection incentives.

These methods are adopted differently across states and multiple risk sharing methods may be

used collectively.

    Risk corridors work like a profit-sharing scheme with the state. Plans whose claims costs

exceed capitation payments by a given percentage are reimbursed for a portion of their losses.

Conversely, a plan whose claims fall short of capitation payments by a given percentage must

reimburse the state for a portion of their profits. With stop-loss protection, plans are not

accountable for claims above a defined threshold. For example, New York limits plan risk for

inpatient care to $100,000 per enrollee per year, with the state covering remaining costs.

Similarly, Arizona will cover 75% of an enrollee’s annual inpatient claims above $25,000 or

$35,000 (depending on the beneficiary) and 100% of inpatient claims exceeding $650,000. Some

states do not offer stop-loss protection or reinsurance but require that plans purchase private

reinsurance coverage (Courtot, 2012).

    In addition to these risk-sharing policies, carve outs of certain services and populations also

act as risk sharing mechanisms. For example, New York automatically defaults low-birth weight

babies into the fee-for-service program, protecting managed care plans from very high Neonatal

Intensive Care Unit costs. Many states also default disabled individuals and other individuals
                                                   27
with complex chronic conditions into fee-for-service, weakening selection incentives faced by

managed care plans.

    Some states also use supplemental “kick” payments to insurers for certain services or types

of individuals. Supplemental payments are typically made to compensate managed care plans for

services for which the state does not want them to bear the risk. The most common supplemental

payment is for maternity services, to cover the cost of pre-natal care and delivery, with additional

payments for low-birth weight babies. These payments act as a form of risk sharing to

compensate insurers for the added cost of delivery. Pregnancy and childbirth are often difficult to

include explicitly in the prospective risk-adjustment models typically implemented in Medicaid

given that (1) there typically are not diagnoses from year t-1 indicating that a delivery will take

place in year t and (2) many pregnant women who have Medicaid coverage became eligible for

Medicaid only when they become pregnant. Supplemental payments may also be made for HIV

care, organ transplants, and other high-cost populations or services.

    A final form of risk sharing that takes place in MMC is as part of the MMC plan’s base

payment. In some cases, MMC plans are not actually at risk for the spending of their enrollees.

This typically occurs with provider-owned plans. The plan/provider organization is charged with

managing the care of its enrollees and then reimbursed for any services that it provides to its

enrollees on a fee-for-service basis. For example, the University of Utah has an MMC plan that

participates in Utah’s Medicaid program, and until 2013 this plan was reimbursed fee-for-service

for all services it provided its enrollees. This form of plan payment is similar to another form of

payment (known as “cost-plus” payment) that used to be common in Medicaid. Under cost-plus

payment, MMC plans would present the state each year with records of their enrollees’ spending.

The state would then set each plan’s payment equal to the plan’s prior spending plus a mark-up
                                                   28
to cover administrative costs and provide profits. While there was typically some negotiation

between the state and the MMC plans, this form of payment was closer to fee-for-service

reimbursement, leaving MMC plans with some short-term risk but limiting the medium- and

long-term risk they faced. New York used “cost-plus” payment in its MMC program until 2008

when it transitioned to administratively-set regional rates with risk adjustment.



4. Evaluation of health plan payment

    Medicaid does not have a single health plan payment system; instead, each state has its own

payment system that may vary across different Medicaid populations. This makes an overall

evaluation of health plan payment close to impossible. Thus, in this section we focus our

attention on two types of evaluations. First, we present results on the statistical performance of

each of the five risk adjustment models most commonly used in state Medicaid programs. For

each model, we present R-squared and/or predictive ratio statistics from the initial research

papers outlining the development of the models. While risk adjustment is far from the only

component of Medicaid plan payment systems, it is an important component and is the only

component that we know of that has been evaluated. Second, we review the small set of papers

that have studied indirect consequences of plan payment systems, such as effects on health

outcomes, benefit distortions, and risk selection of profitable enrollees by managed care plans.

These papers provide insights into the inadequacies of the overall payment system, rather than

focusing solely on risk adjustment.




                                                   29
4.1 Statistical Performance of Common Risk Adjustment Models

    The five most commonly used risk adjustment models that have been incorporated into

Medicaid Managed Care payment systems are the Chronic Illness and Disability Payment

System (CDPS), the Medicaid Rx model, the Adjusted Cost Groups (ACG) system, the Clinical

Risk Groups (CRG) system, and the Diagnostic Cost Group (DxCG)/Hierarchical Condition

Category (HCC) system. For each of these risk adjustment systems, the researchers who

developed the system produced a report describing the development of the system and reporting

some key statistics that are often used to evaluate payment system performance. While we

recognize that there has been additional research on each of these systems, because of the large

number of systems, we restrict our review to these initial reports except in a few exceptional

cases. Additionally, we are limited to discussing the measures of performance that have been

used, with the only available measures being R-squared statistics and predictive ratios. While

these metrics do not directly measure the performance of the payment system with respect to

common objectives such as inducing efficient sorting across plans and providing plans with

incentives to provide efficient levels of benefits, (1) they are available and (2) they are not too

different from metrics that do measure performance on these objectives (Layton et al. 2017).

    The CDPS system was developed specifically for risk adjustment in Medicaid. It categorizes

chronic conditions by the part of the body they affect. Each category is then divided into levels

of severity. Kronick et al. (2000) report statistical measures of model performance using fee-for-

service Medicaid data from seven states. They estimate separate weights for disabled and low-

income Medicaid recipients. The model is estimated prospectively, using diagnoses from the

prior year to predict current year spending. The model performs particularly well for the disabled

population, achieving an R-squared of 0.18 for this group. Performance is weaker for non-
                                                  30
disabled adults and children enrolled in Medicaid, with R-squared statistics of 0.08 and 0.04 for

these groups. When considering predictive ratios, the model also performs poorly for individuals

with multiple chronic conditions, resulting in payments that fall below costs for these

individuals. The developers of the CDPS also compare their model to the HCC and ACG

systems, finding that with respect to the R-squared statistic the CDPS model outperforms both of

its competitors in the Medicaid population they study. This result holds for all three eligibility

categories: the disabled, non-disabled adults, and non-disabled children.

    The Medicaid Rx Model uses pharmacy claims rather than diagnosis codes from claims to

group individuals by chronic condition. This model is also prospective, using drug utilization

from the prior year to predict current spending. Gilmer et al. (2001) show that this model

performs better for disabled Medicaid recipients than it does for non-disabled adults and children

using fee-for-service Medicaid data from California, Colorado, Georgia, and Tennessee (Gilmer

et al. 2001). The model produces R-squared statistics of 0.15, 0.11, and 0.06 for the disabled,

non-disabled adults, and non-disabled children, respectively. However, the developers of the

model compare the model to the CDPS model and find that the CDPS model performs better.

    The ACG model is similar to the CDPS in that it uses diagnoses to group individuals by

condition. Unlike the other models, this model was developed on a commercial managed care

population (Starfield et al. 1991). The developers found that in that population, the model

produced an R-squared statistic of 0.19, implying reasonably good performance. However, other

work indicates much weaker performance in a Medicaid population (Kronick et al. 2000).

    The CRG model is also a diagnosis-based model. It differs from the ACG and CDPS models

in that the categories to which it assigns individuals are mutually exclusive, i.e. each individual

belongs to a single category. The developers of this model find that in a Medicare population the
                                                  31
model produces an R-squared of 0.11 when used prospectively and around 0.43 when used

concurrently (Hughes et al. 2004). The model performs reasonably well across all subgroups

analyzed by the developers, with predictive ratios ranging from around 0.9 to around 1.1,

implying that for these groups costs never exceed or fall below revenues by more than 10%. This

is not surprising given that the authors only analyzed subgroups of individuals incorporated into

the model (age, number of chronic diseases, etc.).

    The DxCG/HCC system is another diagnosis-based risk adjustment model. The developers

of this model find that it performs well in a Medicaid population, with an R-squared statistic

between 0.21 and 0.23 (Ash et al. 2000). The developers analyze predictive ratios for a variety of

medical condition-based subgroups. They find that the DxCG model dramatically outperforms

basic age/sex risk adjustment and that it performs well overall: All predictive ratios exceed 0.8

with the exception of the arthritis, and sexually transmitted diseases groups, and many groups

including most cancers, heart failure, diabetes, and alcohol/drug dependence have predictive

ratios close to 1.0.


4.2 Indirect Consequences of Inadequate Risk Adjustment

    While statistical measures of payment system performance can be useful – in that these

measures are similar to measures derived from a formal model of a regulator’s objective in

addressing adverse selection incentives (Layton et al. 2017) – studies of the actual consequences

of payment systems for enrollment and health outcomes provide a more complete picture of

whether a payment system achieves desired goals. Here, we focus on studies that consider

potential indirect outcomes of payment systems.




                                                     32
    Frank, Glazer, and McGuire (2000) study insurer incentives to distort plan benefits to attract

health enrollees in a Medicaid population. They construct a theoretical model that provides a

measure of an insurer’s incentive to distort coverage for a particular service, calling the insurer’s

behavior in response to that incentive “service-level selection.” They then use the measure to

evaluate service-level selection incentives in Michigan’s Medicaid program using data from fee-

for-service Medicaid recipients. They show that insurer service-level selection incentives are

particularly strong for mental health services and that this result holds under a payment system

with no risk adjustment and systems using ACGs and HCCs. They also show that both the HCC

and ACG risk adjustment systems tend to weaken distortionary incentives.

    An early paper showing evidence of MMC plan behavior consistent with a potential failure

of an MMC plan payment system was Currie and Fahr (2005) who study the effect of the switch

to managed care on the composition of the Medicaid caseload. They find that Medicaid

enrollment increases for poor white and Hispanic children but decreases for black children. They

also find that enrollment decreases among toddlers but not for school-aged children. Given that

toddlers and black children are generally sicker than other Medicaid populations (Currie and

Fahr 2005), these results are consistent with “cream-skimming” behaviors, potentially implying

that the payment systems in place during the study period (1989-1994) were inadequate.

    Kuziemko et al. (2013) study transitions to managed care in Texas’ Medicaid program.

Again, they focus on evidence of cream-skimming behavior among MMC plans, though they

focus on the mechanism by which plans engage in cream-skimming rather than the ultimate

enrollment consequences. Specifically, they show that when Texas counties transitioned from

fee-for-service Medicaid to MMC, black infant mortality rates increased while Hispanic infant

mortality rates decreased. They argue that this is consistent with plans reducing quality of care
                                                   33
for high-cost Medicaid recipients and improving quality of care for low-cost Medicaid recipients

because the average black birth costs almost twice as much as the average Hispanic birth. Again,

this suggests that the MMC plan payment system was imperfect in Texas during the authors’

study period (1993-2001).

    Clearly, more research is needed in this area. Medicaid is a population with extreme

variation in health care spending, with kids and pregnant women sometimes combined in the

same risk pool as the disabled and low-income aged individuals. This unpriced risk heterogeneity

represents a challenge for policymakers seeking to minimize adverse selection problems. Thus,

work focusing on more recent years and investigating standard questions about the extent of

selection in these MMC markets and the adequacy of current payment systems for compensating

plans for that selection is critical to improving the economic performance of these markets.



5. Ongoing issues and reforms

    There is a great deal we do not know about the economics of Medicaid managed care. MMC

market design, in particular, is an issue that is ripe for study and reform, and an issue clearly

linked to decisions about the form of health plan payment. As a large and growing budget item,

Medicaid reform is an issue high on states’ priority lists. MMC regulation is also a federal

priority, with the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) in 2016 issuing the first

large regulatory revamp in over a decade. Finally, as we have emphasized, the principles of

regulated competition have been applied to Medicaid only incompletely and in varying ways

across states. This makes Medicaid a potential “laboratory for regulated competition” – a setting

where researchers can test ideas underlying regulated competition and inform state Medicaid


                                                  34
reform efforts. This sort of research can improve our understanding of the consequences of

various policies underlying the regulated competition model.

    In this section, we highlight several areas where the principles of regulated competition

could be more fully applied in MMC. We discuss both potential reforms suggested by these

principles and the actual reform activity in these areas.


5.1 Enrollee Premiums

    The lack of enrollee premiums in Medicaid is a major departure from the basic idea of

regulated competition, for instance as laid out by Enthoven and Kronick (1989). Price signals are

central to the standard economic theory of market functioning. They steer consumers towards

lower-cost options and also let them indicate their level of valuation for higher-quality goods by

paying extra. These demand signals, in turn, encourage producers to cut costs and improve

quality. This standard form of competition is not possible in Medicaid where enrollees can

typically choose any plan for free.

    The implications of Medicaid’s “price-free” competition model are not well understood. Its

consequences are particularly interesting because of well-known market failures associated with

price competition in insurance markets with adverse selection (Akerlof 1970; Rothschild and

Stiglitz 1976). One way of mitigating these inefficiencies is to cross-subsidize price differences

between plans of varying generosity, lowering the relative price of the (more generous) adversely

selected plan. Cross-subsidizing price differences can lead to two beneficial effects. First, it can

improve the sorting of beneficiaries across plans by narrowing price differences towards cost

differences for the marginal enrollee (or “marginal costs”; see Cutler and Reber 1998; Einav,




                                                   35
Finkelstein, and Cullen 2010). Second, it can increase the quality of plans in equilibrium, making

it possible for generous plans to survive (Miyazaki 1977; Handel, Hendel, and Whinston 2015).

     Medicaid’s zero-premium design works like a 100% subsidy on price differences. For

improving sorting among plans, this is only optimal if marginal cost differences are truly zero.

Recent evidence from Layton, Geruso, and Wallace (2016) studying New York Medicaid

suggests that cost differences may in fact be quite large (as large as 30% among MMC plans in

New York City). Thus, Medicaid’s 100% cross-subsidies likely go too far for the purpose of

optimal sorting (i.e., “too many” individuals enrolling in high-cost plans and “too few” enrolling

in low-cost plans).

     For increasing equilibrium quality, the effects of Medicaid’s subsidy policy are ambiguous.

On the one hand, firms are likely to compete more on quality when enrollees are not price

sensitive (Dorfman and Steiner 1954). Further, the absence of premiums may eliminate a

powerful tool for low-cost, low-quality plans to selectively attract profitable consumers – the

mechanism at the heart of the Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) model.12 On the other hand, the

zero-premium setup means that Medicaid must either set insurer prices administratively or (if

bidding is used) impose caps on price bids. Otherwise, a plan could charge an arbitrarily high

price and make unlimited profits. Binding price caps can reduce equilibrium quality because a

plan cannot raise its price to pay for the associated costs of improving quality. Thus, the net

effect on quality is ambiguous. Additional research is needed to understand the tradeoffs

involved with Medicaid’s price-free competitive model.


12
   Adverse selection can still occur in zero-premium Medicaid markets, but the mechanism would have to be
different. Sicker people might be more aware that certain plans are better quality (or more likely to actively choose a
plan). Alternatively, the sick and healthy might value different aspects of quality – e.g., the sick might value good
specialist networks, whereas the healthy value good PCP networks. The latter is the mechanism in the literature on
“service-level selection” (Frank, Glazer, and McGuire 2000; Ellis and McGuire 2007).
                                                            36
     We are not aware of any states that apply different enrollee premiums to MMC plans based

on their price bids. Several states have recently adopted reforms requiring higher-income

enrollees (above the poverty line) to pay modest premiums to enroll in Medicaid.13 Some of

these reforms allow lower-income enrollees to get slightly more generous benefits if they pay a

modest premium (though they are not disenrolled if they fail to pay). However, these reforms do

not apply different premiums to managed care insurers based on their price bids, costs of care, or

observed/unobserved quality.

     One concern with premiums in Medicaid is that even modest amounts may deter enrollment

(Dague 2014), leaving low-income individuals uninsured. This concern, however, can be

addressed within the regulated competition framework if premiums can be negative – that is if

the state can rebate money to consumers. The state could make a benchmark plan (e.g., the most

expensive plan) free and share savings with consumers if they choose a cheaper option. There are

questions about whether such a system would be administratively feasible, but if so, it could

allow for premium differences without deterring coverage.


5.2 Competitive Procurement

     Absent enrollee premiums, the main way Medicaid programs can encourage insurers to

compete on prices is via states’ power to limit and shape choices. We highlight two “competitive

procurement” tools: regulators’ power to determine plan availability and to set auto-assignment

rules.




13
   For instance, five states (Arkansas, Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, and Montana) have received federal waivers
allowing them to charge premiums to enrollees newly eligible under the ACA (Kaiser Survey 2016). The “Healthy
Indiana Plan” is a typical example. It requires enrollees between 101-138% of poverty to pay premiums of 2% of
income (about $25/month) to stay enrolled.
                                                        37
     One way states can encourage competition is by selecting insurers in the procurement

process based on criteria like price and quality. If these criteria are clear in advance and there is a

credible threat of rejection, the procurement process may encourage insurers to lower prices

and/or improve quality. Notice the counter-intuitive logic: by limiting choice (or at least

threatening to do so), the program promotes competition on desired outcomes. While many states

use a “competitive” process to select MMC plans, the extent to which there is a real threat of

rejection is unclear. Some states (like Missouri) explicitly limit the number of insurers that can

participate in Medicaid (either statewide or regionally). The desired number of MMC plan

contracts may be communicated to insurers during the RFP process, as in the case of Iowa’s

2015 RFP release.14 But it is not clear how binding these limits are or how states select the

winning insurers. In Minnesota’s 2012 RFP, a scoring rubric based on quality, efficiency, and

cost was used to select the top three plans in each region (Spencer 2012).

     Another way of using plan availability to encourage competition is for states to accept all

insurers but limit plan availability for certain enrollees (e.g., new enrollees) to plans with the

lowest prices. This method has been used in two hybrid Medicaid/exchange programs:

Massachusetts’ pre-ACA CommCare program and Arkansas’ “private option” Medicaid

expansion. It has the advantage that the Medicaid program can limit choice without having to

kick current enrollees out of an existing plan if it fails in the competitive procurement process.

     An additional competitive procurement tool is states’ power to auto-assign passive

beneficiaries. In theory, plans with lower prices (or better quality) could be favored with larger

shares of auto-assignees. Interestingly, while ten states consider quality in auto-assignment, as


14
  Iowa stated plans to reward 2 to 4 MMC plan contracts in the 2015 Iowa Medicaid Managed Care RFP release
(Herman, 2015).
                                                      38
far as we know only Kentucky appears to use insurer prices as a factor (Marton et al. 2016).

Indeed, 23 states use auto-assignment to “balance enrollments” across plans, giving larger shares

to plans with fewer people (Kaiser Survey 2016). This method has the odd (and likely perverse)

effect of favoring plans that actively choosing enrollees have signaled to be less desirable. Given

the high rates of auto-assignment in many states (45% in the median state), a state’s decision of

how to allocate these enrollees is likely to have a significant effect on MMC plan behavior.

Overall, competitive auto-assignment seems like a simple and underexplored avenue for reform.


                         Textbox 4: Kentucky’s Medicaid Program

In 2011, Kentucky ended its PCCM program and expanded mandatory enrollment in private
risk-based managed care plans statewide. The state chose to contract with three managed care
plans: Aetna Better Health of Kentucky (owned by Aetna), Wellcare of Kentucky (owned by
Wellcare), and Kentucky Spirit (owned by Centene). More recently, the state also initiated a
contract with Anthem to serve its Medicaid expansion population. All plans are comprehensive
Medicaid Managed Care plans and there are no service “carve-outs.”

In April 2011, the state issued an RFP seeking bids from managed care insurers to cover
Medicaid recipients residing outside the Louisville area. They received bids from 9 insurers
and chose three. After the state selected the three plans, regional rates were negotiated with
each managed care plan. Overall, Wellcare negotiated the highest rates and Spirit negotiated
the lowest rates. It is not clear whether a promise of favorable auto-assignment to plans with
lower rates was part of the negotiation process, but ultimately the state did assign more
enrollees to the lowest cost plan in each region than to the other plans (Palmer et al. 2012).

In November 2011, the state auto-assigned all Medicaid recipients to one of the three plans
and then opened a 90 day open enrollment period during which recipients were able to switch
to a different plan (Marton et al. 2016). The auto-assignment algorithm took into account prior
physician relationships, family relationships, “load balancing,” and cost (Palmer et al. 2012).

Following auto-assignment, there was substantial switching out of the Kentucky Spirit plan,
which had the lowest negotiated rate and was viewed as low-quality, especially in one region
where it was unable to contract with a dominant provider group (Marton et al. 2016). Marton
et al. find that sicker recipients were more likely to switch out of Spirit and into Wellcare,
potentially leading to an adverse selection problem for Wellcare. However, the advantageously
selected plan, Spirit, exited the market in 2013, citing large financial losses under the low rate
it had negotiated with the state.

                                                   39
5.3 Scope of Benefits and Carve-Outs

    Standard theory suggests that managed care plans will have more efficient cost control

incentives if they cover a broad set of benefits. An insurer that covers all benefits will internalize

“offset effects,” whereby benefit changes in one area affect spending in another. For instance,

reducing access to prescription drugs has been shown to increase hospitalizations for the elderly

(Chandra, Gruber, and McKnight 2010). An insurer that covered only prescription drugs (as in

Medicare Part D) would not internalize these offset effects (Starc and Town 2016; Lavetti and

Simon 2016).

    In the presence of adverse selection, however, it may be efficient to “carve-out” certain

services that are used by individuals with predictably high costs (Frank, Glazer, and McGuire

2000; Ellis and McGuire 2007). If these services are not carved out and risk adjustment is

inadequate, then insurers face incentives to inefficiently ration these services. Because of this

selection issue, it can be better for the state to pay for a service via fee-for-service or to contract

it out separately to a specialized plan (e.g., a behavioral health care organization), despite the

potential inefficiency induced by non-internalized offset effects.

    In Medicaid, benefits like behavioral health, prescription drugs, and dental care are in fact

often “carved out” of managed care contracts. However, the recent trend has been to begin

carving some of these services back into managed care contracts. The shift in strategy may be

driven by more favorable federal policies for drug reimbursement or improved integration of

dental and behavioral health provider networks by insurers. The shift may also be driven by

improvements in state MMC plan payment systems that use sophisticated risk adjustment


                                                    40
systems that combat the selection-related inefficiencies that the carve-outs may have partially

been intended to prevent. Alternatively, even without a carve-out insurers may still subcontract

with more specialized insurers to provide behavioral health services.15

        More research is needed to understand the efficiency consequences of these carve-outs.

Given that many states are currently shifting away from carve-outs, there should be many natural

experiments with which researchers can study their consequences in the coming years.


5.4 Plan Regulation and Payment

        A key feature of regulated competition is that the market designer regulates benefits and risk

adjusts payments to offset incentives to stint on quality due to adverse selection. MMC

regulators have widely adopted both approaches: benefits are heavily regulated (indeed, typically

completely specified) and risk adjustment is standard. But there are several ways in which these

areas are ripe for reform.

        First, while states are increasingly adopting risk adjustment methods that use enrollee

diagnoses (Kaiser Survey 2016), these methods are still imperfect. For instance, many states use

“aggregate” risk adjustment, which is based on the risk scores of a plan’s enrollees in the prior

year (see discussion in Section 3). This is likely to offset selection incentives less well than the

standard risk adjustment methods based on a plan’s actual enrollees (though it may also reduce

incentives to upcode). Further, an important lesson from the literature is that when risk measures

are imperfect, optimal risk adjustment “over-pays” based on observed risk to compensate for

adverse selection on unobserved risk (Glazer and McGuire 2000). We are not aware of any states

that have tested this approach.


15
     Section 2 includes more detail on the incentives to carve out certain Medicaid service.

                                                               41
     Second, some aspects of quality – like how well the insurer coordinates care or how smooth

its claims-paying process is – are difficult to measure and regulate in plan contracts. Instead,

Medicaid programs are increasingly using quality reporting and pay-for-performance incentives

to encourage insurers to improve on these softer aspects of quality.16

     Third, Medicaid programs are increasingly specifying in contracts that plans pay their

providers using value-based purchasing or non-fee-for-service “alternative” payment models.

This new focus of Medicaid programs has the goal of reforming the delivery system. In 2016, 12

states had contracts requiring or encouraging alternative payments, with eight states planning to

adopt such contract provisions in 2017 (Kaiser Survey 2016). In addition to these plan payment

requirements, several states are adopting reforms to require plans to provide services that address

the “social determinants” of health, including screening beneficiaries and referring them to non-

medical community support services.

     Finally, Medicaid programs are increasingly adopting regulations on medical loss ratios

(MLRs), to constrain plan profits and administrative costs. New federal regulations in 2016

mandated an 85% minimum MLR for Medicaid plans, though many states already had similar or

higher requirements. MLR regulation has little basis in standard regulated competition principles

– though it may make sense given the limits on price competition in the Medicaid program.

However, it is unclear how it can work in a program where provider-owned plans are so

common. These plans can directly adjust their costs via the transfer price embedded in their

plan’s payment rates to the owning provider.




16
  In 2015, nearly all states with risk-based managed care had quality reporting programs, and 28 of the 39 states had
pay-for-performance initiatives. Many states are adopting or expanding these initiatives in 2016 and 2017.
                                                           42
                                          References

Akerlof, G. (1970). The Market for "Lemons": Quality Uncertainty and the Market
       Mechanism. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3), 488-500.
Ash, Arlene, Randall Ellis, Gregory Pope, et. al. (2000). “Using Diagnoses to Describe
       Populations and Predict Costs”. Health Care Finance Review, 21 (3), Spring: 7-28.
Brooks, Tricia, Sean Miskell, Samantha Artiga, et. al. (2016). Medicaid and Chip Elligibity,
       Enrollment, Renewal, and Cost-Sharing as of January 2016: Findings from a 50-State
       Survey. Kaiser Family Foundation. January 21. Accessed January 10, 2017.
       http://kff.org/report-section/medicaid-and-chip-eligibility-enrollment-renewal-and-cost-
       sharing-policies-as-of-january-2016-premiums-and-cost-sharing/.
Center for Medicaid and State Operations. (2006). “Letter to State Medicaid Directors”. Center
       Medicaid and Medicare Services. Retrieved from https://www.medicaid.gov/Federal-
       Policy-Guidance/downloads/SMD06010.pdf
Chandra, A., Gruber, J., & McKnight, R. (2010). Patient Cost Sharing in Low Income
       Populations. The American Economic Review, 100(2), 303-308.
Courtot, B., Coughlin, T. A., & Lawton, E. A. (2012). “Medicaid and CHIP Managed Care
       Payment Methods and Spending in 20 States.” Office of the Assistant Secretary for
       Planning and Evaluation, US Department of Health and Human Services. Urban Institute,
       Washington, DC.
Currie, Janet and John Fahr. (2005). “Medicaid managed care: effect on children’s Medicaid
       coverage and utilization”. Jounral of Public Economics, 89 (1), January: 85-108.
Culter, D., & Reber, S. (1998). Paying for Health Insurance: The Trade-Off between
       Competition and Adverse Selection. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2), 433-
       466.
Dague, Laura (2014). “The effect of Medicaid premiums on enrollment: a regression
       discontinuity approach.” Journal of Health Economics, 37, p. 1-12.
Dockendorf, Megan, Elizabeth Larson and Angie WasDyke. (2014). “MO Healthnet Managed
       Care Rate Development July 1, 2015- June 30, 2016”. Mercer. November 10, 2014.
       Accessed January 10, 2017. https://dss.mo.gov/business-processes/managed-care/bidder-
       vendor-documents/mercer-presentationmohealthnet-managed-care-rate-development.pdf
Dorfman, R., & Steiner, P. (1954). Optimal Advertising and Optimal Quality. The American
       Economic Review,44(5), 826-836.
Draper, D. A., Hurley, R. E., & Short, A. C. (2004). “Medicaid managed care: the last bastion of
       the HMO?.” Health Affairs, 23(2), 155-167.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark Cullen (2010). Estimating Welfare in Insurance
       Markets Using Variation in Prices. Quarterly Journal of Economics. vol. 123, no 3,
       August, pp: 877-921.
Ellis R.P. and McGuire, T.G. (2007) “Predictability and Predictiveness in Health Care
       Spending,” Journal of Health Economics 26(1): 25-48.
Enthoven A, Kronick R. (1989). “A consumer choice health plan for the 1990s”. New England
       Journal of Medicine;320:29.

                                                43
Frank, Richard, Haiden Huskamp, Thomas McGuire, and Joseph Newhouse. “Some Economics
       of a Mental Health Carve Out.” Archives of General Psychiatry, vol 56, October, 1996.
Frank, Richard, Jacob Glazer, and Thomas McGuire. (2000) “Measuring Adverse Selection in
       Managed Health Care.” Journal of Health Economics, vol 19:829-854.
Geruso M, Layton T, and Wallace J (2016). “Are All Managed Care Plans Created Equal?
       Evidence from Random Plan Assignment in New York Medicaid Managed Care”. In
       preparation.
Gifford, Kathy, et al. (2011). "Profile of Medicaid Managed Care Programs in 2010: Findings
       from a 50-State Survey, A."
Gilmer, Todd, Richard Kronick, Paul Fishman, and Theodore Gianats. (2001). “The Medicaid
       Rx Model: Pharmacy-Based Risk Adjustment for Public Programs”. Medical Care, 39
       (11), November: 1188-1202.
Glazer, Jacob and Thomas G. McGuire. (2000). "Optimal Risk Adjustment in Markets
       with Adverse Selection: An Application to Managed Care." American Economic
       Review, 90(4): 1055-1071.
Handel, Ben, Igal Hendel and Michael Whinston (2015). “Equilibria in Health Exchanges:
       Advrse Selection vs. Reclassification Risk Supplement. Econometrica 83(4): 1261-1313.
Herman, Bob (2015). “Iowa opens Medicaid program to managed-care bidding.” Modern Health
       Care. Retrieved from
       http://www.modernhealthcare.com/article/20150224/NEWS/150229971.
Hughes, J, Averill R, Eisenhandler J, et. al. (2004).” Clinical Risk Group’s (CRG): a
       classification system for risk-adjusted capitation based payment and health care
       management”. Medical Care, 42(1), January: 81-90.
Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF, 2011). “A Profile of Medicaid Managed Care Programs in
       2010: Findings from a 50 state survey.” September 13 Retrieved from
       http://kff.org/medicaid/report/a-profile-of-medicaid-managed-care-programs-in-2010-
       findings-from-a-50-state-survey/
Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF, 2016). “Total Medicaid Spending.” September. The Henry J
       Kaiser Family Foundation. http://kff.org/medicaid/state-indicator/total-medicaid-
       spending/?currentTimeframe=0
Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF, 2017a). “Medicaid Benefits: Prescription Drugs”. State Health
       Facts: Medicaid Benefits Data Collection. Retrieved from http://kff.org/medicaid/state-
       indicator/prescription-drugs/?currentTimeframe=0
Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF, 2017b). “Medicaid MCO Parent Firm Activity, by State and
       Insurance Market”. State Health Facts: Medicaid Managed Care Market Tracker.
       Retrieved from http://kff.org/other/state-indicator/medicaid-mco-parent-firm-activity-by-
       state-and-insurance-market/?currentTimeframe=0
Kronick, Richard, Todd Gilmer, Tony Dreyfus, and Lora Lee. (2000). “Improving Health-Based
       Payment for Medicaid Beneficiaries”. Healthcare Financing Review, 21 (3), Spring : 29-
       64.

                                                44
Kuziemko, Ilyana, Katherine Meckel, and Maya Rossin-Slater. (2013). “Do Insurer’s Risk Select
        Against Each Other? Evidence from Medicaid and Implications for Health Reform”.
        NBER Working Paper 19198.
Layton, Timothy, Michael Geruso, and Jacob Wallace. (2016). “Are All Managed Care
        Programs Created Equal? Evidence From Random Plan Assignment in New York
        Medicaid Managed Care.” In preparation.
Layton, Timothy, Randall Ellis, Thomas McGuire, and Richard Van Kleef. (2017) "Measuring
        Efficiency of Health Plan Payment Systems in Managed Competition Health Insurance
        Markets." Journal of Health Economics. Forthcoming.
Lewin Group, ACAP, and MHPA. “Medicaid Non-Emergency Out-of-Network Payment Study.”
        July 2009.
Lavetti, Kurt and Kosali Simon. (2016). “Strategic Formulary Design in Medicare Part D Plans”
        Revise and Resubmit at American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
Marton, James, Aaron Yelowitz, and Jeffrey Talbert. (2016). “Medicaid Program Choice, Inertia,
        and Adverse Selection”. Under revision Journal of Health Economics.
Medicaid and Children’s Health Insurance Programs: Essential Health Benefits in Alternative
        Benefit Plans, Eligibility Notices, Fair Hearing and Appeal Processes, and Premiums and
        Cost Sharing; Exchanges: Eligibility and Enrollment. (Medicaid and Children’s Health
        2013) 78 Federal Register 42159. September 15..
Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission (MACPAC, 2011). “Report to the
        Congress: The Evolution of Managed Care in Medicaid.”
Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission (MACPAC, 2017). “Mandatory and
        Optional Benefits.” Retrieved from https://www.macpac.gov/subtopic/mandatory-and-
        optional-benefits/
Mershon, E. (2016, May 23). “Medicaid Plans Succeed in Obamacare Exchange as Others
        Struggle.” Washington Health Policy: Week in Review. Retrieved from
        http://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/newsletters/washington-health-policy-
        in-review/2016/may/may-23-2016/medicaid-plans-succeed-in-obamacare-exchange-as-
        others-struggle
Miyazaki, H. (1977). “The Rat Race and Internal Labor Markets.” Bell Journal of Economics,
        8(2): 394-418.
Office of the Inspector General (OIG), US Department of Health and Human Services. (2014).
        "State Standards for Access to Care in Medicaid Managed Care”
Rothschild, M., & Stiglitz, J. (1976). Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay
        on the Economics of Imperfect Information. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90(4),
        629-649.
Smith, Vernon, Kathleen Gifford, and Eileen Ellis. (2016). Medicaid Reforms to Expand
        Coverage, Control Costs, and Improve Care: Results from a 50-State Medicaid Budget
        Survey for State Fiscal Years 2015-2016. Kaiser Family Foundation. Accessed January
        10, 2017. http://files.kff.org/attachment/report-medicaid-reforms-to-expand-coverage-

                                                45
        control-costs-and-improve-care-results-from-a-50-state-medicaid-budget-survey-for-
        state-fiscal-years-2015-and-2016
Sparer, Michael. (2012). “Medicaid managed care: Costs, access, and quality of care”. Robert
        Woods Johnson Foundation.. September. Accessed January 10, 2017.
        http://www.rwjf.org/content/dam/farm/reports/reports/2012/rwjf401106.
Spencer, D, Dybdal, K & Johnson, K. (2012). “Stakeholder Analysis of Medicaid Competitive
        Bidding in Minnesota: Final Report.” State Health Access Data Assistance Center
        (SHADAC).                                   Retrieved                              from
        http://archive.leg.state.mn.us/docs/2014/mandated/140686.pdf
Starc, Amanda and Robert J. Town, (2016) "Externalities and Benefit Integration in Health
        Insurance", NBER Working Paper 21783.
Starfield B, Weiner J, Mumford L, and Steinwachs D. 1991. Ambulatory Care Groups: A
        Categorization of Diagnoses for Research and Management. Health Services Research,
        vol. 26(1): 53-74.
US Department of Health and Human Services Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Servies.
        (CMS 2016a). Medicaid & CHIP: August 2016 Monthly Applications, Eligibility
        Determinations and Enrollment Report. Novemer 3. Accessed January 10, 2017.
        https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/program-information/downloads/august-2016-
        enrollment-report.pdf.
US Department of Health and Human Services Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Servies.
        (CMS 2016b). Medicaid and Managed Care Enrollment and Program Characteristics
        2014.       Spring.      https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid-chip-program-information/by-
        topics/data-and-systems/medicaid-managed-care/downloads/2014-medicaid-managed-
        care-enrollment-report.pdf
Winkelman, R & Damler, Rob. (2008). "Risk adjustment in state Medicaid programs." Health
        Watch 57: 1-34.




                                                46
