NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CREDIT MARKET FREEZES
Efraim Benmelech
Nittai K. Bergman
Working Paper 23512
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23512

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017

We thank Bengt Holmstrom for numerous conversations. We also thank Marty Eichanbaum, Ravi
Jaganathan, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Jonathan Parker, Sergio Rebelo, Steve Strongin, our NBER
Macro Annual discussants V. V. Chari and Raghu Rajan, and seminar participants at the
Goldman Sachs Global Markets Institute Academic Fellowship Conference and the NBER's 32nd
Annual Conference on Macroeconomics for many comments that have improved the paper. We
are grateful to Jack Bao and Kewei Hou for sharing their bond liquidity data. Shoham
Benmelech, Zach Mikaya, Khizar Qureshi, Jeremy Trubnick and Yupeng Wang provided
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Efraim Benmelech and Nittai K. Bergman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Credit Market Freezes
Efraim Benmelech and Nittai K. Bergman
NBER Working Paper No. 23512
June 2017
JEL No. G01,G12,G21
ABSTRACT
Credit market freezes in which debt issuance declines dramatically and market liquidity
evaporates are typically observed during financial crises. In the financial crisis of 2008-09, the
structured credit market froze, issuance of corporate bonds declined, and secondary credit
markets became highly illiquid. In this paper we analyze liquidity in bond markets during
financial crises and compare two main theories of liquidity in markets: (1) asymmetric
information and adverse selection, and (2) heterogenous beliefs. Analyzing the 1873 financial
crisis as well as the 2008-09 crisis, we find that when bond value deteriorates, bond illiquidity
increases, consistent with an adverse selection model of the information sensitivity of debt
contracts. While we show that the adverse-selection model of debt liquidity explains a large
portion of the rise in illiquidity, we find little support for the hypothesis that opinion dispersion
explains illiquidity in financial crises.

Efraim Benmelech
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
e-benmelech@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Nittai K. Bergman
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-632
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
nbergman@mit.edu

Introduction
Financial market freezes – by which we mean large declines in the volume of transactions
in both the primary and the secondary markets that occur over a non-trivial period of
time – are typically observed during financial crises. For example, issuance of corporate,
mostly railroad, bonds collapsed during the financial crisis of 1873 and did not resume until
1879. Likewise, there was a considerable decline in bond issuances in the financial crises of
1884, 1893 and 1907. Similar patterns can be observed during the Great Depression when
issuance of bonds by industrial firms fell dramatically in 1931 and did not recover until
1935.1 In particular, issuance of real estate bonds, which accounted for 23% of the total
corporate bond issuance in the 1920s, came to a halt in 1929 when the market for such bonds
dried-up. Junk bond issuances that boomed in the first half of the 1980s collapsed in 1990
with the market remaining frozen until 1993. The IT revolution led to a boom in issuance
of bonds by telecommunication companies which were in-turn purchased and securitized
into Collateralized Bond Obligations (CBO). The massive defaults by telecom companies
in 2001 and 2002 led to a collapse of the bond securitization market and CBOs have since
disappeared. A more recent example of a market freeze took place during the financial crisis
of 2008-09 with the collapse of the structured finance market – the largest and fastest growing
financial market in the years leading to the crisis. In particular, not only did the market for
mortgage-backed securities such as RMBS and CDOs collapse, but also, other, non-housing
segments of the structured finance markets – ranging from commercial loans securitizations
to asset-backed securities – came to a halt, and even the issuance of corporate bonds declined
significantly.
Credit freezes and liquidity dry-ups during financial crises affect secondary markets as
well. During the financial crisis of 2008-09 illiquidity in the bond market rose dramatically.
For example, according to Bao, Pan and Wang (2011), aggregate illiquidity doubled from
its pre-crisis levels in August 2007, and tripled in March 2008, during the collapse of Bear
Stearns. By September 2008, during the Lehman Brothers default and the bailout of AIG,
bond illiquidity was five times its pre-crisis level. As we show in our analysis below, illiquidity
in the bond market also rose sharply in the panic of 1873 – one of the worst financial crises
during the National-Bank era. For example, bid-ask spreads doubled from their pre-crisis
levels in August 1873 and remained elevated for more than a year.
This paper analyzes liquidity in bond markets during financial crises with an emphasis on
the most recent crisis of 2008-09. In doing so, we compare two main theories of liquidity in
markets: (1) asymmetric information and adverse selection, and (2) heterogenous beliefs.
1

See Benmelech, Frydman and Papanikolaou (2017).

2

The classic literature explaining liquidity and frictions in trade between economic agents
relies on fundamental insights developed in the information economics literature. As first
shown in Akerlof (1970) and Spence (1973), private information held by economic agents
generates adverse selection in which buyers demand discounts reflecting their concern about
the negative information held by sellers. Dang, Gorton and Holmström (2012, 2013) and
Holmström (2015) apply these insights to develop an asymmetric-information theory of
liquidity in bond markets. This is the first theory we test to understand the determinants of
liquidity in bond markets during financial crises.
The fundamental insight of Dang, Gorton and Holmström is that the payoff structure of
debt contracts generates two regions in which bonds will trade. When bond default risk is
relatively low, bond payoffs will be comparatively insensitive to underlying firm value. The
value of private information, and hence adverse selection between economic agents, will be
relatively low. As a result, when default risk is low, debt is informationally insensitive, and
liquidity will be high. In contrast, when default risk rises, the sensitivity of bond value to
underlying firm value increases as the firm is nearing its default boundary. Private information
in this region is valuable, adverse selection is therefore high, and debt liquidity will decline.
The main prediction of the Dang, Gorton and Holmström model is thus that bond illiquidity
will rise as bond value declines, with the bond moving from the informationally insensitive to
the informationally sensitive regions.
The second theory of bond liquidity we analyze stems from the literature on heterogeneous
beliefs (see, e.g., Harrison and Kreps (1978), Varian (1989), and Harris and Raviv (1993)).
By assuming that agents hold different fundamental opinions about underlying asset values –
some agents are optimistic while others are pessimistic – the literature on heterogeneous beliefs
evades the classic no-trade results in the information economics literature (e.g. Rubinstein
(1975), Hakansson et al. (1982), and Milgrom and Stokey (1982)). Adverse selection is
thus mitigated – indeed, dissipated – by agents’ high certainty in the correctness of their
own opinion of asset value: agents engage in trade for their own perceived mutual benefit.
Differences of opinion can thus promote trade and increase liquidity. Indeed, if agent A values
an asset more than agent B, and believes B’s valuation to be simply wrong, then agent A
does not fear adverse selection in purchasing the asset from B, nor will she require a discount
in doing so. Our empirical tests are aimed, therefore, at analyzing to what extent differences
of opinion are positively related to liquidity in debt markets during the financial crisis of
2008-09.
One caveat about the theoretical prediction that differences of opinion lead to higher
liquidity, is that the theory relies on assumptions regarding the joint distribution of beliefs and

3

endowments. To the extent that opinion dispersion rises in a manner perfectly correlated with
the distribution of endowments, it need not be the case that trade and liquidity will rise with
the degree of the dispersion. Consider for example a scenario with two agents differentiated
by their beliefs about asset value – an optimist and a pessimist – where the optimist owns
the asset. If, now, opinion dispersion rises in such a way as to make the optimist even more
optimistic and the pessimist more pessimistic, there should be no associated increase in trade
or market liquidity.2 Still, if there are numerous agents, and the changes in agents’ opinions
are not perfectly aligned with current asset holdings, increased dispersion will facilitate trade.
Before turning to testing the ability of the models to explain liquidity of credit markets
during financial crises, we begin by providing descriptive evidence on credit issuance dry-ups.
We collect data on bond issuance during the period surrounding the 1873, 1929 and 2008-09
financial crises. The results show that in all three crises there is a substantial decline in
bond issuance during and after the onset of the crisis. While the evidence is consistent with
liquidity dry-ups and market freezes during downturns in the spirit of Myers and Majluf
(1984) and Lucas and McDonald (1990), we cannot rule out that the reduction in issuances
is driven by lack of corporate demand for credit stemming from a reduction in investment
opportunities. Hence, in our main analysis we focus on liquidity in secondary markets – i.e.,
market liquidity – as opposed to liquidity in primary markets – i.e., funding liquidity.3
We begin by empirically testing the main prediction of the Dang, Gorton and Holmström
model – namely that during financial crises bond illiquidity rises as bond value declines. To
operationalize the empirical tests we use standard measures of bond illiquidity for the 1873
and 2008-09 crises. Specifically, we use bid-ask spreads as a measure for bond illiquidity
during the 1873 crisis. For the 2008-09 financial crisis we use γ – the negative covariance of
log-price changes in two consecutive periods – that has been proposed by Roll (1984) and
has been recently used by Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011) as a measure of bond illiquidity.4
Using our hand-collected data from the 19th century as well as TRACE data for the
2007-2009 period, we provide graphical evidence that bond illiquidity rises when bond values
deteriorates. For example, the correlation between bid-ask spreads and bond prices during
the 1873-1876 period is -0.909. Likewise, the correlation between γ and bond prices during
the 2007-2009 period is -0.858. Both correlations are statistically significant at the 1 percent
level. We next test the prediction that bond illiquidity rises as bond price declines in financial
crises more formally by estimating a regression model in which the dependent variable is
2

In fact, the opposite may hold, as if forced to trade, the optimist will have to sell to the pessimistic agent.
For a discussion of the relation between funding liquidity and market liquidity see Brunnermeier and
Pedersen (2009).
4
Our results also hold with alternative measures of illiquidity such as the one proposed in Amihud (2002).
3

4

bond illiquidity and the main explanatory variable is lagged bond price. Our results confirm
the negative association between illiquidity and bond prices in both the 1873 and 2008-09
financial crises even after we control for bond and year-by-month fixed-effects. Our evidence
confirms the fundamental prediction of the asymmetric-information theory of bond liquidity
in Dang, Gorton, and Holmström (2012): bond illiquidity rises as bond price declines during
financial crises.5
We continue by analyzing the main prediction of the heterogeneous beliefs theory – i.e.,
that differences of opinion between economic agents should promote liquidity. Measuring
differences of opinion is not trivial as this requires gauging the subjective beliefs of agents
engaged in trade. We employ two proxies of differences of opinions in our analysis. The
first proxy for differences opinion in debt markets is the absolute value of the difference
between the credit rating of Moody’s and S&P in notches.6 Our second measure of opinion
heterogeneity is analyst earnings forecast dispersion. Following the literature on analyst
forecast dispersion (see, e.g., Diether, Malloy and Scherbina (2002)) we calculate for each
bond-month in our sample, the ratio of its firm’s standard deviation of analysts’ currentfiscal-year annual earnings per share forecasts to the absolute value of the mean analyst
forecast.
There are two important caveats to these proxies for opinion dispersion. First, even if
the measures accurately capture differences of opinion regarding firm value amongst rating
agencies and amongst equity analysts, these measures may not accurately reflect differences
of opinion amongst the relevant market participants who are actually trading in the bond
markets. Second, it could very well be that incentive structures, career concerns, institutional
reputational concerns and the like are influencing earnings forecasts and credit ratings,
implying that the actual beliefs of the analysts and rating agencies are different from those
announced to the market. We employ these measures because of their availability, and while
they have been used extensively in the literature, we proceed with the analysis with these
caveats in mind.
First, we show that the difference of opinion measures rise substantially during the crisis.
The S&P-Moody’s credit rating difference, as well as analyst earnings forecast dispersion,
spike up post Lehman collapse – both attaining a maximum in March 2009 – before declining.
Taken together with the rise in illiquidity during the crisis described above, the fact that
5

In related work, Pérignon et al. (2017) empirically examines the market for certificates of deposit
in Europe showing that banks experiencing funding dry-ups subsequently exhibit decreasing performance,
consistent with asymmetric information models such as Gorton and Pennacchi (1990), Calomiris and Kahn
(1991), and Dang, Gorton, and Holmström (2012).
6
A one-to-one correspondence exists in the rating system of the two credit rating agencies, and so this
measure is well defined.

5

mean opinion dispersion increased post-Lehman serves as prima facie evidence against the
main prediction of the heterogeneous beliefs literature of a positive relation between opinion
dispersion and liquidity. A simple means comparison analysis confirms the time-series
evidence. Sorting bonds into bins by their degree of bond rating difference results in a
positive and monotonic relation between opinion dispersion and illiquidity. Similarly, sorting
bonds by deciles of analyst earnings forecast dispersion uncovers a qualitatively similar result:
higher dispersion is associated with increased illiquidity, with the effect being particularly
pronounced in the top two deciles of analyst forecast dispersion.
More formally, we estimate a regression model relating bond illiquidity to differences of
beliefs using our two measures of opinion dispersion. Regressions are run with year-by-month
fixed effects – soaking up common time series variation – and bond fixed effects which control
for non-time varying bond characteristics. The results show that the Moody’s-S&P bond
rating difference is positively related to bond illiquidity. Similarly, the opinion dispersion
measure based on analyst forecast dispersion is also positively related to illiquidity, with the
effect concentrated in high levels of forecast dispersion. In contrast to the heterogeneous
beliefs theory, increased opinion dispersion does not seem, therefore, to contribute to increased
liquidity.
We then run a “horse-race” between the Dang, Gorton, and Holmström asymmetricinformation theory of bond liquidity and the heterogeneous beliefs theory. Estimating
regression models relating bond liquidity to bond price as well as the two measures of opinion
dispersion, we show that while the relation between illiquidity and price during the 200809 financial crisis remains negative and statistically significant, the relation between bond
illiquidity and opinion dispersion is not statistically significant once bond price is added as a
covariate.7
We continue by estimating the portion of the aggregate increase in bond illiquidity during
the financial crisis that can be explained simply by the reduction in bond prices, i.e., by the
main prediction of the Dang, Gorton, and Holmström asymmetric information theory of bond
liquidity. Using the estimated coefficients from the regression of illiquidity on lagged bond
price, and integrating over the full distribution of changes in bond price, we conclude that
between a quarter and a third of the increase in bond illiquidity after the collapse of Lehman
7

The fact that the bond rating difference is no longer positively related to illiquidity once bond price is
added as a covariate in the regression analysis likely stems from the fact that price and rating difference
are negatively related: decreases in bond price are associated with increases in the Moody’s-S&P rating
difference. Thus, the positive relation between illiquidity and rating difference may simply be reflecting the
negative relation between bond price and illiquidity combined with the negative relation between bond price
and rating dispersion.

6

Brothers in September 2008 can be attributed solely to the concurrent reduction in bond
prices.
To summarize, our empirical results are consistent with the information asymmetry theory
of liquidity as in Dang, Gorton and Holmström (2012). When bond value deteriorates, bond
illiquidity increases, as would be predicted by adverse selection stemming from the bond
entering a region in which its value is informationally sensitive. The negative relation between
bond illiquidity and price explains a large fraction of the rise in illiquidity during the financial
crisis, although a sizeable fraction remains unexplained.
In contrast, using two proxies for belief dispersion – the Moody’s-S&P difference in bond
rating and analyst forecast dispersion – we find little support for the hypothesis that liquidity
is enhanced as differences of opinion rise. At the aggregate level, as well as using panel data
analysis at the individual bond-level, opinion dispersion did not increase liquidity during the
crisis period. If anything, the opposite seems to hold, with illiquidity and dispersion positively
related, particularly when using the bond rating difference measure of belief dispersion.
Our results points to a strong link between crises and the dry-ups of market liquidity.
We find that asset prices play a crucial role in determining liquidity in debt markets during
financial crises. It is precisely when prices decline market-wide, that liquidity dries-up and
issuance of new liabilities becomes difficult, reducing the supply of capital for firms already
pushed into distress due to the crisis. Illiquidity in credit markets can have dire consequences
for households as well. Precautionary savings in the form of fixed-income securities become
hard to sell and households in need of liquid funds may find liquidity difficult to obtain
precisely when they need it most.
These results have implications for the efficacy of monetary interventions meant to
strengthen the economy during downturns through increased lending by the financial sector. In
particular, the asymmetric information theory of liquidity suggests that if these interventions
occur when borrower balance sheets are weak, liquidity will not easily flow from the financial
sector into the economy. Weak borrower balance sheets will imply that issued liabilities
will be informationally sensitive, limiting borrowers’ ability to raise debt capital. Monetary
interventions meant to inject liquidity from the financial sector into the real economy can thus
arrive “too late”. In contrast, monetary interventions that occur at an earlier stage – when
balance sheets are still sufficiently strong that liabilities issued by borrowers are relatively
informationally insensitive – will have a larger effect. As a corollary, if monetary interventions
are rendered ineffective because they arrive too late in the cycle, the asymmetric information
theory of liquidity suggests that fiscal policy may be effective in complementing monetary
policy. In particular, strengthening borrower balance sheets directly through fiscal policy

7

shifts corporate liabilities into a less informationally sensitive region in which monetary
interventions meant to increase lending become effective.8
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 presents evidence on credit issuance
freezes in three financial crises. Section 2 provides evidence on liquidity and informational
sensitivity in financial crises. Section 3 evaluates the explanatory power of belief dispersion
for liquidity in financial crises. Section 4 studies the explanatory power of bond prices in
explaining illiquidity during the 2008-09 crisis. Section 5 concludes.

1

Funding Illiquidity During Financial Crises
We define credit market freezes as large declines in the volume of transactions in both

primary and secondary credit markets that occur over a non-trivial period of time. This
section provides descriptive evidence on credit market issuance freezes during the financial
crises of 1873, 1929, and 2008-09.

1.1

Credit Issuance Freezes in Three Financial Crises

The most recent example of a credit market freeze took place during the financial crisis of
2008-09 with the collapse of the structured finance market – the largest and fastest growing
credit market in the years leading to the crisis. Issuance of structured finance securities and
especially collateralized debt obligations (CDO) grew dramatically between 2003 and 2006.
While the year 2007 was on track to surpass the record numbers of 2006, the credit crisis that
began in summer 2007 brought the market for structured finance to a halt.9 The collapse of
the securitzation market is well illustrated in Figure 1 which uses issuance data to illustrate
the dramatic decline in issuance of non-agency mortgage securities from 2005 to 2010.10 Not
only did the market for Mortgage-Backed Securities such as RMBS and CDOs collapse, but
also other, non-housing segments of the structured finance markets ranging from commercial
loans securitizations (CLO) to asset-backed securities (ABS) came to a halt and even the
issuance of corporate bonds declined significantly. Figure 2 demonstrates that issuance of
non-mortgage asset-backed securities collapsed during the crisis and stayed at a low level in
the following years. The decline in the volume of bond issuance was not confined only to
8

For a model along these lines that relies on an endogenous collateral constraint – rather than on frictions
driven by asymmetric information – see Benmelech and Bergman (2012).
9
See Benmelech and Dlugosz (2010).
10
The data used to construct Figures 1-3 were obtained from the Securities Industry and Financial Markets
Association (SIFMA).

8

securitized assets. Figure 3 shows that issuance of corporate bonds also declined considerably
in 2008 and returned to its pre-crisis level only in 2010.11
We now turn to another credit market freeze that took place during the financial crisis of
1873. The crisis of 1873 is one of the classic international crises according to Kindleberger
(1990). It is also one of Sprague’s (1910) four crises of the U.S. National Banking era that
eventually led to the creation of the Federal Reserve in 1914. The 1873 crisis is traditionally
viewed as a classic banking panic triggered by the failure of commercial banks linked to
the railroad industry. In turn, the crisis heralded a six year recession according to the
NBER business cycle reference dates. We collect information on issuance of bonds, mostly by
railroad companies, for the years 1869-1874 from the Commercial and Financial Chronicle
(CFC) – a weekly business publication that was first published in 1865 and reported detailed
business news as well as detailed prices of bonds and stocks. Figure 4 displays the volume
of corporate bonds issuance from 1869 to 1874. As Figure 4 demonstrates, bond issuances
declined dramatically in 1873 and 1874 compared to their level in 1870 and 1871. While we
do not have detailed information on bond issuance after 1874, contemporary observers of the
1873 financial crisis have argued that bond issuance collapsed during the financial crisis of
1873 and did not resume until 1879.
We provide additional evidence on credit issuance freezes from the financial crisis of 1929.
The crisis began on October 1929 with a crash of the stock market that marked the beginning
of the Great Depression. According to Mishkin (1991):
The outcome of the panic period starting October 23 and culminating in the crash
on October 29 was a negative return for the month of October of close to 20%.
This was the largest monthly negative return in the stock market up to that time.12
Figure 5 plots the volume of corporate bond issuance of all industrial firms from 1920
to 1940 in millions of current dollars.13 As Figure 5 demonstrates, issuance of bonds by
industrial firms declined in 1929 and then fell dramatically in 1931. The corporate bond
market remained frozen until 1935. Benmelech, Frydman and Papanikolaou (2017) use the
collapse of the corporate bond market to identify the effects of funding shortage on firms’
employment. They show that bonds were the primary source of debt financing for large
firms in the 1920s and that the collapse of the bond market during the Great Depression led
firms to layoff many of their employees. Figure 6 provides additional information on credit
11

Chari et al. (2014) provides a dynamic adverse selection model of secondary loan markets in which
reputational considerations give rise to a multiplicity of equilibria. Small reductions in collateral values are
shown to bring about collapses in the volume of new issuances.
12
Mishkin (1991) p. 93.
13
The data is based on Table 52 in Hickman (1960).

9

market freezes during the Great Depression. The figure presents data on issuance of real
estate bonds from 1925 to 1934 in millions of current dollars.14 According to Goetzmann and
Newman (2010) total issuance of real estate bonds grew from $57.7 million in 1919 to $695.8
million in 1925. By 1928 new issues of real estate bonds surpassed railroad bond issuance
and accounted for 23% of the total corporate bond issuance. As Figure 6 illustrates, and
consistent with evidence in Figure 1 for the 2008-09 financial crisis, real estate bond issuance
collapsed during the crisis with the market for these bonds all but disappearing.
Our results show that in all three crises there is a substantial decline in bond issuance
during and after the onset of the crisis. The evidence is consistent with liquidity dry-ups and
market freezes during downturns in the spirit of Myers and Majluf (1984) and Lucas and
McDonald (1990). Still, we cannot rule out that the reduction in issuances is driven by a
lack of corporate demand for credit stemming from a reduction in investment opportunities.
We next turn to provide suggestive evidence on credit market freezes in secondary markets
in which market liquidity dries-up. Providing such evidence requires information on prices
of bonds in secondary markets which we have collected for two notable financial crises: the
1873 financial crisis and the more recent 2008-09 crisis.

2

Market Liquidity and Informational Sensitivity
Market liquidity is a notoriously ambiguous concept. By liquidity in secondary markets,

we are referring to what is commonly known as “market liquidity” – i.e., the ease with which
assets are traded (see, e.g., Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009)). In our analysis we employ
two measures of market liquidity common in the literature – γ and Bid-Ask spreads which
we define below. In particular, we do not focus on volume of trade as a measure of liquidity,
since exogenous variation in the demand for funds is likely to play an important role in
determining agents’ need to sell their asset holdings – particularly during financial crises –
irrespective of the ease with which assets are traded. Put differently, trading volume may be
high not because markets are liquid, but because investors require funding.

2.1

The Financial Crisis of 1873

We collect weekly information from the CFC on prices of corporate – mostly railroad –
bonds from January 1873 up to the end of June 1876. The data include the name of the
security, the issuing firm, and the bid and ask prices that prevailed for each security during
the week. There are 69,444 bond-week observations in our dataset. The CFC reports bid or
14

The data is based on Johnson (1936a and 1936b).

10

ask prices for 56,717 bond-week observations, and 12,727 bond-week observations do not have
pricing information, suggesting that these bonds were not traded during the week in which
the information is not reported. We begin our analysis by calculating an index of bid-ask
spreads for bonds that have information on both bid and ask prices. We define the relative
bid-ask spread for bond i in week w as:
Spreadi,w =

Aski,w − Bidi,w
,
M id pricei,w

(1)

where M id pricei,w is defined as (Aski,w + Bidi,w )/2. Next we calculate Spreadt as an
equal-weighed time-series average of Spreadi,w across bonds and within a month t.
Figure 7 presents the monthly evolution of bid-ask spreads from January 1873 to June
1876. As the figure shows clearly, bid-ask spreads increased from 0.052 in August 1873 to
0.060 in September 1873 when the crisis started and 0.063 in October 1873. As the financial
crisis intensified with more failures of banks and railroad companies, the mean bid-ask spread
reached 0.099 – almost twice as high as its level before the crisis. Figure 7 also displays
the evolution of the mean bond mid-price using the data we have collected from the CFC.
As Figure 7 shows, the decline in bond prices is associated with higher bid-ask spreads –
indicating that the bond market became less liquid as bonds’ prices declined. The correlation
between the mean bid-ask spread and mean bond price is -0.909 and is statistically significant
at the 1 percent level.
We argue that the evidence from the 1873 financial crisis is consistent with Dang, Gorton
and Holmström model of the effect of the information-sensitivity of debt on liquidity and
liquidity dry-ups in debt markets. The main prediction of the model is that that when
underlying values deteriorates, debt shifts from being informationally insensitive and becomes
informational sensitive, adverse selection problems rise, and liquidity drops. We now turn to
conduct similar analysis of the relation between bond prices and market liquidity during the
financial crisis of 2008-09.

2.2

The Financial Crisis of 2008-09

We use bond-pricing data from FINRA’s TRACE (Transaction Reporting and Compliance
Engine). Our initial sample is similar to the one we use in Benmelech and Bergman (2017)
and includes all corporate bonds traded in TRACE. We keep bonds with a time-to-maturity
of at least six months and standard coupon intervals (including zero-coupon bonds). Our
sample is comprised of ‘plain-vanilla’ corporate bonds – we do not include securitized assets

11

in the sample and exclude bonds that are issued by financial firms, as well as convertible,
putable, and fixed-price callable bonds.
As a measure of illiquidity we use, γ, which is defined as the negative covariance of
log-price changes in two consecutive periods:15
γ = −Cov(∆pt , ∆pt−1 ).

(2)

Figure 8 presents the evolution of the γ measure of illiquidity over time from January
2006 to December 2010 as well as an index of bond prices that is constructed based on actual
bond transactions from TRACE. As the figure demonstrates, and consistent with our findings
for the financial crisis of 1873, bond prices and bond illiquidity are negatively correlated.
Figure 8 illustrates very clearly the spike in bond illiquidity that coincides exactly with the
dramatic decline in corporate bond prices: γ increases from 0.680 in January 2007 to 3.434
in September 2008 the month in which Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy and to 7.312
in October 2008. The correlation between γ and bond prices during the 2007-2009 period
is -0.858 and is statistically significant at the 1 percent level. Consistent with our findings
for the 1873 crisis, we find support for Dang, Gorton and Holmström (2013) that when
underlying values deteriorates liquidity drops.
Figure 9 refines the analysis in Figure 8 by stratifying the time-series evolution of the γ by
credit rating. For the ease of graphical representation we classify bonds into four categories of
bond credit ratings where Rating Category 1 includes the highest quality bonds and Category
4 includes the lowest credit quality bonds. As Figure 9 clearly demonstrates, and consistent
with Dang, Gorton and Holmström (2012), lower credit rating bonds exhibits higher levels of
illiquidity.16 Moreover, lower quality bonds – especially those in categories 3 and 4 – become
particularly illiquid during the height of the financial crisis of 2008-09.

2.3

Regression Analysis of Bond Prices and Liquidity During Financial Crises

Our graphical evidence for the financial crisis of 1873 and 2008-09 suggests that bond prices
and bond liquidity are negatively correlated during financial crises. We next test the prediction
that bond illiquidity rises as bond price declines in financial crises more formally by estimating
the following baseline specification:
15

See Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011) and Benmelech and Bergman (2017) for details about the intuition and
the construction of the γ measure.
16
Benmelech and Bergman (2017) provide in-depth analysis of the relation between credit rating and bond
liquidity.

12

Illiquidityi,t = β0 + β1 × P ricei,t−1 + bi θ + ct δ + i,t ,

(3)

where Illiquidity is either γ for the 2007-2009 period or the normalized bid-ask spread
Spreadi,t for the 1873-1876 period, subscripts indicate bond (i) and either month (for 20072009) or week (for 1873-1876) (t), P ricei,t−1 is bond price, δt is a vector of either year or
year×month fixed effects, θi is a vector of bond fixed effects – and i,t is the regression residual.
We report the results from estimating variants of regression 3 in Table 1. Tables throughout
this paper report regression coefficients and standard errors clustered at the bond level (in
parentheses). The main explanatory variable in the table is lagged bond price. Columns 1-2
report results for the 2007-2009 period while Columns 3-4 report results for the 1873-1876
period.
The results reported in Column 1 are based on regression 3, which is estimated with year
and bond fixed effects. There is a negative association between illiquidity and bond prices,
suggesting that bonds with lower prices are more illiquid (high γ). We obtain very similar
results when we include year×month – instead of just year – and bond fixed effects (Column
2). The association between γ and bond price remains negative and significant at the 1%
level when we control for bond fixed effects. Likewise, Column 3 shows that bid-ask spreads
are negatively correlated with bond prices during the 1873-1876 period after controlling
for bond and year fixed-effects. Column 4 repeats the analysis presented in Column 3 and
adds year×month fixed-effects. The results are statistically significant at the 1 percent level,
suggesting that bonds that experienced lower prices during the 1873 financial crisis also
became less liquid. An important concern regarding the negative relation between bond
illiquidity and bond price is one of reverse causality. Rather than declines in bond values
causing illiquidity to rise, it could be that bond prices are declining due to an expected
(future) reduction in bond liquidity. In Benmelech and Bergman (2017) we conduct detailed
analysis to address this endogeneity concern, using instrumental variables and non-linearities
around the default boundary.

3

Liquidity and Belief Dispersion During the Financial
Crisis
A large literature discusses how heterogeneous beliefs can promote trade and liquidity in

financial markets (see, e.g., Harrison and Kreps (1978), Varian (1989), and Harris and Raviv,
(1993)). This literature provides an alternative theory to trade than that provided by classic

13

asymmetric information and adverse selection theories (Akerlof (1970) and Spence (1973)).
By assuming that agents hold different fundamental opinions about underlying asset values –
some agents are optimistic while others are pessimistic – the literature on heterogeneous beliefs
evades the classic no-trade results in the information economics literature (e.g. Rubinstein
(1975), Hakansson et al. (1982), and Milgrom and Stokey (1982)). Agents engage in trade for
their own perceived mutual benefit. In this section we analyze the relation between differences
of opinion and liquidity in the bond market.
Measuring heterogeneous beliefs among market participants is clearly challenging. To test
the heterogeneous beliefs theory we use two imperfect measures to proxy for differences of
opinion in market participants’ assessment of the future value of bonds during the financial
crisis. The first measure is the difference between the S&P and Moody’s bond credit rating,
and is defined as:
Rating dif f erencei,t = S&Pi,t − M oody 0 si,t .
Since there is a direct correspondence between the Moody’s and S&P rating systems, we
simply calculate for each bond and month the (absolute value) notch difference between the
Moody’s credit rating and the S&P credit rating. Credit rating data are taken from Mergent
FISD.
The second measure of differences of opinion employed in our analysis is analyst earnings
forecast dispersion. To calculate this dispersion, we match each bond issue to the relevant
firm’s equity using the 6-digit CUSIP. For each month, following Diether, Malloy and Scherbina
(2002), we then calculate the ratio of the standard deviation of analysts’ current-fiscal-year
annual earnings per share forecasts to the absolute value of the mean forecast.17 This analyst
earnings forecast dispersion measure proxies for differences of opinion regarding firm equity,
and so is expected to be a better measure of differences of opinion for bond values with lower
credit quality.18
σ(EP S f orecasti,j,t )

F orecast dispersioni,t =

,

M ean(EP S f orecasti,j,t )
where i indicates stock, j indicates analyst, and t indicates month. EPS forecast is the
analyst’ forecast at each month for current fiscal year annual earning per share.
17

Data on earnings forecasts are taken from I/B/E/S.
For example, consider a firm that has issued a very safe bond trading with a low spread to the maturitymatched Treasury. Even if there exist large differences of opinion regarding firm earnings, these should not be
expected to translate into differences of opinion regarding the firm’s bond value, which all market participants
may agree is very safe, regardless of their position on the firm’s equity value.
18

14

3.1

Liquidity and Belief Dispersion: Descriptive Evidence

Table 2 provides summary statistics of the distribution of the Moody’s-S&P bond rating
difference over the sample period, 2007-2010. As can be seen, just over 50% of observations
exhibit no rating difference. Over a third of bonds exhibit a rating difference of one notch,
approximately nine percent of bond-months exhibit a rating difference of two notches, and
two percent of the sample exhibits a difference of three notches or more. Table 3 provides
the distribution of analyst earnings forecast dispersion. As can be seen, the median ratio of
earnings forecast dispersion – i.e. the ratio of standard deviation to mean analyst forecasts –
is 0.03, with a 75th percentile of 0.084.
Figures 10 and 11 protray the evolution of dispersion of opinion over the crisis using the
two differences of opinion variables. As can be seen in Figure 10, analyst earnings forecast
dispersion increased greatly following the collapse of Lehman Brothers, with median forecast
dispersion more than doubling from 0.024 in September 2008 to its peak of 0.077 in March
2009. The figure clearly shows that earnings forecast dispersion is seasonal, with a yearly
frequency. This seasonality arises due to the fact that dispersion is calculated each month
with respect to the (fiscal) year end earnings forecasts. This dispersion will naturally decline
towards the latter part of the year, as the time until the earnings report shortens. The
fact that the dispersion measure is calculated with respect to the end of year forecast also
explains why the large rise in the measure occurs not immediately after Lehman’s collapse in
September 2008, but rather early in 2009.
Figure 11 depicts the evolution of the Moody’s-S&P bond rating difference over the crisis.
Here we see a spike in the bond rating difference at the end of 2007, and another larger
spike post-Lehman (with a lag as bond ratings take time to adjust). The Moody’s-S&P
rating difference rises from a mean value of 0.54 in September 2008, to a peak of 0.78 in
March 2009.19 Bond rating differences decline by August 2009 and remain relatively constant
thereafter, but at a level higher than that of early 2007. Indeed, in January 2010, the mean
credit rating difference is 0.67.
Figures 10 and 11 also present the evolution of monthly (par-value-weighted) mean bond
illiquidity, as proxied by the γ illiquidity measure. As discussed above, illiquidity sharply rose
during the crisis. We note that the concurrent rise of illiquidity and rise of our proxies for
differences of opinions during the crisis provides prima facie evidence against the hypothesis
that heterogeneous beliefs promote liquidity.
19

It is interesting to note that the two measures of opinion dispersion, calculated from two different markets
(equity and debt) and two differing sets of market participants (rating agencies and equity analysts), attain
their maximum value during the crisis in the same month – March 2009. The time-series correlation between
the mean forecast dispersion and the mean rating difference is 0.47.

15

3.2

An Empirical Analysis of the Relation between Liquidity and
Belief Dispersion

Figure 12 displays average illiquidity calculated over different levels of Moody’s-S&P
credit rating difference, while Figure 13 depicts average bond illiquidity over the 10 deciles
of (lagged) analyst forecast dispersion.20 Illiquidity in both figures, and throughout the
analysis below, is measured by γ. Consistent with the co-movement of illiquidity and opinion
dispersion depicted in Figures 10 and 11, Figure 12 shows that illiquidity rises with credit
rating dispersion and particularly so for bond rating differences of three notches or more.
Similarly, Figure 13 shows that illiquidity rises with higher analyst forecast dispersion. Similar
to Figure 12, the increase in illiquidity is most pronounced for the top two deciles of forecast
dispersion.
Moving to regression analysis, Table 4 regresses γ on indicator variables defined over the
Moody’s-S&P bond rating differences.21 Importantly, the regression is run with bond and
year-by-month fixed effects to absorb non-time varying bond determinants of illiquidity, as
well as market-wide variation in illiquidity during the crisis. Identification is thus obtained by
comparing the illiquidity of two bonds with different measures of the Moody’s-S&P spread in
the same month and year (as compared to each bond’s mean illiquidity).
As can be seen in Table 4, increased credit rating differences between Moody’s and S&P
is associated with higher bond illiquidity. Difference of opinion, as captured by bond rating
divergence, does not seem to promote liquidity, as would be predicted by the heterogeneous
beliefs literature. The economic effect is substantial: Controlling for year and month-by-bond
fixed effects, as compared to bonds with no disagreement between Moody’s and S&P rating,
bonds where the respective ratings differ by three notches exhibit a γ illiquidity measure that
is higher by 1.26 units, representing approximately 70% of the mean during the crisis. Bonds
with a four notch divergence in ratings exhibit a γ illiquidity measure that is higher by 3.03
units, or 165% of mean γ.
Table 5 runs the analogous regression using indicator variables defined over the quintiles
of analyst forecast dispersion. As can be seen, the relation between analyst forecast dispersion
and bond illiquidity is generally weak, but the highest quintile of forecast dispersion exhibits
substantially larger illiquidity than the lowest quintile of earnings forecast dispersion: with
bond and year-by-month fixed effects, the difference between the two quintiles is 0.318, or
approximately 250% of the mean level of illiquidity.
20
21

Recall that only approximately 1% of the sample has a bond rating of 4 or more.
The omitted variable in the regression is a Moody’s-S&P credit rating difference of zero.

16

Although the positive relation between analyst forecast dispersion and bond illiquidity is
not supportive of the heterogeneous beliefs theory, we cannot rule out that endogeneity, and
in particular omitted variables, are biasing our results. Indeed, one potential explanation
for the positive relation between belief dispersion and illiquidity is that dispersion in beliefs
increase when underlying bond values deteriorate. Such a negative relation between belief
dispersion and bond price would occur if, for example, heterogeneous beliefs are more likely
to arise when bonds become riskier.22 The positive relation between bond illiquidity and
higher bond opinion dispersion in Tables 4 and 5 may then simply be reflecting the negative
relation between bond price and illiquidity combined with the negative relation between bond
price and rating dispersion.
Figures 14 and 15 provide initial evidence on the relation between bond risk and opinion
dispersion, showing the evolution of the two measures of opinion dispersion during the crisis
calculated over four categories of bond credit ratings.23 Figure 15, which depicts the evolution
of average bond rating differences by bond credit rating groups, sorts the bonds based on the
higher between the Moody’s and S&P credit rating. The figures depict the monthly par-value
weighted average opinion dispersion measure. As can be seen, lower rated bonds (rating
category 4) exhibit the sharpest rise in opinion dispersion during the crisis. In addition,
Figure 15 shows a substantial increase in the rating dispersion for the highest credit rating.
This is a result of Moody’s, but not S&P, downgrading Aaa rated bonds.
To further understand the relation between bond prices and opinion dispersion, Table
6 regresses the change in opinion dispersion – either Moody’s-S&P credit rating difference
or analyst forecast dispersion – on the change in bond price. As can be seen, difference of
opinion, as proxied by bond rating differences, rise when bond price declines, although the
effect is not economically large: a one standard deviation decline in bond price increases bond
rating dispersion by approximately 2.5 percent of the mean rating dispersion (Column 1).
However, calculating the effect over bond-month observations where the γ illiquidity measure
is not missing – i.e. the sample over which the relation between illiquidity, bond price, and
opinion dispersion is analyzed – triples this economic magnitude, to approximately 7.5 percent
of the mean rating difference. The last two columns of Table 6 analyze the relation between
analyst forecast dispersion and bond price, showing that it is not statistically significant.
22

Thus, one might expect lower belief dispersion regarding the default probability of a AAA rated bond
than for a BB rated corporate bond.
23
Rating Category 1 includes the highest quality bonds.

17

3.3

Asymmetric Informational and Belief Dispersion: A Horse
Race

Table 7 conducts a “horserace” between the two theories of bond illiquidity: the asymmetric
information theory which predicts that illiquidity should decline with bond price and the
heterogeneous beliefs theory, which predicts that differences of opinion promote liquidity.
Specifically, the specifications in the table relate the γ measure of bond illiquidity to price as
well as to indicator variables defined over the different levels of bond rating difference. As
usual, all regressions are run with bond and year-by-month fixed effects. As can be seen in
Table 7, illiquidity as measured by γ is still negatively related to bond price – consistent with
the asymmetric information theory of liquidity of debt (as in Dang, Gorton and Holmström
(2012)) and the results above. However, as the second column of the table shows, bond rating
dispersion is no longer related to illiquidity in a statistically significant manner once bond
price and bond-by-year fixed effects are included.
In a similar manner, Table 8 regresses the γ illiquidity measure on both bond price and
analyst forecast dispersion. As in Table 7, bond price is still negatively related to bond
illiquidity, but differences of opinion, as proxied by analyst forecast dispersion, is not related
to γ in a statistically significant manner.
In sum, our results are consistent with the information asymmetry theory of liquidity as in
Dang, Gorton and Holmström (2012). In contrast, using two proxies for belief dispersion – the
Moody’s-S&P difference in bond rating and analyst forecast dispersion – we find little support
for the hypothesis that liquidity is enhanced as differences of opinion rise. At the aggregate
level, as well as using panel data analysis at the individual bond-level, opinion dispersion did
not increase liquidity during the crisis period. If anything, the opposite seems to hold, with
illiquidity and dispersion positively related, particularly when using the bond rating difference
measure of belief dispersion. However, once we control for bond price movements, belief
dispersion is not related in a statistically significant manner to the γ measure of bond-market
illiquidity.

4

To What Extent Can Bond Price Variation Explain
the Rise in Illiquidity During the 2008-09 Crisis?
We have shown that deteriorations in bond value are associated with rises in bond

illiquidity, consistent with the main prediction of the asymmetric information theory of
liquidity in debt markets. To what extent can this relation, combined with the market-wide

18

deterioration in bond prices post-Lehman collapse, explain the rise in bond market illiquidity
during the crisis?
To fix ideas, Figure 16 and 17 depict the cumulative distribution function and probability
density function of bond prices for August and October 2008, as well as January 2009. The
figures show the large changes in the distribution of bond prices – with a sharp leftward
movement of mass in the distribution of bond prices in October 2008, i.e. post Lehman –
which is partially reversed by January, 2009.
To understand the role of bond price deterioration in explaining the behavior of bondmarket liquidity during the crisis, we first regress bond illiquidity (proxied by γ) on twenty
indicator variables defined over twenty equal-sized bins of lagged bond price, running the
following specification:

Illiquidityi,t = β0 +

20
X

βk × P riceBinki,t−1 + bi γ + ct δ + i,t ,

(4)

k=1

where Illiquidity is γ, for bond i in month t. PriceBin is a set of twenty indicator variables
based on (within-year) twenty equal sized bins of bond price – P riceBinki,t−1 equals one if
bond i is in price bin k at month t − 1.24 bi is a vector of bond fixed-effects, and ct is a vector
of either year or year×month fixed-effects.25 Standard errors are clustered at the bond level.
Using the regression coefficients, we calculate for each bond in each month in our sample
the predicted illiquidity of that bond based on the bond’s price. We calculate the market-level
predicted illiquidity by calculating the par-value weighted average across all bonds. Figure 18
presents for each month t the change in predicted (weighted-average) bond-market illiquidity
from January 2007 to month t, together with the actual change in the weighted average
bond-market illiquidity. The figure uses a regression specification which does not include bond
fixed effects. Figure 19 displays the analogous predicted change in bond-market illiquidity
but uses the regression specification which includes bond fixed effects.
As can be seen, predicted and actual changes in illiquidity track each other closely up to
late 2007 (i.e. pre-crisis) and from the first quarter of 2010 and on. In the interim period,
the increase in actual illiquidity is higher than the predicted increase stemming solely from
the decline in bond prices. Still, the leftward shift in the distribution of bond prices, in and
of itself, can explain between a quarter and a third of the increase of the rise in actual bond
market illiquidity during the crisis.
24

The first price bin represents bonds with the lowest price.
Note that with the inclusion of bond fixed effects, the regression is identified off of changes over time in
the level of illiquidity and bond price for each bond.
25

19

5

Conclusion
This paper analyzes illiquidity in bond markets during financial crises and compares two

main theories of liquidity in markets: (1) asymmetric information and adverse selection, and
(2) heterogenous beliefs. We find that when bond value deteriorates, bond illiquidity increases,
consistent with an adverse selection model of the information sensitivity of debt contracts
as in Dang, Gorton and Holmström (2012, 2013) and Holmström (2015). In contrast, we
find little support for the hypothesis that opinion dispersion explains illiquidity in financial
crises. Our results point to a strong link between crises and the dry-ups of market liquidity
and have implications for the efficacy of monetary interventions that are designed to boost
lending by the financial sector.

20

References
Amihud, Yakov, “Illiquidity and Stock Returns: Cross-Section and Time-Series Effects,”
Journal of Financial Markets (2002), 5: 31-56.
Akerlof, George A., “The Market for “Lemons”: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics (1970), 488-500.
Bao, Jack, Jun Pan, and Jian Wang, “Liquidity of Corporate Bonds,” Journal of Finance
(2011), 66: 911-946.
Benmelech, Efraim and Nittai Bergman, “Credit Traps,” America Economic Review (2012),
106: 3004-3032
Benmelech, Efraim and Nittai Bergman, “Debt, Information, and Illiquidity,” Working paper
(2017).
Benmelech, Efraim and Jennifer Dlugosz, “The Credit Rating Crisis,” NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 2009 161-207.
Benmelech, Efraim, Carola Frydman and Dimitris Papanikolaou, “Financial Frictions and
Employment during the Great Depression,” Working paper 2017.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Lasse H., Pedersen, “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity,”
Review of Financial Studies (2009), 22: 2201-2238.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Charles M. Kahn, “The Role of Demandable Debt in Structuring
Optimal Banking Arrangements,” American Economic Review (1991), 81: 497-513.
Chari, V. V., Ali Shourideh, and Ariel Zetlin-Jones, “Reputation and Persistence of Adverse
Selection in Secondary Loan Markets,” American Economic Review (2014), 104: 4027-4070.
Dang Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmström, “Ignorance, Debt and Financial Crises,”
Working paper (2012).
Dang Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmström, “The Information Sensitivity of a Security,”
Working paper (2013).
Diether, Karl, Christopher J., Malloy, and Anna Scherbinaa, “Differences of Opinions and
the Cross Section of Stock Returns,” The Journal of Finance (2002), 57: 2113-2141.
Goetzmann, William N., and Frank Newman, “Securitization in the 1920’s,” (2010) NBER
Working Paper No. 15650.

21

Gorton, Gary B., and George Pennacchi, “Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation,”
Journal of Finance (1990), 45: 49-72.
Hakansson, N., J. Kunkel, and J. Ohlson, “Sufficient and Necessary Conditions for Information to have Social Value in Pure Exchange,” The Journal of Finance (1982), 37: 1169-1181.
Harris, Milton, and Artur Raviv, “Differences of Opinions Make a Horse Race,” Review of
Financial Studies (1993), 6: 473-506.
Harrison, Michael, and David Kreps, “Speculative Investor Behavior in a Stock Market with
Heterogeneous Expectations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics (1978), 92: 323-336.
Hickman, W., Braddock, Statistical Measures of Corporate Bond Financing Since 1900.
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc (1960).
Holmström, Bengt, “Understanding the Role of Debt in the Financial System,” BIS working
paper (2015).
Johnson, Ernest A., “The Record of Long-Term Real Estate Securities,” Journal of Land and
Real Estate Economics, (1936a) 12: 44-48.
Johnson, Ernest A., “The Record of Long-Term Real Estate Securities: By Cities of Issue,”
Journal of Land and Real Estate Economics, (1936b) 12: 195-197.
Kindleberger, Charles, Manias, Panics and Crashes. (1990) Fourth edition New York Basic
Books.
Lucas, Deborah, and Robert L., McDonald, “Equity Issues and Stock Price Dynamic,” Journal of Finance (1990) 45: 1019-1043.
Milgrom, P. and N. Stokey, “Information, Trade and Common Knowledge,” Journal of
Economic Theory (1982), 26: 17-27.
Mishkin, Frederic S., “Asymmetric Information and Financial Crises: A Historical Perspective,” in Financial Markets and Financial Crises, Hubbard, Glenn R., Ed (1991) The
University of Chicago Press, 69-108.
Myers, Stewart C., and Nicholas S., Majluf, “Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions
when Firms Have Information That Investors Do Not Have,” Journal of Financial Economics
(1984) 13: 187-221.
Pérignon, Christophe, David Thesmar, and Guillaume Vuillemey, “Wholesale Funding DryUps,” The Journal of Finance, Forthcoming.

22

Roll, Richard, “A Simple Implicit Measure of the Effective Bid-Ask Spread in an Efficient
Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics (1973), 355-374.
Rubenstein, M., “Security Market Efficiency in an Arrow-Debreu Economy,” American Economic Review (1975), 65: 812-824.
Spence, Michael, “Job Market Signaling,” The Journal of Finance (1984) 39: 1127-1139.
Sprague, Oliver M.W. History of Crises Under the National Banking System. (1910) Washington. National Monetary Commission. GPO.
Varian, H. R., “Differences of Opinion in Financial Markets,” in Courtenay C. Stone (ed.),
Financial Risk: Theory, Evidence and Implications, Kluwer, Boston, (1989) 3-37.

23

Figure 1: Non-agency mortgage securities issuance: 2005-2010.

24

Figure 2: Asset-backed securities issuance: 2005-2010.

25

Figure 3: Corporate bonds issuance: 2005-2010.

26

Figure 4: Corporate bonds issuance: 1869-1874.

27

Figure 5: Industrial bonds issuance: 1926-1939.

28

Figure 6: Real estate bonds issuance: 1925-1939.

29

Figure 7: Bid-ask spreads and bond prices: 1873-1876.

30

Figure 8: Illiquidity and bond price: 2007-2009.

31

Figure 9: Average illiquidity by credit rating: 2007-2009.

32

Figure 10: Mean and median analyst forecast dispersion and bond illiquidity: 2007-2009.

33

Figure 11: Mean rating dispersion and bond illiquidity: 2007-2009.

34

Figure 12: Average illiquidity by lagged bond rating difference: 2007-2009.

35

Figure 13: Average illiquidity by lagged dispersion of analysts forecast: 2007-2009.

36

Figure 14: Analysts forecast dispersion by Moody’s credit rating: 2007-2009.

37

Figure 15: Mean bond rating difference by credit rating: 2007-2009.

38

Figure 16: Bond price cumulative distribution function: 2007-2009.

39

Figure 17: Bond price probability density function: 2007-2009.

40

Figure 18: Predicted Illiquidity: 2007-2009 (without bond fixed-effects).

41

Figure 19: Predicted Illiquidity: 2007-2009 (with bond fixed-effects).

42

Table 1: Bond illiquidity and lagged prices

Pricet−1
Constant
Bond FE
Year FE
Year * Month FE
Period
Observations
Adj − R2

(1)
Gamma

(2)
Gamma

(3)
Bid-Ask spread

(4)
Bid-Ask spread

-0.204***
(0.005)
21.592***
(0.523)
Yes
Yes
No
2007-09
41,672
0.417

-0.169***
(0.006)
17.768***
(0.611)
Yes
No
Yes
2007-09
41,672
0.458

-0.0033***
(0.0005)
0.299***
(0.037)
Yes
Yes
No
1873-1876
27,170
0.745

-0.0032***
(0.0006)
0.296***
(0.037)
Yes
No
Yes
1873-1876
27,170
0.747

43

Table 2: Bond rating differences: Summary Statistics

Rating diff

Frequency

Percent

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

57,117
39,815
9,465
1,298
532
114
163
30
2
1
8
1
1
2

52.62
36.68
8.72
1.2
0.49
0.11
0.15
0.03
0
0
0.01
0
0
0

Total

114,572

100%

Table 3: Analysts’ forecast dispersion: Summary Statistics
Mean
Median
Std
p25
p75
Min
Max
Observations

44

0.134
0.030
0.642
0.013
0.084
0
33.3
46,635

Table 4: Bond illiquidity and bond rating differences

Rating Diff 1
Rating Diff 2
Rating Diff 3
Rating Diff 4
Constant
Bond FE
Year FE
Year * Month FE
Observations
Adj − R2

(1)
Gamma

(2)
Gamma

0.024
(0.104)
0.977***
(0.215)
1.615**
(0.705)
3.562***
(0.932)
0.696***
(0.080)
Yes
Yes
No
41,148
0.274

0.014
(0.092)
0.658***
(0.202)
1.263**
(0.636)
3.030***
(0.868)
0.336***
(0.095)
Yes
No
Yes
41,148
0.393

Table 5: Bond illiquidity and analysts’ forecast dispersion

Forecast dispersion 2
Forecast dispersion 3
Forecast dispersion 4
Forecast dispersion 5
Constant
Bond FE
Year FE
Year * Month FE
Observations
Adj − R2

45

(1)
Gamma

(2)
Gamma

-0.010
(0.082)
-0.146*
(0.089)
0.132
(0.122)
0.382**
(0.174)
0.650***
(0.105)
Yes
Yes
No
22,571
0.277

0.099
(0.078)
0.030
(0.092)
0.066
(0.125)
0.318*
(0.174)
0.174
(0.125)
Yes
No
Yes
22,571
0.402

Table 6: Changes in rating differences and analyst dispersion and price changes

∆Price
Constant
Year * Month FE
Gamma not missing
Observations
Adj − R2

∆ Rating difference

∆ Rating difference

∆ Analysts dispersion

∆ Analysts dispersion

-0.001***
(0.000)
0.004***
(0.001)
Yes
No
108,518
0.00595

-0.003***
(0.001)
0.005***
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
41,267
0.00593

-0.000
(0.001)
0.002***
(0.000)
Yes
No
46,363
0.00642

0.004
(0.002)
0.000
(0.002)
Yes
Yes
22,475
0.00869

Table 7: The effects of bond rating differences and bond price on bond illiquidity

Rating Diff 1
Rating Diff 2
Rating Diff 3
Rating Diff 4
Pricet−1
Constant
Bond FE
Year FE
Year * Month FE
Observations
Adj − R2

(1)
Gamma

(2)
Gamma

-0.079
(0.083)
-0.009
(0.146)
-0.902**
(0.442)
-0.940*
(0.504)
-0.210***
(0.005)
22.159***
(0.523)
Yes
Yes
No
41,148
0.421

-0.062
(0.079)
0.034
(0.146)
-0.694
(0.438)
-0.450
(0.483)
-0.174***
(0.006)
18.314***
(0.611)
Yes
No
Yes
41,148
0.461

46

Table 8: The effects of analyst dispersion and bond price on bond illiquidity

Forecast dispersion 2
Forecast dispersion 3
Forecast dispersion 4
Forecast dispersion 5
Pricet−1
Constant
Bond FE
Year FE
Year * Month FE
Observations
Adj − R2

(1)
Gamma

(2)
Gamma

-0.041
(0.070)
-0.090
(0.077)
-0.114
(0.106)
-0.370**
(0.149)
-0.207***
(0.007)
21.817***
(0.642)
Yes
Yes
No
22,571
0.436

0.073
(0.070)
0.141*
(0.080)
0.176
(0.110)
0.186
(0.155)
-0.174***
(0.007)
17.967***
(0.737)
Yes
No
Yes
22,571
0.479

47

