NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CROP DISEASE AND AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY
Christine L. Carroll
Colin A. Carter
Rachael E. Goodhue
C.-Y. Cynthia Lin Lawell
Working Paper 23513
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23513
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Ave
Cambridge MA 02138
June 2017
We thank Krishna V. Subbarao, Julian Alston, Andre Boik, Colin Cameron, Erich Muehlegger,
Kevin Novan, Peter Orazem, John Rust, Wolfram Schlenker, Paul Scott, Dan Sumner, Sofia
Villas-Boas, Marca Weinberg, Jim Wilen, and Jinhua Zhao for invaluable discussions and
comments. We also received helpful comments from seminar participants at the University of
California at Davis and California State University at Chico, and from conference participants at
the NBER Understanding Productivity Growth in Agriculture Research Conference, the
Heartland Environmental and Resource Economics Workshop, the Association of Environmental
and Resource Economists (AERE) Summer Conference, the American Agricultural Economics
Association (AAEA) Annual Meeting, the Giannini Agricultural and Resource Economics
Student Conference, and the Interdisciplinary Graduate and Professional Student (IGPS)
Symposium. We received funding from USDA NIFA (grant # 2010-51181-21069). We also
benefited from valuable discussions with Tom Bengard, Bengard Ranch; Kent Bradford, Seed
Biotechnology Center UC-Davis; Leslie Crowl, Monterey County Agricultural Commissioner's
Office; Rich DeMoura, UC-Davis Cooperative Extension; Gerard Denny, INCOTEC; Lindsey du
Toit, Washington State University; Thomas Flewell, Flewell Consulting; Hank Hill, Seed
Dynamics, Inc.; Steve Koike, Cooperative Extension Monterey County; Dale Krolikowski,
Germains Seed Technology; Chester Kurowski, Monsanto; Donald W. McMoran, WSU
Extension; Marc Meyer, Monsanto; Chris Miller, Rijk Zwaan; Augustin Ramos, APHIS; Scott
Redlin, APHIS; Richard Smith, Cooperative Extension Monterey County; Laura Tourte, UC
Cooperative Extension Santa Cruz County; Bill Waycott, Monsanto; and Mary Zischke,
California Leafy Greens Research Program. Carter, Goodhue, and Lin Lawell are members of
the Giannini Foundation of Agricultural Economics. All errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Christine L. Carroll, Colin A. Carter, Rachael E. Goodhue, and C.-Y. Cynthia Lin
Lawell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Crop Disease and Agricultural Productivity
Christine L. Carroll, Colin A. Carter, Rachael E. Goodhue, and C.-Y. Cynthia Lin Lawell
NBER Working Paper No. 23513
June 2017
JEL No. Q00,Q10,Q12
ABSTRACT
Crop diseases and how they are managed can have a large impact on agricultural productivity.
This paper discusses the effects on agricultural productivity of Verticillium dahliae, a soil borne
fungus that is introduced to the soil via infested spinach seeds and that causes subsequent lettuce
crops to be afflicted with Verticillium wilt. We use a dynamic structural econometric model of
Verticillium wilt management for lettuce crops in Monterey County, California to examine the
effects of Verticillium wilt on crop-fumigation decisions and on grower welfare. We also discuss
our research on the externalities that arise with renters, and between seed companies and growers
due to Verticillium wilt, as these disease-related externalities have important implications for
agricultural productivity.
Christine L. Carroll
College of Agriculture
CSU Chico
940 West First Street
Chico, CA 95929
clcarroll@csuchico.edu

Rachael E. Goodhue
University of California at Davis
Agricultural and Resource Economics
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
goodhue@primal.ucdavis.edu

Colin A. Carter
University of California at Davis
Agricultural and Resource Economics
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
colin@primal.ucdavis.edu

C.-Y. Cynthia Lin Lawell
University of California at Davis
Agricultural and Resource Economics
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
cclin@primal.ucdavis.edu

1

Introduction

Crop diseases can have a large impact on agricultural productivity. Invasive plant pathogens,
including fungi, cause an estimated $21 billion in crop losses each year in the United States
(Rossman, 2009).

Verticillium dahliae

is a soil borne fungus that is introduced to the soil

via infested spinach seeds and that causes subsequent lettuce crops to be aicted with
Verticillium wilt (V. wilt). Lettuce is an important crop in California, and the majority of
the lettuce production in the United States occurs in California. The value of California's
lettuce crop was $1.7 billion in 2013 (National Agricultural Statistics Service, 2015).
How crop diseases are managed can have a large impact on agricultural productivity
as well.

V. wilt can be prevented or controlled by the grower by fumigating with methyl

bromide, planting broccoli (a low-return crop), or not planting spinach. These control options
entail incurring costs or foregoing prot in the current period for future benet. V. wilt can
also be prevented or controlled by the spinach seed company by testing and cleaning the
spinach seeds. However, seed companies are unwilling to test or clean spinach seeds, as they
are not aected by this disease.
This paper analyzes the eects of V. wilt on agricultural productivity. In particular,
we use a dynamic structural econometric model of V. wilt management for lettuce crops in
Monterey County, California to examine the eects of V. wilt on crop-fumigation decisions
and on grower welfare.

We also discuss our research on the externalities that arise with

renters, and between seed companies and growers due to V. wilt, as these disease-related
externalities have important implications for agricultural productivity.
We use a dynamic model for several reasons. First, the control options (fumigation,
planting broccoli, and not planting spinach) require incurring costs or foregoing prot in the
current period for possible future benet, and are thus are best modeled with a dynamic
model.

2 Second, because cropping and fumigation decisions are irreversible (as is the damage

2 Some of these actions may also generate benets in the current period for the current crop. For example,
in addition to being an investment in protecting potential future lettuce crops from V. wilt, methyl bromide

1

from V. wilt), because the rewards from cropping and fumigation decisions are uncertain,
and because growers have leeway over the timing of cropping and fumigation decisions, there
is an option value to waiting which requires a dynamic model (Dixit and Pindyck, 1994).
Third,

Verticillium dahliae

takes time to build up in the soil, and once present, persists for

many years.
There are several advantages to using a dynamic structural model to model grower crop
and fumigation decisions. First, unlike reduced-form models, a structural approach explicitly
models the dynamics of crop and fumigation decisions by incorporating continuation values
that explicitly model how expectations about the future aect current decisions.
A second advantage of the structural model is that we are able to estimate the eect of
each state variable on the expected payos from dierent crop and fumigation choices, and
are therefore able to estimate parameters that have direct economic interpretations.

The

dynamic model accounts for the continuation value, which is the expected value of the value
function next period. With the structural model we are able to estimate parameters in the
payos from dierent crop and fumigation choices, since we are able to structurally model
how the continuation values relate to the payos from the crop and fumigation choices.
A third advantage of our structural model is that we can use the parameter estimates
from our structural model to simulate the eects of crop disease on agricultural productivity.
In particular, we run counterfactual simulations to analyze the eects of V. wilt on cropfumigation decisions and on grower welfare.
The balance of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background on the
California lettuce industry, V. wilt, and options to control the disease. Section 3 is a brief
review of the relevant literature.

Section 4 describes our dynamic structural econometric

model. Section 5 describes our data. We present our results in Section 6 and our counterfactual simulations in Section 7. Section 8 concludes.

can also be benecial to the current crop of strawberries. However, on net, these control options generally
require incurring net costs or foregoing prot in the current period.

2

2

Background

California, a major agricultural producer and global trader, sustains signicant economic
damage from invasive plant pathogens.

Fungi damage a wide variety of California crops,

resulting in yield- and quality-related losses, reduced exportability, and increased fungicide
expenditures (Palm, 2001).
Measured by value, lettuce ranks in the top ten agricultural commodities produced
in California (National Agricultural Statistics Service, 2015). Much of California's lettuce
crop is grown in Monterey County, where lettuce production value is 27% of the county's
agricultural production value (Monterey County Agricultural Commissioner, 2015). Approximately ten to fteen thousand acres are planted to lettuce in Monterey County each season
(spring, summer, and fall). Spinach, broccoli, and strawberries are also important crops in
the region.

Verticillium dahliae

is a soil borne fungus that causes lettuce to be aicted with V.

wilt. No eective treatment exists once plants are infected by the fungus (Xiao and Subbarao,
1998; Fradin and Thomma, 2006). The fungus can survive in the soil for fourteen years as
microsclerotia, which are resting structures that are produced as the pathogen colonizes
a plant.

This system allows the fungus to remain in the soil even without a host plant.

When a susceptible host is planted, microsclerotia attack through the roots, enter the water
conducting tissue, and interfere with the water uptake and transport through the plant. If
the density of microsclerotia in the soil passes a threshold, a disease known as V. wilt occurs.

Lactuca sativa

V. wilt rst killed a lettuce (

L.) crop in California's Parajo Valley in

1995. Prior to 1995, lettuce was believed to be immune. Since then, the disease has spread
rapidly through the Salinas Valley, the prime lettuce production region of California.

By

2010, more than 150 elds were infected with V. wilt (Atallah, Hayes, and Subbarao, 2011),

3

3 As not all the elds that were infected by 2010 were known at the time Atallah, Hayes, and Subbarao
(2011) was published, the number of elds aected by 2010 elds was actually even higher, numbering over
175 elds (Krishna Subbarao, personal communication, 2013).

3

amounting to more than 4,000 acres (Krishna Subbarao, personal communication, 2013).

4

Although growers have resisted reporting the extent of the disease since 2010, it is likely
that the number of aected acres has increased since then (Krishna Subbarao, personal
communication, 2013).

Verticillium dahliae

is introduced to the soil in three possible ways. First, V. wilt can

be spread locally from eld to eld by workers or equipment. Local spread is a relatively
minor contributor, however, and growers have taken steps to mitigate this issue themselves,
for example by cleaning equipment before moving between elds.
Second, V. wilt is introduced to the soil via infested lettuce seeds. However, studies of
commercial lettuce seed lots from around the world show that fewer than 18% tested positive
for

Verticillium dahliae

and, of those, the maximum incidence of infection was less than 5%

(Atallah, Hayes, and Subbarao, 2011). These relatively low levels do not cause V. wilt in
lettuce at an epidemic level. Models of the disease suggest that it would be necessary for
lettuce seed to have an incidence of infection of at least 5% and be planted back to back for
three to ve seasons in order for the disease to appear, with at least ve subsequent seasons
required for the high disease levels currently seen (Atallah, Hayes, and Subbarao, 2011).
Third, V. wilt is introduced to the soil via infested spinach seeds. Spinach seeds have
been shown to be the main source of the disease (du Toit, Derie, and Hernandez-Perez, 2005;
Short, D.P.G. et al., 2015); 89% of spinach seed samples are infected, with an incidence of
infected seeds per sample of mean 18.51% and range 0.3% to 84.8% (du Toit, Derie, and
Hernandez-Perez, 2005). The precise impact of planting infected spinach seeds on V. wilt
of lettuce was recently assessed and proven to be the cause of the disease on lettuce (Short,
D.P.G. et al., 2015). The pathogen isolated from infected lettuce plants is genetically identical
to the pathogen carried on spinach seeds (Atallah et al., 2010).
Infected spinach seeds carry an average of 200 to 300 microsclerotia per seed (Maruthacha-

4 Krishna Subbarao is a Professor of Plant Pathology and Cooperative Extension Specialist at the University of California at Davis. He has studied V. wilt for many years.

4

lam et al., 2013). As spinach crops are seeded at up to nine million seeds per hectare for
baby leaf spinach, even a small proportion of infected seeds can introduce many microsclerotia (du Toit and Hernandez-Perez, 2005).
One method for controlling V. wilt is to fumigate with methyl bromide. As methyl
bromide is an ozone depleting substance, the Montreal Protocol has eliminated methyl bromide use for fumigation of vegetable crops such as lettuce; however, certain crops such as
strawberries have received critical-use exemptions through 2016

5 (California Department of

Pesticide Regulation, 2010; United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2012b), and
the residual eects from strawberry fumigation provide protection for one or two seasons
of lettuce before microsclerotia densities rise (Atallah, Hayes, and Subbarao, 2011).

The

long-term availability of this solution is limited and uncertain.
A second method for controlling V. wilt is to plant broccoli. Broccoli is not susceptible
to V. wilt and it also reduces the levels of microsclerotia in the soil (Subbarao and Hubbard,
1996; Subbarao, Hubbard, and Koike, 1999; Shetty et al., 2000). Some growers have experimented with this solution, but relatively low returns from broccoli in the region prevent this
option from becoming a widespread solution. Planting all infected acreage to broccoli may
also ood the market, driving down broccoli prices.
A third method for controlling V. wilt is to not plant spinach, since spinach seeds are
the vector of pathogen introduction (du Toit, Derie, and Hernandez-Perez, 2005). Growers
who use this third control method of not planting spinach must forgo any relative prots
they may have received if they planted spinach instead of another crop.
In addition to the control measures that the grower can take, V. wilt can also be prevented or controlled by a spinach seed company through testing and cleaning the spinach

5 Critical-use

exemption requests through 2014 specify that up to one third of the California strawberry
crop will be fumigated with methyl bromide, but actual use was much lower. The remainder of the crop is
treated with alternatives such as chloropicrin or 1,3-Dichloropropene (1,3-D) (United States Environmental
Protection Agency, 2012a). However, these alternatives (unless combined with methyl bromide) tend to be
less eective for V. wilt (Atallah, Hayes, and Subbarao, 2011). Field trials of other chemical fumigants either
have not been widely used due to township caps or are not yet registered and approved.

5

seeds. Testing or cleaning seeds is an important option for preventing

Verticillium dahliae

from being introduced into a eld, but can be uncertain and potentially costly. Although

Verticillium dahliae

cannot be completely eliminated by seed cleaning, incidence levels in

spinach seed can be signicantly reduced (du Toit and Hernandez-Perez, 2005). Very recent
developments in testing procedures suggest that testing spinach seed for
might soon be feasible on a commercial basis.
up testing spinach seeds. Previously, testing for

Verticillium dahliae

Moreover, a very recent innovation speeds

Verticillium dahliae

in spinach seeds took

approximately two weeks and could not accurately distinguish between pathogenic and nonpathogenic species (Duressa et al., 2012). This new method takes only one day to complete,
is highly sensitive (as it is able to detect one infected seed out of 100), and can distinguish
among species (Duressa et al., 2012).
V. wilt can also be controlled by restricting the imports of spinach seeds infested with

Verticillium dahliae,

but doing so would have trade implications.

Currently, the United

States has no phytosanitary restrictions on spinach seed imports, but Mexico prohibits the
importation of seeds if more than 10% are infected (IPC, 2003).
V. wilt can therefore be prevented or controlled by the grower by fumigating with
methyl bromide, planting broccoli, or not planting spinach. These control options require
long-term investment for future gain.

V. wilt can also be prevented or controlled by the

spinach seed company by testing and cleaning the spinach seeds. However, seed companies
are unwilling to test or clean spinach seeds, as they are not aected by this disease.

3

Literature Review

The rst strand of literature to which our paper relates is on the economics of pest management (Hueth and Regev, 1974; Carlson and Main, 1976; Wu, 2001; Noailly, 2008; McKee
et al., 2009), which focuses on pests for which treatment is available after crops are aected.
In contrast, V. wilt cannot be treated once crops are aected. Existing work on crop disease,

6

such as Johansson et al. (2006) and Gomez, Nunez, and Onal (2009) on soybean rust, and
Atallah et al. (2015) on grapevine leafroll disease, focuses on spatial issues regarding the
spread of the disease. In contrast, V. wilt has only a limited geographic impact, and thus
dynamic considerations are more important than spatial ones for V. wilt.
A second strand of literature to which our paper relates is on dynamic models in
agricultural management.

As

Verticillium dahliae

persists in the soil for many years, a

static model such as that proposed by Mott, Hall, and Osteen (1984) will not properly
account for the future benets of reducing microsclerotia in the soil. The dynamics of V.
wilt more closely t the seed bank management model by Wu (2001).
Dynamic models have been used in agricultural management to analyze many problems. Weisensel and van Kooten (1990) use a dynamic model of growers' choices to plant
wheat, or to use tillage fallow versus chemicals to store moisture. In a related paper, van
Kooten, Weisensel, and Chinthammit (1990) use a dynamic model that explicitly includes
soil quality in the grower's utility function and the trade-o between soil quality (which may
decline due to erosion) and net returns.
Our paper builds on the literature on dynamic structural econometric modeling. Rust's
(1987; 1988) seminal papers develop a dynamic structural econometric model using nested
xed point maximum likelihood estimation.

This model has been adapted for many ap-

plications, including bus engine replacement (Rust, 1987), nuclear power plant shutdown
(Rothwell and Rust, 1997), water management (Timmins, 2002), agriculture (De Pinto and
Nelson, 2009; Scott, 2013), air conditioner purchases (Rapson, 2014), wind turbine shutdowns and upgrades (Lin Lawell, 2017), and copper mining decisions (Aguirregabiria and
Luengo, 2016). Carroll et al. (2017a) develop and estimate a dynamic structural model to
analyze short- versus long-term decision-making for disease control. Carroll et al. (2017b)
develop and estimate a dynamic structural model to analyze the supply chain externality
between growers and spinach seed companies in controlling V. wilt.

7

4

Dynamic Structural Econometric Model

To analyze the eects of V. wilt on, we develop and estimate a single-agent dynamic structural
econometric model using the econometric methods developed by Rust (1987). Each month

t,

each grower

i

chooses an action

dit ∈ D.

The possible actions for each grower for each

month include one of ve crops (resistant, susceptible (other than lettuce), lettuce, spinach,
and broccoli), combined with the choice to fumigate with methyl bromide. To focus on the
crops most relevant to this problem, we group the crops resistant to V. wilt together and the
crops (other than lettuce) susceptible to V. wilt together. Lettuce, spinach, and broccoli are
included separately as these crops are most relevant to V. wilt. Susceptible crops include
strawberries, artichoke, and cabbage. Resistant crops include cauliower and celery.
Although the raw data are observations on the day and time any fumigant is applied
on a eld, we aggregate to monthly observations. Growers are generally only making one
crop-fumigation decision each season. The length of the season varies among crops, and can
be as short as one month for spinach and more than a year for strawberries. For this reason,
we choose a month as the time period for each crop-fumigation decision. To cover the case
of multi-month seasons, we include a dummy variable for whether the grower continues with
the same crop chosen in the previous month. Moreover, because not all crops are harvested
in all months, we also include dummy variables for each crop-month indicating whether a
particular month is a harvest month for a particular crop. For example, although Monterey
County grows crops during a large portion of the year, few crops are harvested in the winter
months.
To estimate growers' losses from V. wilt, it would be ideal to observe actual prices,
quantities, costs, and level of microsclerotia for both growers facing losses from V. wilt and
those who are not. In theory, prot maximizing growers make optimal planting and fumigating decisions factoring in planting and input costs, as well as the costs of microsclerotia
building up in the soil over time and potentially impacting future crops. Unfortunately, data

8

on growers' actual price, quantity, costs, and level of microsclerotia are not available.

6

We account for the important factors in a grower's prot maximizing decision by
including in the payo function state variables that aect revenue; state variables that aect
costs; state variables that aect both revenue and costs; and state variables that aect either
revenue or cost by aecting the microsclerotia and the spread of V. wilt. The dierent state
variables we include may have eects on price, yield, input costs, or microsclerotia levels.
Costs are accounted for by the crop-fumigation dummies and the constant in our model,
and we allow these costs to dier between the early and later periods of our data set. The
largest cost dierence among crops is due to fumigation, so we include a dummy for methyl
bromide fumigation to account for the net costs of fumigation and to absorb cost dierences
among crops.
The per-period payo to a grower from choosing action
values of the state variables

t.

The state variables

sit

sit

at time

at time

t

t

dit

at time

t

depends on the

it (dit )

at time

priceit (dit )),

dummy

as well as the choice-specic shock

include crop prices for each crop (

variables for each crop indicating whether this month is a harvest month for that crop

harvest month dummyit (dit )), dummy variables for each crop indicating whether that crop

(

is the same as the crop chosen in the previous month (

last crop dummyit (dit )),

a variable

measuring whether and how much the methyl bromide control option was used in the past

methyl bromide historyit ),

(

and a variable measuring whether and how much the broccoli

broccoli historyit ).

control option was used in the past (

There is a choice-specic shock it (dit ) associated with each possible action

it

denote the vector of choice-specic shocks faced by grower

D}.
i

The vector of choice-specic shocks

it

dit ∈ D.

Let

i at time t: it ≡ {it (dit )|dit ∈

is observed by grower

i

at time

t,

before grower

makes his time-t action choice, but is never observed by the econometrician.
The per-period payo to a grower from choosing action

6 The

dit

at time

t

is given by:

7

University of California at Davis "Cost and Return Studies" have a limited number of estimates
for the revenue and costs, but estimates are not available for all the crops and years in our model.
7 Because the model requires discrete data, we bin the action and state variables. This means that there
9

U (dit , sit , it , θ) = π(dit , sit , θ) + it (dit ),
where the deterministic component

π(·)

of the per-period payo is given by:

π(dit ,sit , θ) = θ1 · spinach
+ θ2 · methyl

dummyit

bromide dummyit

+ θ3 · broccoli

dummyit

+ θ4 · (lettuce

dummyit * methyl bromide historyit )

+ θ5 · (lettuce

dummyit * broccoli historyit )

+ θ6 · (spinach

dummyit *methyl bromide historyit )

+ θ7 · (spinach

dummyit *broccoli historyit )

+ θ8 · lettuce

dummyit

+ θ9 · (priceit (dit )*
+ θ10 · last

(1)

harvest month dummyit (dit ))

crop dummyit (dit )

+ θ11 ,

where

spinach dummyit , methyl bromide dummyit , broccoli dummyit , and lettuce dummyit are

among the possible actions

dit ∈ D.

Spinach will tend to increase microsclerotia, thus decreasing the quantity harvested,
increasing microsclerotia costs, and potentially increasing input costs as growers need to
fumigate more. The coecient

θ1

on the spinach dummy captures the eects of spinach on

payos that are not internalized in the spinach price.
Especially in more recent years, methyl bromide fumigation is very expensive and

are no meaningful units associated with the variables, payos, or value functions; and the payo and value
functions described in the model do not explicitly measure revenue or prot. However, the payo function
does include action and state variables that aect revenue (such as price); costs (such as the methyl bromide
dummy); both revenue and costs; and either revenue and/or costs through their eect on microsclerotia and
the spread of V. wilt.
10

raises input costs dramatically. Fumigation is the largest cost dierence among crops. Thus,
methyl bromide fumigation is a control option that requires incurring costs or forgoing prot
in the current period for future benet. The coecient

θ2

on the dummy for methyl bromide

fumigation accounts for the costs of fumigation and absorbs the cost dierences among
crops.

8

Broccoli is not highly protable, but may yield future benets for lettuce growers.
Thus, planting broccoli is a control option that requires incurring costs or forgoing prot in
the current period for future benet. The coecient

θ3

on the broccoli dummy captures the

eects of broccoli on payos that are not internalized in the broccoli price.
Since the control options require incurring costs or forgoing prot in the current period
for future benet, previous use of control options may aect current payos. We therefore
include variables indicating the fumigation history with methyl bromide within the last twelve
months and the broccoli history within the last twelve months. We expect methyl bromide
fumigation history and broccoli history to be closely linked to the presence of microsclerotia
in a eld.

Methyl bromide fumigation history and broccoli history will tend to decrease

microsclerotia levels in the soil, leading to increased harvest for susceptible crops, lower
microsclerotia costs, and lower input costs.
We interact the variables measuring previous use of control options with a dummy
variable for lettuce being planted in the current period because lettuce is the primary susceptible crop.

Methyl bromide fumigation history interacted with planting lettuce today

would have a positive coecient

θ4

if having fumigated with methyl bromide is an eective

control option. Similarly, broccoli history interacted with planting lettuce today would have
a positive coecient

θ5

if having planted broccoli is an eective control option. These two

parameters therefore enable us to assess the eectiveness of these two respective control

8 In

addition to being an investment in protecting potential future lettuce crops from V. wilt, methyl
bromide can also be benecial to the current crop of strawberries. However, on net, methyl bromide fumigation generally requires incurring net costs or foregoing prot in the current period. A negative sign on
the coecient on the dummy for methyl bromide fumigation would indicate a net cost to methyl bromide
fumigation.
11

options.
We also interact the methyl bromide history and broccoli history variables with the
dummy variable for spinach being planted in the current period, to capture whether the
undesirability of spinach is mitigated by having methyl bromide history and/or broccoli
history.
Growers continue to plant lettuce even though it is susceptible, and the coecient

θ8

on the lettuce dummy captures any additional benet of lettuce beyond its price.
Growers base decisions in part on the price or gross return they expect to receive for
their harvested crops (Scott, 2013). We interact price with a dummy variable that is equal to
one during the harvest season for each crop to capture the fact that although a grower may
plant the same crop for multiple months, he only receives revenue during the months of the

9 In particular, the expected gross revenue to harvesting a crop

harvest season for that crop.

during non-harvest season months (e.g., during the winter) is 0.

10 Thus, by incorporating

the expected gross return in the payo of function and by modeling the dynamic decisionmaking of growers of when and what to plant, and whether and when to fumigate, our model
accounts for the biological reality of how long a crop needs to be in the ground, because a
prot maximizing grower is unlikely to pull out the crop before it is ready to harvest (and
therefore before he would receive the expected return), barring problems such as V. wilt or

9 On

average, the length of the harvest season is less than 2 months in our data set, and equal to about
1.5 months on average for most crops. The exception are susceptible crops, which include strawberries,
and which have an average harvest season length of 2.59 months. In the case of strawberries, however,
strawberries are an ongoing harvest crop and therefore the more months in the harvest season it is grown,
the more product can be harvested, so it is reasonable to assume that a grower may receive revenue each
harvest month during which strawberries are grown. We choose not to model the grower as only receiving the
revenue for his crop the rst month of the harvest season, as this would not explain why growers may plant
the same crop for multiple months in the harvest season. Staying in the harvest season longer sometimes
yields higher revenue because it enables the grower to harvest more product or replant the crop for more
harvest, both of which are better captured by having the grower receive more revenue if he stays in the
harvest season longer. For similar reasons, we choose not to model the grower as only receiving the revenue
for his crop the last month of the harvest season. As seen in Carroll et al. (2017a), we nd that the results
are robust to whether we divide the marketing year average price for each crop by its average harvest season
length, and therefore to whether we assume growers who plant the same crop for multiple months receive
more revenue than those who plant that crop for only one month.
10 The costs of inputs are included in the constant, which we expect to be negative.

12

other issues that meant that crop was unhealthy.
The last crop dummy variable is equal to one if the crop chosen this month is the
same as the crop planted in the previous month. The last crop dummy captures both the
requirement to grow a particular crop over multiple months, as well as any tendency for a
grower to choose to replant the same crop over and over again, perhaps harvest after harvest.
The value function for a long-term grower, which gives the present discounted value
of the grower's entire stream of per-period payos at the optimum, is given by the following
Bellman equation:

Z
V (s, , θ) = max(π(d, s, θ) + (d) + β
d∈D

where

β

V (s0 , 0 ; θ)d Pr(s0 , 0 |s, , d, θ)),

is the discount factor. We set our monthly discount factor to

To estimate the unknown parameters

θ = (θ1 , ..., θ11 ),

(2)

β = 0.999.

we use a nested xed point

maximum likelihood estimation technique developed by Rust (1987, 1988). We assume the
observed choices are the result of the optimal decision rule

dt = γ(st , t )

that solves the

Bellman equation.
We assume the state variables evolve as a rst-order Markov process, with a transition
density given by

Pr(st+1 , t+1 |st , dt , t , θ).

Since the price variable we use is the annual county

average, we assume that the choice of any one grower would not have a large enough eect
to inuence prices and therefore that the distribution of price next period does not depend
on any single grower's decisions this period; we therefore model crop prices as evolving
exogenously. The endogenous state variables (methyl bromide fumigation history, broccoli
history, and last crop dummy) evolve deterministically as a function of this period's action.
We assume that the state variables and the choice-specic shocks

it

are conditionally

independent and that the choice-specic shocks it are distributed multivariate extreme value.
Under these assumptions, the value function for a long-term grower given in Equation (2)
can be rewritten as:

13

V (s, , θ) = max (π(d, s, θ) + (d) + βV c (s, d, θ)),
d∈D(s)

where

V c (·) is the continuation value,

which is the expected value of the value function next

period conditional on the state variables and action this period:

Z

c

V (s, d, θ) =

V (s0 , 0 ; θ)d Pr(s0 , 0 |s, , d, θ).

(3)

The choice probability for a long-term grower is given by:

Pr(d|s, θ) = P

exp (π(d, s, θ) + βV c (s, d, θ))
.
˜ s, θ) + βV c (s, d,
˜ θ))
exp (π(d,
˜
d∈D(s)

After obtaining the model predictions for the choice probabilities as functions of the
state variables and the unknown parameters

θ,

the parameters

θ

can then be estimated

using maximum likelihood. The likelihood function is a function of the choice probabilities,
and therefore a function of the continuation value

V c (·).

Solving for the parameters

θ

via

maximum likelihood thus requires an inner xed point algorithm to compute the continuation
value

V c (·) as rapidly as possible and an outer optimization algorithm to nd the maximizing

value of the parameters

θ, i.e., a xed point calculation is nested within a maximum likelihood

estimation (MLE). From Blackwell's Theorem, the xed point is unique.
Identication of the parameters

θ comes from the dierences between per-period payos

across dierent action choices, which in innite horizon dynamic discrete choice models are
identied when the discount factor

β

and the distribution of the choice-specic shocks

it

are

xed (Abbring, 2010; Magnac and Thesmar, 2002; Rust, 1994). In particular, the parameters
in our model are identied because each term in the deterministic component
period payo given in Equation (1) depends on the action

dit

π(·) of the per-

being taken at time

t,

and

therefore varies based on the action taken; as a consequence, the parameters do not cancel out
in the dierences between per-period payos across dierent action choices and are therefore

14

identied. For example, the coecient

θ1 on the spinach dummy is identied in the dierence

between the per-period payo from choosing to plant spinach and the per-period payo from
any action choice

dit

11

that does not involve planting spinach.

Standard errors are formed by a nonparametric bootstrap. Fields are randomly drawn
from the data set with replacement to generate 100 independent panels each with the same
number of elds as in the original data set.

The structural model is run on each of the

new panels. The standard errors are then formed by taking the standard deviation of the
parameter estimates from each of the panels.

5

Data

We use Pesticide Use Reporting (PUR) data from the California Department of Pesticide
Regulation.

12

Our data set is composed of all elds in Monterey County on which any

13 Additional data on

regulated pesticide was applied in the years 1993 to 2011, inclusive.

prices, yields, and acreage come from the Monterey Agricultural Commissioner's Oce. We
collapse the data set into monthly observations.
We group the crops into six categories: susceptible (which includes artichoke, strawberries, and cabbage, but excludes lettuce which we represent separately), resistant (cauliower
and celery), lettuce, spinach, broccoli, and other.

14 From these, we form nine action choices:

susceptible, susceptible with recent fumigation, resistant, broccoli, broccoli with recent fu-

15

migation, lettuce, lettuce with recent fumigation, spinach, and other.

11 To

identify the constant θ11 , we normalize the deterministic component π(·) of the per-period payo
from choosing "other" to 0.
12 For more information see: http://www.cdpr.ca.gov/docs/pur/purmain.htm.
13 We use the eld identier as as well as the section, township, and range data from the PUR data set
to match elds across time. We delete a small number of observations that are non-agricultural uses (golf
courses, freeway sidings, etc.).
14 To make the model manageable, we include only the most common crops in Monterey County and those
that are most often grown in rotation with lettuce. The crops explicitly included in our model account for
nearly 90% of the observations. We account for the many rarely planted crops by including an "other" option,
which includes various herbs, berries, nursery products, nuts, wine grapes, livestock, and many others.
15 The data contain the crop planted in each eld for each recorded pesticide application. Although the
15

For control options, we use recent histories for broccoli and methyl bromide because
their eects on microsclerotia are relatively short-lived. Microsclerotia levels rebound within
one to two seasons, or approximately one year.

Thus, broccoli history is the number of

months broccoli was planted in the last 12 months, and methyl bromide history is the
number of months methyl bromide was used in the last 12 months.
The vast majority of elds (94% of observations) in our data set have only one grower
over the entire time period. Of these, we analyze those long-term growers who appear in
the data on from 1994 to 2010, and we model their decision-making as an innite horizon
problem. This data set on long-term growers consists of 615 elds, each over seventeen years.
We use a marketing year average price for each crop

16 to represent growers' expectations

about prices for each year. The marketing year average price is in units of dollars per acre,

17 Using the current year's

and therefore measures revenue per acre and incorporates yield.

marketing year average price assumes that growers have rational expectations about what

focus of our research is on methyl bromide, the other pesticides provide observations regarding which crops
are in the ground at which times. Due to the nature of the data, sometimes we do not observe the entire
production cycle of a crop. For example, strawberries are often in the ground for a year or more; however, if
there is no registered pesticide applied in one of those months, a gap in the production cycle may appear in
our data. We account for this issue in several ways. As long as the missing data are missing for exogenous
reasons, missing data will not bias the results. Since there are no pesticide treatments for V. wilt once crops
are in the ground, we have reason to believe that missing months mid-production cycle due to no pesticide
application in that month are exogenous to the impact of V. wilt on crop and methyl bromide fumigation
choice. We compared the distribution of these months between short-term and long-term growers and nd
that they are similar distributions. Finally, in the simulations, we simulate all months in the time period, but
only count grower-months that are present in the actual data when calculating welfare and other statistics
for comparison purposes.
16 For lettuce, we use a weighted average of the prices for head and leaf lettuce. In the early years of the
data set, romaine and other types of lettuce were not broken out separately, so gross revenue numbers vary
based on this reporting, but do not aect the discretized value of the price.
17 We look at gross revenue rather than net revenue due to data limitations. Costs are captured by our
crop-fumigation dummies and our constant. Estimating net revenue did not improve the overall model, and
cost dierences among crops are mainly driven by methyl bromide fumigation, which is explicitly included
in the model, and/or the dierence between strawberry costs compared to other crops. Strawberry costs are
generally an order of magnitude higher than for the vegetable crops, in part due to fumigation cost according
to Richard Smith, Farm Advisor for Vegetable Crop Production & Weed Science with the University of
California Cooperative Extension in Monterey County. We also attempted to incorporate this eect by
including dummy variables for the dierent crop choices and fumigation, with resistant crops as the baseline.
Unsurprisingly, the susceptible dummy variables (which includes strawberries) was collinear with the methyl
bromide fumigation variable; we therefore do not include the susceptible crop dummy variable in our model.
We expect the crop-fumigation dummies to at least partially capture the cost dierences among the dierent
crops.

16

the average marketing year price will be that year.

18 The Monterey County Agricultural

Commissioner's Oce publishes annual crop reports including prices, yields harvest, and
acreages for major crops in the county. Monterey County is a major producer of many of
the crops included in our model.

For most crops, these prices are highly correlated with

California-wide price data published by the National Agricultural Statistics Service.

We

discretize the marketing year average price into 6 bins; the marketing year average price bins
are shown in Figure 1.
We combine the marketing year average price data with data on the timing of harvests
for various crops in Monterey. For each crop, the harvest month dummy variable for that
crop is equal to one in months during which that crop may be harvested, and zero in months
during which that crop is not harvested (i.e., winter months for most crops).

19 For all crops,

we have observations during the winter months, including crops that have just been planted
and are not yet ready for harvest, and crops such as strawberries that overwinter for harvest
in the coming year.
Summary statistics for the state variables for long-term growers are in Table 1. The
mean discretized price for broccoli is relatively low, arming that broccoli is a low-return
crop. Spinach is a relatively small portion of the acreage grown in Monterey County, approximately a tenth of the size of the acreage planted to lettuce according to the most recent
Monterey County Crop Report.
Figure 2 plots the actual fraction of grower-months in each action type for the longterm growers. As seen in Figure 2, lettuce accounts for over

60%

of the grower-months for

these long-term growers. Figure 3 plots the actual fraction of grower-months in each action
by month of year. The actual fraction of grower-months in each action varies by the month

18 Instead

of rational expectations about price, another possible assumption is that growers' best guess
for this year's price is last year's price. The results are robust to whether we use lagged prices rather than
current prices (Carroll et al., 2017a).
19 There is a separate harvest month dummy variable for each crop-month. These data come from Richard
Smith, Farm Advisor for Vegetable Crop Production & Weed Science with the University of California
Cooperative Extension in Monterey County.

17

of the year, with lettuce predominant in the spring and summer months, and other and
susceptible crops having the highest proportion in the winter months.
actual fraction of grower-months in each action type over the years.

Figure 4 plots the

The proportions are

relatively constant across years.

6

Results

The results for long-term growers are presented in Table 2. We run our model on 3 dierent
time periods: the entire time period of our data set (`all'), the early half of the data prior
to 2001 (`early'), and the later half of the data from 2001 to 2011 (`late'). We report our
estimates for the parameters in the per-period payo function in Equation (1). The payos
do not have units because price is discretized and therefore no longer in dollars. Since we do
not have units for payos, we can compare only relative payos and welfare.
According to the results, the coecient on the spinach dummy is signicant and negative, suggesting that planting spinach is undesirable for reasons that are not fully captured

20 This coecient provides evidence that V. wilt is a problem, since it is likely

by its price.

due to the fact that spinach is associated with V. wilt that spinach is undesirable.

21

The coecient on methyl bromide in the current period is signicant and negative,
which means there is a cost to methyl bromide that may yield future benet to either the
current crop or a future crop.

The coecient is more negative in the later half of the

data, likely because the Montreal Protocol started to limit the legal availability of methyl
bromide during this period (California Department of Pesticide Regulation, 2010; United

20 Because

price is the discretized marketing average price of spinach per acre, the price measures revenue
per acre, and therefore incorporates yield as well. Thus, the signicant negative coecient on the spinach
dummy suggests that spinach is not desirable to plant for reasons that are not fully captured by its price,
yield, or revenue per acre.
21 One may worry that the negative coecient on the spinach dummy is possibly also consistent with a
problem in modeling where the other crops with longer crop cycles would potentially be more appealing
than spinach. However, even when returns are divided by the length of season, the returns to spinach versus
other crops still follow the same order. This result suggests that the season length is not the driving factor
behind this coecient. We conrm in Carroll et al. (2017a) that the signicant negative coecient on the
spinach dummy is robust to whether we divide returns by season length.
18

States Environmental Protection Agency, 2012b), and also because there is more demand
for methyl bromide in the later half of the data set when V. wilt became more of a problem,
resulting in a higher price for using methyl bromide.
The broccoli dummy coecient is negative, but not signicant, suggesting that planting
broccoli is not as desirable as planting lettuce (since the lettuce dummy has a signicant
positive coecient) and requires foregoing current benets (or incurring current costs) for
future gain.
The coecient on the interaction term between lettuce and methyl bromide history is
signicant and positive in the later half of the time period, suggesting that methyl bromide
is an eective control option in the later period. Similarly, the coecient on the interaction
term between lettuce and broccoli history is signicant and positive, which suggests that
planting broccoli is also an eective control option.
Although the coecient on the spinach dummy and methyl bromide history interaction
term is not signicant, the point estimate is positive and smaller in magnitude than the
spinach dummy coecient, suggesting that the undesirability of spinach is mitigated by
having methyl bromide history.

In addition to the signicant positive coecient on the

lettuce and methyl bromide interaction in the later period, this further suggests that methyl
bromide is an eective control option in the later period.
Similarly, although the coecient on the spinach dummy and broccoli history interaction term is not signicant, the point estimate is positive and smaller in magnitude than the
spinach dummy, also suggesting that the undesirability of spinach is mitigated by broccoli
history. In addition to the signicant positive coecient on the lettuce and broccoli history
interaction, this further suggests that planting broccoli is an eective control option.
The lettuce dummy has a signicant positive coecient, which means that owners
derive benets from planting lettuce beyond its price, such as meeting shipper contract

22 Thus, it is desirable for growers to control V. wilt, since they benet from

requirements.

22 In

the model, returns are estimated at the county level, so although contracts can and do specify prices,
19

planting lettuce.
The coecient on price at the time of harvest is negative.

At rst blush this may

appear counterintuitive, as economic theory predicts that price will have a positive eect
on return. After looking further into the data, however, the reason for this result becomes
more clear.

Strawberries have a much higher revenue per acre than any of the vegetable

crops included in this data set, on the order of $70,000 for strawberries versus $20,000 or less
for some vegetable crops. Most growers concentrate on either strawberry crops or vegetable
crops, so there are very few cases in the data of growers switching to strawberries from
vegetable crops, even though that behavior is what one would expect based on price alone.
When strawberries are removed as an action choice in the analysis, the coecient for price is
then positive. In addition, some strawberry growers are switching to contracts in which the
price plays very little role in determining their prot. They are paid a baseline amount for
growing the crop and may make more money in a particularly good year, but do not bear
the downside risk in a poor year.
The negative coecient on price at the time of harvest therefore suggests that there
may be something partially driving growers' decision-making that is not observable.

For

example, growers may have connections and contracts that tie them to certain crops that
we cannot observe. They may have expertise or risk proles that better suit certain crops.
Perhaps some growers consider themselves vegetable growers and the cost of switching to
strawberries is too high. Uncertainty related to the future of methyl bromide and its lack of
suitable replacements for treating V. wilt could also play a role. Unobservable factors that
may make growers less likely to switch crops are at least partially captured in our model by
the last crop dummy. We hope to explore these issues further in future work.
The coecient on the last crop dummy is signicant and positive, which suggests that
growers are committed to previous crops, which is also consistent with the hypothesis that
growers do not switch crops often and therefore are less responsive to price.

we expect the return used in the model to be exogenous to contracting decisions.
20

The total average eects of the variables that appear in more than one term of the
per-period payo function are reported at the bottom of Table 2. The spinach dummy has a
total average eect that is signicant and negative on net, which provides evidence that V.
wilt is a problem, even if the undesirability of spinach is mitigated by having methyl bromide
history and/or broccoli history.
The lettuce dummy has a signicant and positive total average eect, which means
that owners derive benets from planting lettuce beyond its price, and that the benets
of lettuce are enhanced in the presence of control options such as methyl bromide history
and/or broccoli history.
Methyl bromide history has a positive total average eect that is signicant in the
later half of the time period, suggesting that methyl bromide is an eective control option
in the later period. Similarly, broccoli history has a signicant and positive total average
eect, suggesting that planting broccoli is an eective control option.
In using a marketing year average price for each crop to represent growers' expectations
about prices for each year, we assume that growers have rational expectations about the price.
Instead of rational expectations about price, another possible assumption is that growers'
best guess for this year's price is last year's price. The results are robust to whether we use
lagged prices rather than current prices (Carroll et al., 2017a).
We choose not to model the grower as only receiving the revenue for his crop the rst
month of the harvest season, as this would not explain why growers may plant the same crop
for multiple months in the harvest season. Staying in the harvest season longer sometimes
yields higher revenue because it enables the grower to harvest more product or replant the
crop for more harvest, both of which are better captured by having the grower receive more
revenue if he stays in the harvest season longer. For similar reasons, we choose not to model
the grower as only receiving the revenue for his crop the last month of the harvest season.
As seen in Carroll et al. (2017a), we nd that the results are robust to whether we divide
the marketing year average price for each crop by its average harvest season length, and

21

therefore to whether we assume growers who plant the same crop for multiple months in a
harvest season receive more revenue than those who plant that crop for only one month in
the harvest season.
We calculate the normalized average grower welfare per grower per month for the entire
time period (`all'), the early time period (`early'), and the later time period (`late'). The
welfare is calculated as the present discounted value of the entire stream of payos to growers
evaluated at the parameter values, summed over all growers in the relevant data set, then
divided by the number of grower-months in the relevant data set. The average grower welfare
per grower per month is then normalized so that the average welfare per grower per month
over the entire time period (`all') is 100.
The standard errors for the welfare values are calculated using the parameter estimates
from each of 100 bootstrap samples. For each of the 100 bootstrap samples, we calculate the
average welfare per grower per month using the parameter estimates from that bootstrap
sample, and normalize it.

The standard error of the normalized welfare is the standard

deviation of the normalized welfare over all 100 bootstrap samples.
The welfare results are presented in Table 3. According to the welfare results, average
grower welfare per grower-month is higher in the earlier time period than in the later time
period, perhaps because V. wilt became more of a problem in the later time period.

7

Simulations

We use the estimated parameters from our dynamic structural model to simulate the eects
of crop disease on agricultural productivity. In particular, we use counterfactual simulations
to analyze the eects of V. wilt on crop-fumigation decisions and on grower welfare.
The severity of the crop disease is measured by the coecient
in the grower's per-period payo function.

θ1 on the spinach dummy

The spinach dummy coecient captures the

eects of spinach on payos that are not internalized in spinach price. The more negative

22

the spinach dummy coecient

θ1 ,

the more severe the disease.

To analyze the eects of crop disease on agricultural productivity, we use the estimated
parameters from our dynamic structural model in Section 6 to simulate how dierent values
of the spinach dummy coecient would aect the choices and payos of growers. According
to the results of the dynamic structural model for growers in Table 2, the coecient

θ1

on

the spinach dummy when we use data over the entire time period (`all') is -1.1311.
We consider a set of twenty-one evenly spaced values of the spinach dummy coecient

θ1

between -2.00 and 0.00. A spinach dummy coecient

θ1

of -2.00 represents a scenario in

which V. wilt is even more severe than it currently is, and therefore one in which spinach
seeds have an even greater negative eect on grower payos than they currently do.
spinach dummy coecient

θ1

A

equal to zero represents a scenario in which V. wilt is no longer

an economically damaging disease, and therefore one in which the eect of spinach on grower
payos (aside from price eects) is neutral and not economically signicant.
For each possible value of the spinach dummy coecient

θ1 ,

we run 100 simulations

of the choices and payos that would arise if the spinach dummy coecient were equal that
values. For each of the 100 simulations, we calculate the average grower welfare per month,
which is the total welfare divided by the number of grower-months. Then, for each possible
value of the spinach dummy coecient, we average the grower welfare per month over the
100 simulations using that value of the spinach dummy coecient. We then calculate the
average benets to the grower from mitigating the disease taking the average grower welfare
per month at each value of the spinach dummy coecient, and then subtracting the average
grower welfare per month when the spinach dummy coecient

θ1

is an extremely severe

-2.00. In other words, we normalize the average grower welfare per month when the spinach
dummy coecient

θ1

is an extremely severe -2.00 to 0.

Standard errors are calculated using a nonparametric bootstrap.

In particular, we

calculate the standard errors of the grower benets from disease mitigation using the parameter estimates from each of twenty-ve bootstrap samples. For each of the twenty-ve

23

bootstrap samples, we run twenty-ve simulations using the parameter estimates from that

23 The standard error of the grower benets is the standard deviation of

bootstrap sample.

the respective statistic over all twenty-ve bootstrap samples.
Figure 5 plots the benets to a grower per month from mitigating the disease, averaged
over 100 simulations, as a function of the coecient

θ1

on the spinach dummy achieved.

According to our results, the benets to the growers are the highest when the coecient
on spinach is driven up to zero, which represents the scenario in which V. wilt is no longer
an economically damaging disease.

As the coecient on spinach becomes more negative

(representing scenarios in which V. wilt is more severe a disease), the benets to growers
decline.
To analyze the eects of mitigating V. wilt on crop-fumigation decisions, we simulate
the crop choices of long-term growers when the spinach dummy coecient

θ1

is equal to

-1.00, which represents the scenario in which V. wilt is less severe than it currently is; and
when the spinach dummy coecient

θ1

is equal to zero, which represents the scenario in

which V. wilt is no longer an economically damaging disease.
Standard errors and 95% condence intervals are calculated using a nonparametric
bootstrap. In particular, we calculate the standard errors of the simulation statistics (e.g.,
mean fraction of grower-months in each action) using the parameter estimates from each of
twenty-ve bootstrap samples. For each of the twenty-ve bootstrap samples, we run twentyve simulations using the parameter estimates from that bootstrap sample.

24 The standard

error of the simulation statistics (e.g., mean fraction of grower-months in each action) is the
standard deviation of the respective statistic over all twenty-ve bootstrap samples.

23 Constraints

on computational time preclude us from running the twenty-ve simulations per bootstrap
sample for more than twenty-ve bootstrap samples per scenario. When we calculated the standard error
for welfare for scenario 1 using 100 bootstrap samples instead of twenty-ve bootstrap samples, the value of
the standard errors were similar using both twenty-ve bootstrap samples and 100 bootstrap samples.
24 Constraints on computational time preclude us from running the twenty-ve simulations per bootstrap
sample for more than twenty-ve bootstrap samples per scenario. When we calculated the standard error
for welfare for scenario 1 using 100 bootstrap samples instead of twenty-ve bootstrap samples, the value of
the standard errors were similar using both twenty-ve bootstrap samples and 100 bootstrap samples.

24

Figures 6-7 simulate growers crop choices when V. wilt is no longer an economically
damaging disease (θ1

= 0)

and when V. wilt is less severe than it currently is (θ1

= −1.00),

respectively. The fraction of grower-months planted to lettuce is higher under both scenarios
than they are in the actual data in Figure 2. Thus, when V. wilt is less severe, growers plant
more lettuce, likely because V. wilt then becomes less of a problem.
Figures 8-9 show the fraction of grower-months in each action type by month of year
when V. wilt is no longer an economically damaging disease (θ1
severe than it currently is (θ1

= −1.00),

= 0) and when V. wilt is less

respectively. Compared to Figure 3, which shows

the actual data, the results of the simulations of less severe disease show more grower-months
planted to lettuce, especially in the last months of the year when the actual data consists
more of susceptible and other crops.
Figures 10-11 show the fraction of grower months in each action type by year when V.
wilt is no longer an economically damaging disease (θ1
than it currently is (θ1

= −1.00), respectively.

= 0)

and when V. wilt is less severe

Compared to Figure 4, which shows the actual

data, the results of the simulations of less severe disease show more grower-months planted
to lettuce and fewer grower-months planted to other crops. Thus, when the disease is less
severe, growers plant more lettuce, likely because V. wilt then becomes less of a problem.

8

Conclusion

This paper discusses the eects on agricultural productivity of

Verticillium dahliae,

a soil

borne fungus that is introduced to the soil via infested spinach seeds and that causes lettuce
to be aicted with V. wilt.

We use a dynamic structural econometric model of V. wilt

management for lettuce crops in Monterey County, California to examine the eects of V.
wilt on crop-fumigation decisions and on grower welfare.
According to our results, planting spinach is undesirable for reasons that are not fully
captured by its price, which is consistent with the conclusion that V. wilt is a problem.

25

Fumigating with methyl bromide and planting broccoli are both eective control options,
but involve incurring costs or foregoing prot in the current period for future benet. We
nd that average grower welfare per grower-month is higher in the earlier time period than
in the later time period, perhaps because V. wilt became more of a problem in the later time
period.
According to the results of our counterfactual simulations of the eects of V. wilt on
agricultural productivity, the benets to the growers are the highest when the coecient
on spinach is equal to zero, which represents the scenario in which V. wilt is no longer
an economically damaging disease.

As the coecient on spinach becomes more negative

(representing scenarios in which V. wilt is more severe a disease), the benets to growers
decline. When the disease is less severe, growers plant more lettuce, likely because V. wilt
then becomes less of a problem.

Thus, V. wilt has important eects on crop-fumigation

decisions, grower welfare, and agricultural productivity.
There are two main externalities that arise due to V. wilt, and that have important
implications for agricultural productivity.
nality.

The rst externality is an intertemporal exter-

When faced with managing a disease that requires future investment, short- and

long-term decision-makers may have dierent incentives and choose to manage the disease
dierently. In the case of V. wilt, because the options for controlling V. wilt require longterm investments for future gain, an intertemporal externality arises with short-term growers,
who are likely to rent the land for only a short period of time. Renters, therefore, might not
make the long-term investments needed to control V. wilt. As a consequence, future renters
and the landowner may suer from decisions of previous renters not to invest in control
options.

Thus, decisions made by current renters impose an intertemporal externality on

future renters and the landowner.
In Carroll et al. (2017a), we analyze the factors that aect crop choice and fumigation
decisions made by growers and consider how the decisions of long-term growers (whom we
call owners) dier from those of short-term growers (whom we call renters). We examine

26

whether existing renter contracts internalize the intertemporal externality that a renter's
decisions today impose on future renters and the landowner, and analyze the implications of
renting versus owning land on welfare.
Although contracts can be a potential method for internalizing an externality between
dierent parties, our empirical results in Carroll et al. (2017a) show that existing rental
contracts do not fully internalize the intertemporal externality imposed by renters on future
renters and the landowner. This outcome may be because of the relatively recent development
of the disease and knowledge of its causes, more restrictive contracts not being the norm, the
possibility of land unknowingly being contaminated before rental, or diculty in enforcing or
monitoring aspects of the contract such as whether boots and equipment are washed between
elds.
In addition to the intertemporal externality, a second externality that arises due to V.
wilt is a supply chain externality between companies selling spinach seed and growers who
may lettuce. Growers wish to protect their elds from V. wilt, but they cannot easily prevent
introduction of the disease by spinach seeds when spinach is planted without incurring testing
costs and cleaning fees. Currently, seed companies are unwilling to test or clean spinach seeds,
especially as spinach producers are not aected by this disease.

Thus, decisions made by

seed companies regarding whether and how much to test or clean spinach seeds impose a
supply chain externality on growers.
In Carroll et al. (2017b), we analyze the supply chain externality between growers and
seed companies. We calculate the benets to growers from testing and cleaning spinach seed
by simulating growers' optimal decisions and welfare under dierent levels of seed testing
and cleaning.

We then estimate the spinach seed company's cost to testing and cleaning

spinach seeds in order to reduce the level of microsclerotia, and compare the spinach seed
company's cost to the grower's benets. Because seed cleaning cost data are not available,
we use several functional forms and parameters to estimate potential cost functions.

We

then use the benets and costs to determine the welfare maximizing level of seed testing and

27

cleaning.
According to our results in Carroll et al. (2017b), using data over the entire time
period, we nd that a cooperative solution would increase welfare, and in most cases, a
cooperative solution would require that the spinach seed company engage in more spinach
seed testing and cleaning than in the status quo.

Our work regarding the supply chain

externality between seed companies and growers sheds light on how treatment of spinach
seeds could potentially reduce externalities between seed companies and growers.
Crop diseases and how they are managed can have a large impact on agricultural
productivity. Externalities due to V. wilt that arise with renters, and between seed companies
and growers have important implications for the management of V. wilt in particular, and
also for the management of diseases in agriculture in general.

28

References
Abbring, J. 2010. Identication of Dynamic Discrete Choice Models.

Economics

Annual Review of

2:367394.

Aguirregabiria, V., and A. Luengo. 2016. A Microeconometric Dynamic Structural Model
of Copper Mining Decisions. Working Paper, Available <http://aguirregabiria.net/

wpapers/copper_mining.pdf>.
Atallah, S., M. Gomez, J. Conrad, and N. JP. 2015. A Plant-Level, Spatial, Bioeconomic
Model of Plant Disease, Diusion, and Control: Grapevine Leafroll Disease.

Journal of Agricultural Economics

American

97:199218.

Atallah, Z., R. Hayes, and K. Subbarao. 2011. Fifteen Years of Verticillium Wilt of Lettuce
in America's Salad Bowl: A Tale of Immigration, Subjugation, and Abatement.

Disease

Plant

95:784792.

Atallah, Z., K. Maruthachalam, L. Toit, S. Koike, R. Michael Davis, S. Klosterman, R. Hayes,
and K. Subbarao. 2010. Population Analyses of the Vascular Plant Pathogen

dahliae

Detect Recombination and Transcontinental Gene Flow.

Biology

47:416422.

Verticillium

Fungal Genetics and

California Department of Pesticide Regulation. 2010. Department of Pesticide Regulation
Announces Work Group to Identify Ways to Grow Strawberries without Fumigants. Available <http://www.cdpr.ca.gov/docs/pressrls/2012/120424.htm>.

Carlson, G.A., and C.E. Main. 1976. Economics of Disease-Loss Management.

Review of Phytopathology

Annual

14:381403.

Carroll, C.L., C.A. Carter, R.E. Goodhue, and C.-Y. C. Lin Lawell. 2017a. The Economics
of Decision-Making for Crop Disease Control. Working Paper, University of California at
Davis.

29

. 2017b. Supply Chain Externalities and Agricultural Disease. Working Paper, University
of California at Davis.

De Pinto, A., and G.C. Nelson. 2009. Land Use Change with Spatially Explicit Data: A
Dynamic Approach.

Environmental and Resource Economics

43:209229.

du Toit, L., M. Derie, and P. Hernandez-Perez. 2005. Verticillium Wilt in Spinach Seed
Production.

Plant Disease

89:411.

du Toit, L., and P. Hernandez-Perez. 2005. Ecacy of Hot Water and Chlorine for Eradication of

Cladosporium variabile, Stemphylium botryosum,

Spinach Seed.

Plant Disease

and

Verticillium dahliae

from

89:13051312.

Duressa, D., G. Rauscher, S.T. Koike, B. Mou, R.J. Hayes, K. Maruthachalam, K.V. Subbarao, and S.J. Klosterman. 2012. A Real-Time PCR Assay for Detection and Quantication of Verticillium dahliae in Spinach Seed.

Phytopathology

102:443451.

Fradin, E.F., and B.P.H.J. Thomma. 2006. Physiology and Molecular Aspects of Verticillium
Wilt Diseases Caused by

V. dahliae

and

V. albo-atrum. Molecular Plant Pathology

7:71

86.

Gomez, M.I., H.M. Nunez, and H. Onal. 2009.  Economic Impacts of Soybean Rust on the
US Soybean Sector. 2009 Annual Meeting, July 26-28, 2009, Milwaukee, Wisconsin No.
49595, Agricultural and Applied Economics Association.

Hueth, D., and U. Regev. 1974. Optimal Agricultural Pest Management with Increasing
Pest Resistance.

American Journal of Agricultural Economics

56:543552.

IPC. 2003. International Phytosanitary Certicate No. 4051.

Johansson, R.C., M. Livingston, J. Westra, and K.M. Guidry. 2006. Simulating the U.S. Impacts of Alternative Asian Soybean Rust Treatment Regimes.

Economics Review

35:116127.

30

Agricultural and Resource

Lin Lawell, C.-Y. C. 2017. Wind Turbine Shutdowns and Upgrades in Denmark: Timing
Decisions and the Impact of Government Policy. Working Paper, University of California
at Davis.

Magnac, T., and D. Thesmar. 2002. Identifying Dynamic Discrete Choice Processes.

metrica

Econo-

70:801816.

Maruthachalam, K., S.J. Klosterman, A. Anchieta, B. Mou, and K.V. Subbarao. 2013. Colonization of Spinach by

Verticillium dahliae

Ecacy of Seed Treatments.

and Eects of Pathogen Localization on the

Phytopathology

103:268280.

McKee, G.J., R.E. Goodhue, F.G. Zalom, C.A. Carter, and J.A. Chalfant. 2009. Population
Dynamics and the Economics of Invasive Species Management: The Greenhouse Whitey
in California-Grown Strawberries.

Journal of Environmental Management

90:561570.

Mott, L., D. Hall, and C. Osteen. 1984. Economic Thresholds Under Uncertainty with
Application to Corn Nematode Management.

Southern Journal of Agricultural Economics

16:151157.

Monterey
nomic

County

Agricultural

Contributions.

Commissioner.

Available

2015.

Crop

Reports

and

Eco-

<http://www.co.monterey.ca.us/government/

departments-a-h/agricultural-commissioner/forms-publications/
crop-reports-economic-contributions>.
National
2013

Agricultural
Crop

Year.

Statistics
Available

Service.

2015.

California

Agricultural

Statistics:

<http://www.nass.usda.gov/Statistics_by_State/

California/Publications/California_Ag_Statistics/index.asp>.
Noailly, J. 2008. Coevolution of Economic and Ecological Systems.

Economics

18:129.

31

Journal of Evolutionary

Palm, M.E. 2001. Systematics and the Impact of Invasive Fungi on Agriculture in the United
States.

BioScience

51:141147.

Rapson, D. 2014. Durable Goods and Long-run Electricity Demand: Evidence from Air
Conditioner Purchase Behavior.

Journal of Environmental Economics and Management

68:141160.

Rossman, A. 2009. The Impact of Invasive Fungi on Agricultural Ecosystems in the United
States.

Biological Invasions

11:97107.

Rothwell, G., and J. Rust. 1997. On the Optimal Lifetime of Nuclear Power Plants.

of Business & Economic Statistics

15:195208.

Rust, J. 1988. Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Discrete Control Processes.

nal on Control and Optimization

SIAM Jour-

26:10061024.

. 1987. Optimal Replacement of GMC Bus Engines:
Zurcher.

Journal

An Empirical Model of Harold

Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society

55:9991033.

. 1994. Structural Estimation of Markov Decision Processes. In R. Engle and D. McFadden, eds.

Handbook of Econometrics . Amsterdam:

North-Holland, vol. 4, pp. 30813143.

Scott, P.T. 2013. Dynamic Discrete Choice Estimation of Agricultural Land Use. Working
Paper, Available <http://www.ptscott.com>.

Shetty, K., K. Subbarao, O. Huisman, and J. Hubbard. 2000. Mechanism of BroccoliMediated Verticillium Wilt Reduction in Cauliower.

Phytopathology

90:305310.

Short, D.P.G., S. Gurung, S.T. Koike, S.J. Klosterman, and K.V. Subbarao. 2015. Frequency
of

Verticillium Species in Commercial Spinach Fields and Transmission of V. dahliae from

Spinach to Subsequent Lettuce Crops.

Phytopathology

32

105:8090.

Subbarao, K.V., and J.C. Hubbard. 1996. Interactive Eects of Broccoli Residue and Temperature on

topathology

Verticillium dahliae

Microsclerotia in Soil and on Wilt in Cauliower.

Phy-

86:13031310.

Subbarao, K.V., J.C. Hubbard, and S.T. Koike. 1999. Evaluation of Broccoli Residue Incorporation into Field Soil for Verticillium Wilt Control in Cauliower.

Plant Disease

83:124129.

Timmins, C. 2002. Measuring the Dynamic Eciency Costs of Regulators' Preferences:
Municipal Water Utilities in the Arid West.

Econometrica

70:603629.

United States Environmental Protection Agency. 2012a. Critical Use Exemption Information. Available <http://www.epa.gov/ozone/mbr/cueinfo.html>.
. 2012b. The Phaseout of Methyl Bromide. Available <http://www.epa.gov/ozone/

mbr/index.html>.
van Kooten, G.C., W.P. Weisensel, and D. Chinthammit. 1990. Valuing Tradeos between
Net Returns and Stewardship Practices: The Case of Soil Conservation in Saskatchewan.

American Journal of Agricultural Economics

72:104113.

Weisensel, W.P., and G.C. van Kooten. 1990. Estimation of Soil Erosion Time Paths: The
Value of Soil Moisture and Topsoil Depth Information.

Economics

Western Journal of Agricultural

15:6372.

Wu, J. 2001. Optimal Weed Control Under Static and Dynamic Decision Rules.

Economics

Agricultural

25:119130.

Xiao, C., and K. Subbarao. 1998. Relationships Between

Verticillium dahliae

Density and Wilt Incidence, Severity, and Growth of Cauliower.
1115.

33

Inoculum

Phytopathology 88:1108

Figure 1
Marketing year average prices per acre

Note: Black dashed lines delineate the bins used to discretize the marketing year average
price.

34

Table 1
Summary statistics for state variables
Mean

Std. Dev.

Minimum

Maximum

Spinach dummy

0.0285

0.1665

0

1

Methyl bromide today dummy

0.0033

0.0577

0

1

Broccoli dummy

0.0606

0.2385

0

1

Lettuce *Methyl bromide history

0.0229

0.1602

0

3

Lettuce *Broccoli history

1.1709

1.8277

0

12

Spinach *Methyl bromide history

0.0015

0.0431

0

2

Spinach *Broccoli history

0.0397

0.3701

0

10

Lettuce today dummy

0.6379

0.4806

0

1

Susceptible price*Susceptible harvest

5.0660

1.4914

0

6

Resistant price*Resistant harvest

1.8748

1.6125

0

4

Broccoli price*Broccoli harvest

1.1742

0.5082

0

2

Lettuce price*Lettuce harvest

1.9552

1.1004

0

4

Spinach price*Spinach harvest

2.5268

1.4709

0

4

Notes: Number of observations: 25,789. For each crop, the harvest month dummy variable
for that crop is equal to one in months during which that crop may be harvested, and zero
in months during which that crop is not harvested (i.e., winter months for most crops).

35

Figure 2
Actual fraction of grower-months in each action

36

Figure 3
Fraction of grower-months in each action type by month of year

Susceptible

Sus. w/fum

Resistant

Broccoli

Broccoli w/fum

Lettuce

Lettuce w/fum

Spinach

Other

Month

37

Figure 4
Actual fraction of grower-months for each action type by year
Susceptible

Sus. w/fum

Resistant

Broccoli

Broccoli w/fum

Lettuce

Lettuce w/fum

Spinach

Other

Year

38

Table 2
Results for long-term growers
All

Coecients in the per-period payo function on:
Spinach dummy
Methyl bromide dummy
Broccoli dummy
Lettuce dummy*Methyl bromide history
Lettuce dummy*Broccoli history
Spinach dummy*Methyl bromide history
Spinach dummy*Broccoli history
Lettuce dummy
Price*Harvest month dummy
Last crop dummy
Constant

Total average eects on per-period payo of:
Spinach dummy
Lettuce dummy
Methyl bromide history
Broccoli history

Number of observations

level,

† 10%

−1.1905∗∗∗
(0.3297)
−5.6993∗∗∗
(0.1077)
−0.5953
(0.4956)
0.1992
(0.4174)
0.3674∗∗∗
(0.0632)
0.0787
(0.3034)
0.2665
(0.2598)
1.3844∗∗∗
(0.1874)
−0.1558∗∗∗
(0.0458)
24.2249∗∗∗
(3.8795)
−1.0881∗∗∗
(0.2381)

−1.0703∗∗∗
(0.2419)
−6.3633∗∗∗
(0.063)
−0.1615
(0.18)
0.8501∗
(0.3797)
0.3707∗∗∗
(0.0558)
0.2734
(0.1949)
0.2573
(0.6341)
1.4691∗∗∗
(0.1782)
−0.16∗∗∗
(0.0399)
20.0534∗∗∗
(0.786)
−1.1906∗∗∗
(0.2592)

−1.1206∗∗∗
(0.2987)
1.4498∗∗∗
(0.1817)
0.2378
(0.2968)
0.2424∗∗∗
(0.0409)

−1.1791∗∗∗
(0.3299)
1.4003∗∗∗
(0.1874)
0.1276
(0.2630)
0.2390∗∗∗
(0.0405)

−1.0603∗∗∗
(0.2431)
1.4838∗∗∗
(0.1782)
0.5554∗
(0.2450)
0.2460∗∗∗
(0.0400)

25,761

level.

39

Late

−1.1311∗∗∗
(0.2981)
−6.0705∗∗∗
(0.064)
−0.332
(0.2035)
0.2717
(0.4648)
0.3682∗∗∗
(0.0605)
0.026
(0.1956)
0.2643
(0.4769)
1.4346∗∗∗
(0.1817)
−0.1585∗∗∗
(0.0414)
21.2161∗∗∗
(1.0463)
−1.1482∗∗∗
(0.3027)

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Signicance codes:

∗ 5%

Early

10,833

∗∗∗ 0.1%

level,

14,928

∗∗ 1%

level,

Table 3
Normalized average present discounted grower welfare per grower-month
All
Grower Welfare (per grower-month)

Early

Late

100

117.3475

92.7063

(5.0957)

(19.2088)

(3.4884)

Note: The average grower welfare per grower per month is normalized so that the average
welfare per grower per month over the entire time period (`all') is 100. Standard errors in
parentheses. All welfare values are signicant at a

40

0.1%

level.

Figure 5
Normalized average per-month (per-period) grower benets from disease mitigation

Notes: The less negative the spinach dummy coecient

θ1 ,

the less severe the disease. We

calculate the average benets to the grower from mitigating the disease by subtracting the
average grower welfare per month when the spinach dummy coecient

θ1

is an extremely

severe -2.00 from the average grower welfare per month at each value of the spinach dummy
coecient. In other words, we normalize the average grower welfare per month when the
spinach dummy coecient

θ1

is an extremely severe -2.00 to 0. Benets are averaged over

100 simulations. Dotted blue lines indicate the 95% condence interval, which is calculated
using a nonparametric bootstrap.

41

Figure 6
Simulated mean fraction of grower-months in each action when spinach dummy coecient

θ1

equals 0

Notes: The fraction of grower-months in each action is averaged over 25 simulations. Error bars represent the 95% condence interval, which is calculated using a nonparametric
bootstrap.

42

Figure 7
Simulated mean fraction of grower-months in each action when spinach dummy coecient

θ1

equals -1.00

Notes: The fraction of grower-months in each action is averaged over 25 simulations. Error bars represent the 95% condence interval, which is calculated using a nonparametric
bootstrap.

43

Figure 8
Simulated fraction of grower-months in each action type by month of year when spinach
dummy coecient

θ1

equals 0

Susceptible

Sus. w/fum

Resistant

Broccoli

Broccoli w/fum

Lettuce

Lettuce w/fum

Spinach

Other

Month
Notes: The fraction of grower-months in each action by month of year is averaged over 25
simulations. Error bars represent the 95% condence interval, which is calculated using a
nonparametric bootstrap.
44

Figure 9
Simulated fraction of grower-months in each action type by month of year when spinach
dummy coecient

θ1

equals -1.00

Susceptible

Sus. w/fum

Resistant

Broccoli

Broccoli w/fum

Lettuce

Lettuce w/fum

Spinach

Other

Month
Notes: The fraction of grower-months in each action by month of year is averaged over 25
simulations. Error bars represent the 95% condence interval, which is calculated using a
nonparametric bootstrap.
45

Figure 10
Simulated fraction of grower-months in each action type by year when spinach dummy

θ1

coecient

equals 0

Susceptible

Sus. w/fum

Resistant

Broccoli

Broccoli w/fum

Lettuce

Lettuce w/fum

Spinach

Other

Year
Notes: The fraction of grower-months in each action by year is averaged over 25 simulations.
Error bars represent the 95% condence interval, which is calculated using a nonparametric
bootstrap.

46

Figure 11
Simulated fraction of grower-months in each action type by year when spinach dummy

θ1

coecient

equals -1.00

Susceptible

Sus. w/fum

Resistant

Broccoli

Broccoli w/fum

Lettuce

Lettuce w/fum

Spinach

Other

Year
Notes: The fraction of grower-months in each action by year is averaged over 25 simulations.
Error bars represent the 95% condence interval, which is calculated using a nonparametric
bootstrap.

47

