NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNIONS, WORKERS, AND WAGES AT THE PEAK OF THE AMERICAN LABOR
MOVEMENT
Brantly Callaway
William J. Collins
Working Paper 23516
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23516

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017

This paper is dedicated to T. Aldrich Finegan, Professor Emeritus at Vanderbilt University. The
authors gratefully acknowledge assistance from the staff of the University of Pennsylvania
Archives, as well as helpful input from Ran Abramitzky, Al Finegan, Malcolm Getz, Claudia
Goldin, Andrew Goodman-Bacon, Barry Hirsch, Ilyana Kuziemko, Robert Margo, Suresh Naidu,
Greg Niemesh, John Pencavel, Valerie Ramey, Ariell Zimran, and anonymous referees. NSF
funding supported the original data collection (SES 0095943). Francesca Ciliberti, Hannah
Moon, Christina Quigley, and Tim Watts provided excellent research assistance with the Palmer
Survey. Callaway is an Assistant Professor at Temple University; Collins is the Terence E.
Adderley Jr. Professor of Economics at Vanderbilt University and Research Associate of the
NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Brantly Callaway and William J. Collins. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Unions, Workers, and Wages at the Peak of the American Labor Movement
Brantly Callaway and William J. Collins
NBER Working Paper No. 23516
June 2017
JEL No. J5,N12
ABSTRACT
We study a novel dataset compiled from archival records, which includes information on men’s
wages, union status, educational attainment, work history, and other background variables for
several cities circa 1950. Such data are extremely rare for the early post-war period when U.S.
unions were at their peak. After describing patterns of selection into unions, we measure the
union wage premium using unconditional quantile methods. The wage premium was larger at the
bottom of the income distribution than at the middle or higher, larger for African Americans than
for whites, and larger for those with low levels of education. Counterfactuals are consistent with
the view that unions substantially narrowed urban wage inequality at mid-century.

Brantly Callaway
Temple University
1301 Cecil B. Moore Avenue
Ritter Annex 867
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122
brantly.callaway@temple.edu
William J. Collins
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
VU Station B #351819
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235-1819
and NBER
william.collins@vanderbilt.edu

Between 1935 and 1953, union membership in the United States increased from about 13 to
33 percent of nonagricultural employment (Troy 1965). This was the culmination of a tumultuous
period in U.S. economic history, as New Deal legislation, the emergence of industrial unions, the
exigencies of World War II, and workers’ demands for representation led to a sea change in
American labor market institutions (Seidman 1953, Lester 1964, Reder 1988, Freeman 1998). The
economics and history literatures on unions in this period are large.1 Yet some fundamental
questions about unions and wages at mid-century have proven difficult to answer due to the scarcity
of micro-level datasets that record workers’ union status. In particular, the federal Census of
Population has never inquired about union status, and the Current Population Survey (CPS) first
collected data on union membership in 1973, by which time private sector unions were in decline and
losing public support (Saad 2015).2
Our interest in unions at mid-century is heightened by a concurrent and perhaps related trend
in inequality—the high point of American unions coincided with the low point of American wage
inequality in the twentieth century (Goldin and Margo 1992). Scholars studying the late twentieth
century have found evidence that unions tend to reduce inequality (e.g., Freeman 1980; Freeman and
Medoff 1984; DiNardo, Fortin, Lemieux 1996; Card, Lemieux, and Riddell 2004), but far less is
known about the relationship between unions and inequality around mid-century. Prominent scholars
at the time speculated that unions might raise inequality by placing a wedge between the wages of
similar union and non-union workers, by raising wages for workers who might have been already
been relatively well paid, and by reducing employment opportunities in unionized firms (Friedman
1962, 123-25; Rees 1962, 98-99), but they did so without the benefit of worker-level data.
In this paper, we compile and study a novel micro-level dataset that includes information on
wages and union status circa 1950, as well as an unusually rich set of background characteristics.
Such data are extremely rare around mid-century, and to our knowledge, the dataset’s combination of
information is unique for the period.3 The original survey was conducted in six cities in early 1951,
covering Philadelphia, New Haven, Chicago, St. Paul, San Francisco, and Los Angeles. It was
designed to gather information about labor mobility during the 1940s. We transcribed archival
1

Inter alia, see Millis and Brown (1950), Lewis (1963), Freeman (1978), Lichtenstein (1982), and Kersten
(2006).
2
Data from the Survey of Economic Opportunity became available in the late 1960s. This allowed early
studies using microdata (e.g. Ashenfelter 1972, Schmidt and Strauss 1976, and Lee 1978), though the
profession shifted to CPS-based analyses once CPS microdata became widely available in the 1970s.
3
Henry Farber, Dan Herbst, Ilyana Kuziemko, and Suresh Naidu are concurrently working to compile data
from early Gallup Polls and American National Election Studies that include information on whether someone
in the household belonged to a union.

1

records for more than 6,900 men in five of the cities.4 Within cities, the Census Bureau designed the
baseline samples to be representative of the local population (Palmer 1954). Although the cities are
not representative of the entire United States, they are varied in region, size, specialization, and
experience during World War II. We show that the pooled sample of survey microdata closely
approximates the economic, demographic, and human capital characteristics of the non-southern
urban labor force.
We use the new data to address three basic sets of questions about unions, workers, and
wages at mid-century. First, what was the nature of worker selection into union membership at the
height of union strength? Were there substantial differences between union and non-union members
in age, race, educational attainment, veteran status, or other background or work history variables?
Second, what was the conditional-on-observables difference in men’s wages depending on their
union status, and how did the gap vary across quantiles of the union and non-union wage
distributions? Third, how different would the overall distribution of wages have been in these cities
circa 1950 if unionized men were paid according to the non-union wage schedule? None of these
questions could be addressed effectively in the absence of worker-level data.
We find that male union members circa 1950 were, on average, negatively selected from the
labor force in terms of educational attainment and father’s occupational status. Union workers
earned slightly more than observationally similar non-union workers at the median, though the
baseline estimate is only marginally significant (0.029, p-value=0.10). But focusing on the middle of
the distribution misses much of the story. The largest union wage gaps appear at the bottom of the
wage distribution, and they were larger for African Americans and for less-educated men. It is
beyond the scope of this paper to model a full counterfactual economy in which unions did not exist,
but we can provide counterfactual estimates of wage inequality based on reweighting techniques
developed by DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemiuex (1996), Hirano, Imbens, and Ridder (2003), and Firpo
(2007). It is clear that the union distribution was more compressed than the non-union distribution
even after accounting for differences in observable characteristics. This is consistent with studies for
later periods that find that unions tend to standardize wages within and between establishments and
to flatten returns to skill (e.g., Freeman and Medoff 1984). A “no unions” counterfactual wage
distribution, which imposes the non-union wage structure on union workers and combines that
distribution with the actual distribution for non-union workers, is substantially more unequal than the
actual overall wage distribution. We stress that care must be taken in interpreting this result, as the
4

We discuss the data and the original survey in more detail below. Unfortunately, the original data for men in
Chicago are missing from the collection.

2

setting does not allow strong causal identification, but it is at least consistent with the hypothesis that
unions reduced wage inequality in urban areas of the United States at mid-century.
Finally, for the sake of perspective, we compare the results from the Palmer Survey data to a
similar analysis using CPS data from 1973 for non-southern cities. This is the first year that union
status was recorded in the CPS. In 1973, the union wage premium followed roughly the same pattern
as in the early 1950s—there were relatively large union wage advantages at lower percentiles in the
distribution and smaller gaps at the middle. Overall, the counterfactual in which union members are
paid like non-union members suggests that unions reduced inequality in the 1970s, though perhaps
somewhat less than in the 1950s. The difference is partly due to the higher rate of unionization in the
1950s; that is, more workers in 1950 were located in the relatively compressed union wage
distribution.
1. Background
Brief history of unions in the U.S. during the twentieth century
Prior to the 1930s, unions in the U.S. were organized primarily along craft lines and had a
precarious existence (Rees 1962, Lester 1964). A large, open labor market characterized by high
levels of occupational and geographic mobility and ethnic heterogeneity may have forestalled the rise
of organized labor in the U.S. In addition, there was no legal requirement for employers to engage in
collective bargaining and little restraint on employers’ use of strikebreakers, lockouts, retaliatory
firing and threats, and other means to oppose unions and prevent their organization. Richard Lester
writes, “…vigorous (even ruthless) employer resistance to labor organization continued for almost a
century and a half prior to World War II. Such opposition was much more prolonged and bitter here
than in other industrial countries….it helped to give our labor relations history its own special strands
of physical violence and private warfare” (1964, p. 63). A sharp increase in union membership
during World War I, for instance, was reversed after the war in the wake of recession, renewed
employer opposition, and shifting government and public support.
The National Labor Relations Act of 1935, also known as the Wagner Act, marked a major
change in public policy regarding union organization and collective bargaining. It created the
National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) to oversee union representation elections and enforce the
Act’s provisions, which required firms to engage in collective bargaining with certified unions and
refrain from many of the tactics previously used to discourage union formation. The Supreme Court
upheld the Act in 1937 (NLRB v. Jones & Laughlin Steel), and with substantial revision, it remains

3

the basis for union-management relations in the United States.5 The new legal framework, in
combination with the emergence of the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) and workers’
rising demand for representation, led to a rapid increase in union membership in the late 1930s, as
shown in Figure 1. It is plausible that popular discontent from the Great Depression was a
fundamental factor underlying both the institutional changes of the 1930s and the successful
organization of unions that ensued (Ashenfelter and Pencavel 1969, Freeman 1998).
During World War II, temporary policies under the National War Labor Board further
strengthened union membership in the interest of promoting maximum production (Seidman 1953,
Freeman 1978). Nonetheless, political opposition to organized labor grew during the 1940s (Millis
and Brown 1950). In 1947, the Labor Management Relations Act, also known as the Taft-Hartley
Act, passed over President Truman’s veto. It curbed a variety of union tactics, allowed employers to
campaign against union formation, outlawed “closed shops” (in which only union members could be
hired), and permitted states to pass “right-to-work” laws. Union density fell slightly in the late
1940s, but rebounded in the early 1950s. Thus, the data we study pertain to workers observed at the
high-point of American unionization, a period lasting roughly from the mid-1940s to the late 1950s.
Since then, the private-sector union membership rate has declined nearly monotonically.
Closely related research
The mid-century rise of unions in the U.S. motivated a large body of research on whether
unions affected wages and overall wage inequality. As mentioned earlier, scholars writing at the
time generally did not have recourse to micro-level data on wages. Instead, studies of the union
wage gap tended to look for differential changes in average wages within industries as union density
changed (e.g., Ross 1948), or across localities with varying degrees of union density (e.g., Sobotka
1953). There are far too many studies to review here, but Lewis (1963) carefully reviews the stateof-the-art circa 1960. In his writing, modern readers will recognize early considerations of classic
empirical problems such as selection bias, confounding pre-trends in treatment and control groups,
measurement error, and general equilibrium effects.
The empirical evidence from mid-century studies is mixed, with some studies suggesting
large union wage effects and others suggesting negligible effects, depending on the industry, method,
and time of observation. Lewis notes a tendency for estimates of the average union/nonunion wage
gap to be small (less than 5 percent) in studies of the late 1940s (1963, pp. 5, 190), suggesting that
5

The Act did not apply to government employees, agricultural workers, or domestic workers. A separate
industry-specific framework covered railroad workers and was an important precursor to the Wagner Act.

4

post-war inflation may have eroded nominal wages set in collectively bargained contracts. By the
mid-to-late 1950s, however, Lewis suggests that the average wage gap had rebounded to
approximately 10-15 percent (p. 193). Pencavel and Hartsog (1984, p. 204, 207) follow Lewis’s
time-series analysis and extend it to cover 1920 to 1980. They confirm that the average union wage
gap was positive and that it fluctuated with macroeconomic circumstances, but they emphasize that
estimates of period-specific gaps are imprecise. Like Lewis (1963), Rosen (1969) emphasizes that
spillovers from union to non-union wages complicate the interpretation of the union wage gap. He
examines industry-level wage data within manufacturing from 1958, finding (inter alia) relatively
low returns to education associated with unionization and a positive association between the union
wage gap and the union coverage rate. Using similar data, Rosen (1970) finds evidence that is
consistent with larger union wage gaps for skilled craftsman and unskilled laborers than for semiskilled operatives. 6
Scholars also had mixed impressions of whether unions tended to raise or lower inequality
(Lewis 1963, p. 292-95). It is plausible that unions exacerbated inequality on some dimensions, as
speculated by Friedman (1962, pp. 123-25) and Rees (1962, pp. 98-99). Miller (1958), however,
speculates that unions might have lowered inequality in the 1940s because they tended to bargain for
across-the-board raises in cents-per-hour, disproportionately raising wages at the bottom. More
recently, Goldin and Margo (1992) suggest that unions might have helped sustain the relatively
narrow dispersion of wartime wages into the post-war period. Frydman and Molloy (2012) find that
executive compensation relative to production workers’ pay was negatively correlated with union
presence in 1949. And Collins and Niemesh (2016) find that places with industrial concentrations
that made them susceptible to unionization after 1939 had relatively large declines in inequality.
Although micro-level data are not a cure-all for the measurement challenges Lewis described,
economists shifted strongly to micro-level evidence on the union wage gap and inequality once it
became widely available. Early examples using the Survey of Economic Opportunity from 1967
include Ashenfelter’s study of racial discrimination and unions (1972) and Lee’s study of selection
and union wages (1978). Lee’s study is of particular note for its effort to model selection into unions
and the union wage premium simultaneously.7 We refer to some of Ashenfelter’s and Lee’s specific
6

The measure of unionization in Rosen (1969, 1970) is the share of workers in establishments in which at least
50 percent of all workers were represented in collective bargaining, from Weiss (1966), which may be a noisy
proxy for union density. Wages are not observed separately by union status or by occupational category;
rather, inferences are drawn based on regressions of industry wages on industry characteristics.
7
The exclusion restrictions in Lee’s analysis are questionable, but the point that it is important to consider
union selection and wages together is valid and the effort is insightful. Also see Schmidt and Strauss (1976)

5

findings in the course of discussing our analysis of the Palmer data.
The subsequent empirical literature in economics focuses on analyses of union wages in CPS
microdata. With regard to the wage gap, Freeman and Medoff’s landmark study (1984) reports a
large average union wage premium during the late 1970s, at approximately 20 to 30 percent for
samples of non-agricultural, private-sector, blue-collar workers. They also find heterogeneity across
groups of workers: the young, those with low levels of education, and those working in manual labor
occupations tended to have the largest union wage premiums.8 Blanchflower and Bryson (2004)
revisit and extend key themes in Freeman and Medoff’s inquiry, including evidence on union wage
gaps from the 1970s to the early 2000s (see also Hirsch and Macpherson 2016). From the mid1980s, the wage premium declined along with union membership, which they attribute to increasing
competitive pressures in product and labor markets. Nonetheless, Blanchflower and Bryson confirm
that many of the patterns across groups—for instance the high union premium among less-educated
workers—persist over time. With regard to inequality, Freeman (1980), Freeman and Medoff
(1984), DiNardo, Fortin, Lemieux (1996), and Card, Lemieux, and Riddell (2004) present evidence
suggesting that unions tended to narrow overall inequality.
The early empirical literature on unions and wages was aware that non-random selection into
unions might complicate the interpretation of observed wage gaps between union and non-union
workers. This theme of worker mobility and selection links the union wage premium literature with
other prominent literatures in labor economics and public economics. A widely applicable insight
distilled from the Roy model (1951) is that highly skilled workers may tend to sort into sectors,
organizations, or countries that reward skill highly, and may avoid settings where returns to skill are
relatively compressed. This idea is central to the modern economics literature on migration patterns,
starting with Borjas (1987) and continuing in studies of both international and internal migration in
historical and current settings. In the public economics literature, a related and longstanding idea is
that heterogeneous households may sort geographically in response to differences in local tax and
redistribution policies (Stigler 1957, Epple and Romer 1991, Feldstein and Wrobel 1998). Similar
insights apply to organizations with relatively compressed wage structures, such as worker-managed
firms (Burdin 2016) and kibbutzim (Abramitzky 2008, 2009). Although the relevance of selection to
analyses of unions is clear, the topic has been difficult to address in the early and formative period of
the American labor movement due to data limitations. This paper develops a new dataset to
for an early effort to combine consideration of selection and wages. In the absence of determinants of union
status that are credibly excludable from wages in the Palmer data, we do not follow this line of modeling.
8
Lewis (1986) also summarized the micro-level evidence on the wage effects of unions available at that time.

6

overcome some of those fundamental limitations.
2. The Palmer Survey data
The data examined in this paper were originally collected to study labor force mobility during
the 1940s. Gladys L. Palmer, under the auspices of the Social Science Research Council,
orchestrated the project, which was funded by the U.S. Air Force. The Bureau of the Census
designed the samples, drawing primarily on dwelling units that were enumerated in the 1950 census
(“stratum I”) and making additional efforts to sample newly constructed dwellings and group
quarters. Palmer describes the approach as a “three-stage cluster sample” (1954, p. 148). For
example, in stratum I, a sample of census enumeration districts was selected in each city (stage 1),
one or more clusters of 18 dwelling units were drawn from each district (stage 2), and finally three
dwelling units were selected from each cluster (stage 3). Census enumerators implemented the
survey in six cities in January and February 1951. A first interview collected basic information on all
household residents age 14 and over; a second interview collected more detailed work history
information for those age 25 and over and employed full time for at least one month in 1950.
Ultimately, enumerators collected work history information directly from approximately 9,000 male
and 4,000 female workers in Philadelphia, New Haven, Chicago, St. Paul, Los Angeles, and San
Francisco. More detailed information about the survey design and implementation is provided in
Palmer (1954, Chapter 1 and Appendix B).
Fortunately, the University of Pennsylvania Archives holds the handwritten “transcription
sheets” from the work history interviews with men in each city except Chicago. For each worker, the
original interview’s information was written on a “work history schedule.” The transcription sheet is
like a large index card with boxes corresponding to particular questions or pieces of information
retrieved and coded from the work history schedule. We rely entirely on data retrieved from the
extant archival transcription sheets. In comparison with counts reported in the Palmer study (1954,
p. 152), our sample contains about 99 percent of the original work history surveys for men in the five
cities with available data.9 Portions of the Palmer Survey data were studied in Goldin (1991), which
focuses on women’s employment during the 1940s, and Collins (2000), which focuses on African
American men’s occupational upgrading during the 1940s. The dataset used in this paper includes
9

We do have a small number of duplicate transcription sheets for Chicago, but we have not located the
original collection for Chicago. An electronic dataset from UCLA’s archives appears to contain some, but not
all, men from Chicago (cities are not directly identified). We have not attempted to integrate the data from
UCLA here because we have not determined why some men are in that dataset and others are not;
unfortunately, the accompanying documentation is incomplete.

7

thousands of men and several variables that were not previously transcribed or studied, most
importantly union status. The original Palmer study (1954) does not examine the union wage
premium or any other aspect of union membership, nor does Goldin (1991) or Collins (2000).
Table 1 reports summary statistics for the pooled sample of men whose information we
retrieved from the archives. For consistency with subsequent analyses, the sample is restricted to
men of ages 25 and over without missing information on educational attainment, union status, or
earnings. The survey did not collect wage and salary information for self-employed men
(approximately 20 percent of the full sample), and therefore they are omitted from the table. The
original Palmer tabulations included some men’s work histories more than once as a way to
substitute for households that were not found or did not participate in the survey (1954, p. 152). We
weight the observations that served as “duplications” accordingly (approximately 5 percent of
sample), though doing so has little effect on the summary statistics.
In the pooled sample, without adjustments for city size (discussed below), about half the men
belonged to a union at the time of the survey (51 percent). The sample is predominantly white (90
percent), reflecting the demographic composition of the non-southern cities in the sample. Roughly
one-third of the men were World War II veterans. They were predominantly engaged in blue-collar
occupations in 1950 (66 percent) as were their fathers before them (68 percent), where “blue collar”
is defined as an occupation in the craftsmen, operative, laborer, and farmer categories.
Manufacturing industries were the largest employers (35 percent), but other major industrial
categories are well represented in the sample. Unfortunately, the survey did not collect information
on hours of work, though the sample frame was intended to include only full-time workers. We
bring industry-level data on hours worked into consideration later in the paper. Also, the survey did
not collect information on non-wage benefits such as paid vacation time and health insurance.
The original Palmer Survey collected data for a similar number of households in each city,
even though the cities were different sizes. Weighting the observations to reflect differences in the
size of each city’s male labor force (column 3) gives more influence to Philadelphia and Los Angeles
and less to New Haven and St. Paul. Yet the mean values of most variables are only slightly affected
(e.g., union status falls from 0.51 to 0.50 and weekly wages rise from 72 to 74).10
Relying on the Palmer data entails some shortcomings in terms of geographic coverage, most

10

We applied weights that are the ratio of each city’s male labor force, age 25 and above, to the number of
observations for each city in the Palmer sample including duplications (i.e., observations entered more than
once into the original Palmer analysis). Data on labor force size are from the published census volumes for
1950 (U.S. Department of Commerce 1952).

8

notably the omission of southern cities and rural areas. We conclude, however, that the Palmer data
are likely to provide a useful characterization of cities outside the South. Appendix Table 1 shows
that the five cities available for study in the Palmer Survey are fairly representative of cities outside
the South in 1950 according to IPUMS census data (Ruggles et al. 2015).11 For men, ages 25 and
over, who were classified as wage and salary workers, we see that a variety of demographic, human
capital, income, inequality (standard deviation of income), occupation, and industry variables were
similar in magnitude across census samples for the “Palmer cities” and for “all non-southern cities.”
Most differences are statistically significant but small. The most notable differences are that the
Palmer cities’ employment was less concentrated in manufacturing (32 percent versus 37 percent in
the “all non-southern cities” column), and the Palmer cities’ workers had somewhat higher
educational attainment (9.9 compared to 9.6 years). Based on evidence from the American National
Election Study (ANES) for 1952 (Campbell and Gurin 2015) and a back-of-envelope calculation
based on evidence from Troy (1965) and the 1973 CPS, we believe that 50 percent is a reasonable
estimate of union density for male wage and salary workers in cities outside the South.12 For
reference, the table’s last column adds southern cities to the sample, which pulls the summary
statistics in the expected directions (e.g., lower education and income).
Appendix Table 2 compares the Palmer Survey data with the IPUMS census data for the
same five cities. The goal is to see whether measures derived from the Palmer Survey are
comparable to figures drawn from the more familiar census microdata. In almost all cases, the
Palmer data’s values are close to the census-based data, despite some unavoidable incongruities (e.g.,
the census data do not distinguish St. Paul from Minneapolis; census enumerators did not ask
specifically for weekly earnings so they must be calculated from self-reported annual wages and
weeks worked; and the census was conducted 9-10 months before the Palmer Survey).

11

The IPUMS 1-percent sample for 1950 does not include an urban variable. We use the city variable, which
identifies approximately 97 cities. Lorain, Ohio is the smallest city identified (population 43,400).
12
The ANES sample for 1952, when restricted to male-headed households residing in a non-southern city,
where the head was at least 25 years old and not self-employed (or retired, etc.), yields a union membership
estimate of 54.5 percent. This is based on a question about whether the respondent or another member of the
household belonged to a union. The ratio of union density for men, age 25+, in non-farm employment in
metropolitan areas outside the South over the density for all workers in non-farm employment is 1.70 in the
1973 CPS; multiplying 1.70 by 31.2 percent (national non-farm union density in 1950 in Troy (1965)) is 53
percent. Suresh Naidu kindly provided an estimate for non-farm, non-southern households in Gallup Poll data
circa 1950 at 35 percent (personal communication); the ANES data suggest that shifting to urban residents and
omitting the self-employed, retired workers, etc., would scale that number up substantially.

9

3. Selection into unions at mid-century
Because micro-level data on union membership at mid-century are rare, so are statistical
studies of selection into unions at that time. Selection into unions is interesting in its own right
historically, and understanding selection is an important first step to interpreting differences in wages
between union and non-union workers. Around mid-century, joining a union often went hand-inhand with employment in a unionized establishment, reflecting the establishment’s collectively
bargained rules (e.g., “union shops” and “maintenance of membership” policies), peer pressure, or
the worker’s support for the union’s goals (Seidman, London, and Karsh 1951; Hammond and Nix
1953). It was common for establishments to recruit new employees simply by word-of-mouth
(Lester 1954). So, even though union density was high in this period, not all workers were equally
well positioned to learn about job openings in unionized establishments. Seniority considerations
may have dampened mobility into unionized establishments, as new workers would often start at the
bottom of the job assignment and compensation ladder regardless of experience elsewhere (Lester
1954, p. 30). It is likely that, “…accidents, friendships, hearsay, and the timing of job openings”
played important roles in determining the distribution of workers over establishments and, therefore,
union status.13 Of course, this does not imply that union membership was randomly assigned. The
Palmer data provide new insight regarding how different union and non-union men were circa 1950.
Table 2 provides a simple characterization of selection by splitting the Palmer sample into
union and non-union subsamples for comparison. Observations are weighted as described above to
reflect differences in the size of cities. Among men with reported earnings, the pattern of selection
into unions on the basis of personal characteristics was fairly sharp. There were negligible
differences in union membership on the basis of age, race, and years of residence in the area, and
only moderate differences in veteran status (4 p.p. lower for union members) and marital status (4
p.p. higher for union members). There were, however, strong differences in terms of educational
attainment, father’s occupation, and nativity. Union members, on average, had about 1.7 years less
education than non-members, and they were far less likely to have completed high school or

13

Based on interviews with industrial firms in Trenton in the early 1950s, Lester concluded that: “Companies
differ from one another in many respects…. So significantly do they differ and so uncertain are the future
employment prospects for individual employees that a calculating new job seeker would find it exceedingly
difficult, even with the knowledge possessed by those interviewing for this study, to select the one (or even
half dozen) of the 80-odd manufacturing firms studied, in which his earnings or job satisfaction would be
greatest during his work life. Such difficulties, along with lack of information, help to explain why much of
the process of application for, and acceptance of, jobs is governed by accidents, friendships, hearsay, and the
timing of job openings” (1954, p. 29).

10

college.14 Union members’ fathers were much less likely to have been white-collar workers in their
“longest job” than the fathers of non-members. Union members were also more likely to be foreign
born (4 p.p.). This same pattern holds when city fixed effects are included in regressions comparing
union and non-union men (results not shown), implying that the differences are not due to differences
across cities in union density and worker characteristics. In terms of their industrial distribution,
Table 2 reports that union members were disproportionately represented in manufacturing,
construction, and transportation, and were under-represented in trade, finance, business, and
government. We do not control for industry in our baseline analyses since industry and union status
are likely to be jointly determined, but it is worth noting that the selection patterns described above
hold even when controlling for broad industrial categories.
Overall, the comparisons of personal and background characteristics strongly suggest that on
average union members were negatively selected from the urban male labor force. A subtler
question about selection is whether workers were positively selected into union membership
conditional on observables such as educational attainment (Card 1996, Hirsch and Schumacher
1998). Selection on unobservables is inherently difficult to identify. The work history information
in the Palmer Survey does not track union status over time, and so strategies that rely on worker
fixed-effects are infeasible. Nonetheless, there are some background variables in the Palmer Survey
that are useful in this context, variables that are rarely available in cross-sectional datasets. For
instance, one can see whether fathers’ occupational status, as gauged by the IPUMS occscore
variable, was positively associated with workers’ union status conditional on workers’ educational
attainment, age, race, foreign-born status, and city of residence (“basic observables”). It was not.
Rather, union members’ fathers held slightly lower-status occupations when controlling for the sons’
basic observables.15 Additionally, one can use the Palmer Survey’s work history information to see
whether men who belonged to unions in 1951 were differentially unemployed in 1940 compared to
non-members, or whether their first full-time job was differentially high- or low-status conditional on
basic observables. In both cases, the answer is no. There is no statistically significant difference
between union members and non-members in these aspects of work history after conditioning on
basic observables.
14

The highest grade completed variable in the Palmer Survey is not continuous (0, <5, 5-7, 8, 9-11, 12, 1-3
years of college, 4 years of college, or more). We use midpoints of categories when necessary.
15
We assigned the fathers occupational income scores based on the IPUMS occscore variable, which in turn
measures median income in each three-digit occupational category in 1950. The conditional difference
between union and non-union members’ fathers’ status is -0.889 (s.e.=0.393) in a regression that includes fixed
effects for age, educational attainment, race, foreign-born status, and city. Mean fathers’ status is 27.6.

11

These findings are relevant to the interpretation of how U.S. labor market institutions worked
at mid-century and may at first seem counterintuitive. One might hypothesize that if unions forced
employers to pay higher wages, then employers would recruit higher quality workers from the nonunion pool, leading to a union wage premium that is illusory and due to positive selection (Lewis
1962, p. 327-28). It is possible, however, that this mechanism takes a long time to play out such that
positive selection was not evident by 1951, or that unions were so prevalent at this time that a
strategy of systematically replacing current employees with higher quality workers from the nonunion pool was infeasible. In any case, as discussed above, there is no evidence of substitution
toward more skilled workers in the union sector based on the workers’ educational attainment, their
family background, or their employment history. Although limited in precision, there is some
evidence in the Palmer data that better educated workers tended to leave industries that experienced
sharp increases in unionization during the 1940s. At the same time, workers who joined those
industries during the 1940s were not better educated than those who had already worked there in
1940 (and still worked there in 1950), conditional on age and city.16
From a different perspective, the mid-century pattern of negative selection into union status
makes sense because unions are generally believed to compress wage structures by standardizing
wages and reducing returns to skill (Freeman and Medoff 1984). In the Palmer sample, the wage
premium for high school graduates relative to non-graduates in the union sector was only 4 log
points, compared to 16 log points among those not in unions, controlling for age, race, foreign birth,
and city fixed effects, and assigning top-coded earnings $125 per week (the topcode is $100). Ceteris
paribus, following the Roy model intuition mentioned above, this would increase the incentive for
highly skilled workers to avoid or select out of union jobs. To our knowledge, this interpretation is
not prevalent in the literature on unions circa 1950, but it is plausible and consistent with our
findings. It is also consistent with findings reported by Schmidt and Strauss (1976) and Lee (1978)
in their analyses of unions and wages in 1967, with more recent studies of selection out of
organizations with compressed wage structures (Burdin 2016; Abramitzky 2008, 2009), and with
some of the literature on international migration, as reviewed by Abramitzky and Boustan (2016).

16

The industries with large changes in union density were metals, textiles, leather products, and transportation,
communication, and utilities (Troy 1957). For the subset of men who worked in these industries in 1940, a
regression of education on indicators for age, city, and “leave” (=1 for those who left that set of industries by
1950) yields a positive coefficient on “leave” (0.40, s.e.=0.22). Omitting from the sample leavers who were
union members in 1951 yields a larger coefficient (1.17, s.e.=0.28). Separately, for the subset of wage earners
who worked in these industries in 1950 and belonged to a union, the coefficient on “joiner” (=1 if worked in
other industries in 1940) is small and statistically insignificant (-0.23, s.e.=0.28).

12

4. Union and non-union wages
Measuring the union wage premium
Our approach to characterizing the union wage premium emphasizes differences in the
distributions of union and non-union wages, after adjusting for differences in men’s observable
characteristics. As mentioned above we follow re-weighting approaches developed by DiNardo,
Fortin, and Lemiuex (1996), Hirano, Imbens, and Ridder (2003), and Firpo (2007). For our
purposes, this analytical approach is useful for three reasons. First, the previous section showed that
union members differed from non-union members on dimensions that were relevant to earnings, most
notably educational attainment. Taking account of these differences is empirically important when
comparing workers’ wages. Second, we will see below that the union wage premium in the Palmer
data is not sufficiently characterized by conditional differences at the middle of the distribution; a
better understanding comes from a distribution-wide perspective. Third, approximately 14 percent of
the men in the sample have top-coded weekly earnings (at $100). Whereas analysis of mean
differences by OLS would require a strong assumption about the earnings of those with top-codes,
the analysis of quantiles below the top-code does not.
Most of the results we report come from comparing various quantiles of the union earnings
distribution to quantiles of the non-union earnings distribution, where both distributions are adjusted
for differences in characteristics relative to the full sample of male workers. Figure 2 provides an
illustration of how the technique works, and the appendix describes the technique more formally.
Figure 2A shows (i) the observed density of earnings for union workers and (ii) a counterfactual
density of union earnings created by “weighting-up” union observations that have characteristics
similar to those most frequently observed in the overall sample of male workers and “weightingdown” union observations that have characteristics that are uncommon in the overall sample of male
workers.17 Figure 2B shows the same plots but for (i) observed non-union earnings and (ii) the
counterfactual density of non-union earnings re-weighted to have the same distribution of
characteristics as the overall sample of male workers.
Ultimately, we are interested in comparing the re-weighted union and non-union earnings
distributions. Figure 2C plots these two densities, which are exactly the same as the counterfactual
densities in Figures 2A and 2B. Figure 2C also superimposes the differences between the 20th, 50th,
and 80th percentiles of each density. Finally, Figure 2D shows the type of results that we emphasize
throughout this part of the paper. Instead of plotting earnings densities, Figure 2D plots quantile
17

Figure 2 shows kernel density estimates using a Gaussian kernel and Silverman’s rule of thumb bandwidth.
Note also that the second hump, with log(earnings)=4.6, is actually the top-coded earnings at $100/wk.

13

treatment effects (QTEs)—the difference between quantiles of the re-weighted distributions.18 In
essence, the horizontal lines in Figure 2C become vertical distances plotted in Figure 2D. From
these, one can easily see that after adjusting for observed characteristics, the union earnings premium
was largest in the lower part of the distribution. It decreases substantially throughout the distribution
and is somewhat negative by the 80th percentile. Above the 80th percentile, results are not available
due to the top-coding of wages.19
As described above, the comparison of union and non-union wages has a long tradition in
labor economics, but this setting does not lend itself to strong causal inference about the effect of
union membership. The central challenges to a strong causal interpretation of the union wage
premium are (1) unobserved characteristics of workers or jobs that might be correlated with union
status, (2) potential endogeneity of some covariates to union status or expectations thereof, and (3)
potential spillovers in the form of threat effects (whereby non-union firms raise their wages to reduce
their workers’ likelihood of organizing or leaving), crowding effects (whereby unions’ demands for
higher wages displace workers into the non-union sector, depressing wages in that sector), or other
general equilibrium effects (e.g., whereby demand shifts toward products from non-union firms).20
In the presence of such spillovers, the union wage premium would still be an accurate measure of
wage differences between observationally similar workers circa 1950, but caution would have to be
attached to consideration of counterfactuals in which unions do not exist. Below, we refer to
“quantile treatment effects” to be clear that we are following methods developed in the econometrics
18

We focus on quantile comparisons in the same vein as “unconditional quantile treatment effects,” as defined
in Doksum (1974) and Lehmann (1975). See Firpo (2007) and Frolich and Melly (2013) for recent treatments.
Despite similar terminology, QTEs are fundamentally different from the results of quantile regression, where
the coefficient on a binary treatment variable is the difference between the conditional quantiles for treated and
untreated individuals. For example, workers with high education in the lower part of the conditional
distribution may be in the middle or even upper part of the overall earnings distribution. Instead, our results
correspond to workers who are actually in the lower or upper part of the distribution of earnings. Abstracting
from issues related to selection into union membership, QTEs correspond to comparing the distribution of
earnings for workers randomly assigned to be in a union to workers randomly assigned not to be in a union.
19
There are advantages to reporting QTEs relative to plotting the densities. First, it is easier to see effects at
different points in the distribution from the QTEs than from density plots. Second, plotting densities requires
choosing a bandwidth to smooth the data. In practice, results can be sensitive to this choice. QTEs do not
require smoothing, so there is no concern about bandwidth selection.
20
Two additional measurement concerns deserve mention. First, misclassification of union status can bias
regression estimates of the union wage premium toward zero (Freeman 1984, Card 1996, Farber and Western
2001, Hirsch 2004). This concern is less pressing in settings where union density approaches 50 percent, as is
the case in the Palmer data. Moreover, the Palmer Survey questions were posed directly to the workers and
pertained to current status; so, we expect a low level of misreporting. Second, the modern literature on unions
relies heavily on CPS data, and the CPS imputes income to some workers. Because the CPS imputation does
not match donors on union status, the procedure attenuates differences between union and non-union members
(Hirsch and Schumacher 2004). In the Palmer data, there is no imputation of missing wage data.

14

literature under that name, but we do so with appropriate caution regarding causal inference.21
Another measurement concern is that the union wage premium might not fully capture the
compensation premium, which would include things like health insurance and pensions.
Unfortunately, as mentioned above, the Palmer Survey did not inquire about non-wage
compensation. We located no direct comparisons of the value of union versus non-union workers’
nonwage compensation circa 1950, but it is clear that unions actively negotiated for improvements in
such compensation and that it became more important over the 1940s, albeit from a low base. In the
late 1940s and early 1950s, employer supplements to wages and salaries were about 5 percent of
employees’ total compensation (Bauman 1970, chart 2). To the extent that union members enjoyed
better benefits than others circa 1950, the union wage premium may understate the compensation
premium.
Baseline results and further exploration
The first set of results illustrates differences between the quantiles of union and non-union
workers’ earnings, adjusted for differences in covariates across the two groups of workers. The
covariates are age (cubic), race, marital status, foreign-born status, city of residence, World War II
veteran status, educational attainment (less than high school, some high school (grades 9-12), or at
least some college), and whether the person had resided in the area for less than 10 years. We first
describe estimates of the union wage premium in the full sample. Then, for comparison, we focus on
two groups of particular interest—men with low levels of education and African-Americans. Both
groups tend to be close to the bottom of the U.S. income distribution and their outcomes are of
particular interest to scholars and policy makers concerned with poverty and inequality. The results
may provide a quantitative sense of whether union membership was particularly valuable to such
men.
Figure 3 plots baseline estimates of the QTEs—this replicates the information from Figure 2
but rescales it for easier comparison with subsequent figures. Clearly, the largest union wage
premiums were concentrated in the lower part of the earnings distribution. The difference between
the 10th percentiles of adjusted union earnings and non-union earnings was 20.3 log points. The
difference at the medians was smaller, at 2.9 log points (p-value .104), and the difference between

21

DiNardo and Lee (2004) use a regression discontinuity approach to measure union effects on firms’ wages
in settings where union representation elections were just barely won or lost after 1984. They find no effect on
firm-level average wages. Frandsen (2012) follows a similar approach and finds sizable individual-level wage
effects lower in the wage distribution. We are not aware of similar data for mid-century.

15

the 80th percentiles is negative 5.4 log points.22 The basic result illustrates how important it is in this
case to look at the distributions rather than just the median or mean differences.
We can explore further to see whether the baseline results are due to workers systematically
sorting into different kinds of jobs. Workers may select into union status and job types
simultaneously. Therefore, controlling for job type does not necessarily leads to a preferable
estimate of the union wage premium, let alone a causal estimate of the effect of unionization. Rather,
the idea is simply to see whether the baseline patterns are largely driven by differences in the
distribution of workers across job types. To start, we add indicators for four broad occupational
categories and four broad industrial categories.23 Although the occupation and industry controls are
useful predictors of union membership, including them has only a small effect on estimates of the
union premium. For comparison, Table 3 reports the baseline results (column 1A) and results with
occupation and industry controls (column 1B). At the 10th percentile, union earnings were 18.2 log
points higher than non-union earnings (2.1 log points lower than without occupation and industry
controls). At the median, the earnings premium was 5.9 log points (3.0 log points higher than in the
baseline). At the 80th percentile, the union premium was zero.
Next, we collected data on detailed industry-specific injury rates in 1949 and 1950 (U.S.
Department of Labor 1952), and mapped that information to 1950 industry codes.24 The goal is to
see whether the union wage premium reflected a particular disamenity—the risk of injury—that
might be correlated with higher rates of unionization. It does appear that on average unionized men
in the Palmer data worked in industries with higher injury rates (17.8 compared to 14.2 per million
employee hours). We also calculated median weekly hours of work for each three-digit industry
from the 1950 census microdata (Ruggles et al. 2015) to control for potential differences in length of
the work week between union and non-union workers. Not every industry is covered by the injury
rate data, and so column 2A of Table 3 reports results for a reduced sample of men. The
specification in 2A includes controls for broad occupation and industry categories, and so the
22

For reference, ad hoc assignments of $100 or $150 to topcoded earners in OLS regressions result in union
wage gaps of 5.3 or 3.7 log points, respectively.
23
Occupation categories are: professional, managers, clerical, and sales; craftsmen and similar (plus a small
number of farmers); operatives and some service jobs; laborers, farm laborers, and some low-skill service jobs.
Industry categories are: manufacturing and mining (plus a small number in agriculture); construction and
transportation/utilities; wholesale and retail trade, personal service; and finance, business, government.
24
The injury frequency rate is the average number of disabling work injuries for each million employee-hours
worked, where a disabling injury is one that results in death, permanent physical impairment, or makes a
worker unable to perform job duties on one or more days after the injury (U.S. Department of Labor 1952, p.
1). Injury rates are the industry-level average of the 1949 and 1950 rates reported in U.S. Department of Labor
(1952); 1950 railroad industry rates are taken from U.S. Department of Commerce (1976, p. 388).

16

differences relative to column 1B are due solely to the change in sample composition. Column 2B
adds the controls for injury rates and weekly hours. This has little effect on the estimated union wage
premium pattern.
In addition, and again for a reduced sample, we can add controls for background
characteristics that are typically unobservable in cross-sectional datasets, such as whether the worker
was unemployed in 1940 (if in the labor force), the occupational status of his first full-time job, and
his father’s occupational status (if reported). Occupational status is measured according to the
IPUMS occscore variable, which in turn is keyed to median occupation-specific income in the 1950
census (Ruggles et al. 2015). In principle, these background characteristics might capture aspects of
selection and productivity that the baseline specification for the full sample does not. Results are
given in columns 3A (reduced sample with baseline specification) and 3B (reduced sample with
additional control variables). Throughout the distribution, the QTE results are similar with or
without the additional background controls. None of the estimates in column 3B is statistically
different from the analogous estimate in column 3A. 25
Results for men with low educational attainment and for African Americans
Figure 4 plots QTEs for the subset of workers who did not attend high school. This group
makes up 41 percent of the sample. Its members tended to be older, were more likely to be foreignborn or African American, and earned substantially less on average than men with more education.
To be clear, the results in Figure 4 compare the distribution of union earnings to the distribution of
non-union earnings for the subsample of workers with less than a high school education; union and
non-union men with less than a high school education are both re-weighted to have the same
distribution of characteristics as all workers with less than a high school education. Similar to the
results for the full sample, for less educated workers, the union earnings premium was largest in the
lower part of the distributions. At the 10th percentile, union workers earned 19.1 log points more
than comparable non-union workers. The wage gap decreases in the middle and upper part of the
distributions, but it does not fall to zero. The difference in median earnings for union and non-union,
less educated men was 8.0 log points; the difference at the 90th percentiles was 4.3 log points. Thus,
the evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that less-educated men benefited substantially from
25

Obtaining similar QTE estimates, however, does not imply that remaining unobservables are unimportant.
As illustrated by Oster (2016) in an OLS setting, coefficient stability is not by itself indicative of robustness to
omitted variable bias. In the QTE setting, the additional background characteristics are jointly significant
correlates of union status (in logit) and earnings conditional on union status (in OLS), but as shown in Table 3,
the augmented specification yields very similar results to the baseline.

17

union membership.
Figure 5 plots estimates of QTEs for black workers. Again, the union wage premium was
relatively large, and it remained so throughout the black income distribution. At the 10th percentile,
the difference between union earnings and non-union earnings was 26.5 log points for workers with
similar observed characteristics. At the median, the difference was 14.8 log points, and at the 90th
percentile the difference was 12.3 log points. Because the sample contains a relatively small number
of black workers, the confidence intervals are wider than in previous figures, but nearly all the
estimates are statistically significant. Figure 5’s clear implication is that black men who gained entry
to union jobs earned more than observationally similar black men who did not.26
This finding is important because the history of unions is replete with examples of racial
discrimination and exclusion (Northrup 1944, Hill 1967, Zieger 2007). The emergence of industrial
unions after 1935, which sought to unionize production workers along industry rather than craft lines,
likely opened more union job opportunities for African Americans, as did the labor demand shock of
World War II in combination with federal anti-discrimination policies (Collins 2001). Because
unions tended to standardize wages without regard to race, it is plausible that black men in unions
earned pay that was far higher than their non-union peers. This is consistent with the longstanding
efforts of Civil Rights organizations to pry open access to union jobs (Zieger 2007). It also possible,
however, that selection on unobservables into union jobs was more prevalent for black workers, or
that black workers in unions were paid compensating differentials for especially unpleasant aspects
of work (c.f., Foote, Whatley, and Wright 2003). These are interesting questions for future research.
Results within detailed sub-groups
Space and sample size do not allow detailed QTE descriptions for every subgroup of the
labor force. Figure 6, however, conveys a sense of how much heterogeneity there was in the union
wage gap at mid-century. It reports QTEs and confidence intervals at the 20th percentile (left panel)
and median (right panel) for 12 different groups defined by interactions of education and age. It also
reports separate estimates for white, black, blue-collar, and white-collar workers. All the estimates
are conditional on age, city, race, education, years residing in the area, marital status, foreign-born
status, and veteran status (omitting covariates when they are used to define the group).

26

See Ashenfelter (1972) for a careful discussion of race and unionism, which concludes that circa 1967
industrial unions tended to narrow black-white wage differentials whereas craft unions tended to do the
opposite. He too finds that the union/nonunion wage gap was relatively large for black men (p. 450-51). Lee
(1978, Table 3) also finds a relatively large union premium for nonwhite men.

18

For those with less than a high-school education, blue-collar workers, and black workers, the
union wage premium tended to be large at the median and even larger at the 20th percentile. For
those with some high school education (or more) and white-collar workers, the union wage gaps
were smaller and point estimates are sometimes negative. For the subsample of all white men, the
union wage premium at the median was zero, though it was significant and positive at the 20th
percentile. For reference, the full set of median results with additional information on sub-sample
sizes, union membership rates, and wage levels are reported in Appendix Table 3.
When the sample is split and QTEs are estimated separately for each city, the basic pattern of
a large union premium at low quantiles, a small premium at the median, and an even smaller or
negative premium near the top quantiles generally holds (Appendix Table 4). There are notable
differences in point estimates across cities, but the estimates are often imprecise, which makes it
difficult to make inferences from the cross city comparisons.
5. Unions and inequality at mid-century
As noted above, the peak of union density in the U.S. coincided with the low point of
twentieth-century inequality. This might have been entirely coincidental. For instance, it is likely
that the relative supply and demand for skilled workers was a key determinant of the “Great
Compression” (Goldin and Margo 1992). But it is also plausible that the rise of unions and their
tendency to compress the wage distribution mattered. This would be consistent with studies of the
fall of unions and the rise of inequality in recent decades, as well as with the observations of Miller
(1958), Frydman and Molloy (2012), and Collins and Niemesh (2016) regarding mid-century wages.
A first clue regarding the effect of unions on overall inequality comes from skill-group
differences in median earnings and their correlation with the union wage premium. The discussion
above noted that groups that earned relatively low wages (e.g., those with less than high school
education, black men, those in blue-collar occupations) also had large union wage premiums. This is
consistent with unions moving the earnings of some workers in low-wage groups closer to the middle
of the overall distribution, tending to reduce inequality.
To develop more direct evidence, we modify the reweighting approach outlined in the
previous section to address the following question: How different would overall inequality have been
in 1950 (in the Palmer sample) if union workers had been paid according to the non-union wage
schedule? This entails keeping the non-union workers’ wages fixed, but replacing the union
workers’ wages with a counterfactual distribution. The counterfactual for union workers maintains
their characteristics (such as age, education, and race), but the wage structure corresponds to that of

19

non-union workers with similar characteristics. The combination of the actual non-union and
counterfactual union workers’ wage distributions is then a “no unions” counterfactual distribution for
the full sample. This approach cannot take into account general equilibrium effects, and it is subject
to the caveats expressed above regarding the absence of randomized union status and the potential
endogeneity of some covariates. But it does provide a quantitative sense of the importance of
differences in union versus nonunion wages in comprising the overall wage distribution and its level
of inequality.
We take the difference between the 80th percentile and the 10th percentile as a simple measure
of overall inequality, the difference between the 50th percentile and the 10th percentile as a measure of
lower tail inequality, and the difference between the 80th percentile and 50th percentile as a measure
of upper tail inequality. Recall that top-coding makes it difficult to analyze the earnings distribution
above the 80th percentile.
Table 4 reports the results. In Panel A, wages for union members are based on the wages for
non-union members adjusted for differences in age, race, education, years residing in the area,
marital status, veteran status, and city of residence—key traits that workers bring to the labor market.
Overall (80-10) inequality is 21 percent (=0.150/0.715) higher in the counterfactual “no union”
scenario than in reality. Most of the increase in inequality occurs in the lower part of the distribution.
The 50-10 differential is 24 percent (=0.103/0.427) larger in the “no unions” counterfactual than in
the actual distribution, reflecting the relatively large union wage premium at the low end of the wage
distribution compared to the median. In Panel B, we add adjustments for broad occupation and
industry categories, so that the counterfactual distribution of workers’ wages maintains the same
broad occupation and industry mix as the actual distribution. Although informative, it is not clear
that Panel B is preferable to Panel A’s thought experiment because workers’ choices of occupation
and industry are endogenous to the wage structure. Again, the results are consistent with unions
reducing the overall level of wage inequality, yielding a combined 80-10 inequality change of 13
percent. In sum, it seems reasonable to conclude that unions circa 1950 tended to narrow the 80-10
wage dispersion by 13 to 21 percent in the set of cities for which we have data, subject to the caveats
mentioned above.
6. Comparing the 1950s and 1970s
We noted earlier that the CPS first collected data on union status in May 1973, and this has
been the starting point for much of the modern literature on unions and wages. The Palmer data
provide an opportunity to bridge 1950 to the 1970s, spanning most of the period when the American

20

labor movement was at its height but starting to decline. The comparisons of Palmer and CPS data
are imperfect due to differences in sample design, variables’ definitions and availability, and
geographic coverage. But we believe the datasets can provide useful first-order comparisons. We
use the May 1973 CPS file that is available from the National Bureau of Economic Research.27
Despite many changes in the US economy between 1950 and 1973, the basic patterns that we
have described above for the Palmer data are also apparent in the 1973 CPS data when restricted for
comparability to men, ages 25 and over, who worked full time for wages or salary, and resided in
metropolitan areas outside the South. Thus, after the sharp rise in union membership during the late
1930s and 1940s, it appears that unions’ basic imprint on the labor market’s wage structure circa
1950 endured until at least the mid-1970s. We cannot, of course, rule out fluctuations in the
meantime, and we are mindful of Lewis’s (1963) suggestion that the union premium might have
increased over the 1950s (also see Pencavel and Hartsog 1984). For the sake of brevity, we will not
describe results for the 1973 at length, but we will point out particularly interesting features in light
of the earlier discussion.
Table 5 reports characteristics of union and non-union workers in the 1973 CPS, where the
sample is restricted as described above. In the wake of the high school movement (Goldin and Katz
2008), the average level of education for U.S. workers increased substantially between 1950 and
1973, but the education gap between union and non-union workers in 1973 was comparable to that in
1950—a little less than two years. It is notable that the typical union member in 1973 was a high
school graduate, whereas in 1950 only about 30 percent of union members had four years of high
school. By 1973, black workers were somewhat over-represented among union members, another
notable change from 1950, reflecting in part decades of civil rights groups’ efforts to open union jobs
to black workers but also the movement of better educated whites out of union-intensive sectors.
Figure 7 shows QTEs of union membership on usual weekly wages in the 1973 data. The
downward slope is reminiscent of Figure 3 for 1950, where the union wage gap was largest at the
lower quantiles and drifted toward zero at higher quantiles. Thus, the general pattern of union wage
premia in 1950 was roughly similar to that observed in 1973. The largest and only statistically
significant difference between the estimates for 1950 and 1973 is at the 10th percentile where the
union premium is estimated to be 15.4 log points in 1973, which is 4.9 log points smaller than the
corresponding estimate for 1950.
The estimated union wage premium at the median is low compared to estimates of the
27

The data are posted at: http://www.nber.org/data/cps_may.html (accessed September 9, 2016).

21

average premium found elsewhere in the literature on the 1970s (Freeman and Medoff 1984, Card
2001). Hirsch and Macpherson (2016), for example report a union wage premium of about 16 log
points in 1973. Investigation reveals that the sample restrictions we impose to improve
comparability with the Palmer data—omitting those under age 25, part-time workers, residents of
non-metropolitan areas, and residents of the South—substantially reduce the estimated average wage
premium in the CPS data analyzed with OLS (to approximately 3 log points).
Despite the visual similarity of the QTE patterns in 1950 and 1973, the difference between
counterfactual and actual inequality levels appears to have been somewhat smaller in 1973 than in
1950. Following a procedure similar to that described in the previous section, our baseline estimates
indicate that in a counterfactual without unions, 80-10 inequality would have been 6.4 log points (or
7.5 percent) higher than what was actually observed in 1973. This is smaller than the most
comparable results for 1950 (Table 4), where unions were associated with a decline in inequality by
15.0 log points (21 percent in the baseline specification). The difference reflects the smaller fraction
of workers who were union members in 1973, the smaller union wage premium at the low end of the
distribution, and the higher level of inequality (implying a larger denominator when expressed in
percentage terms). We remind readers that the 1950 and 1973 data are not perfectly comparable, and
so the differences between 1950 and 1973 should not be overemphasized. Rather, the main patterns
appear to be fairly consistent across the years, even if unions’ influence on inequality appears
somewhat weaker by 1973.
7. Conclusions
This paper examines a novel dataset, originally collected in early 1951, that we retrieved
from archival sources. The extant “transcription sheets” from the survey cover only five U.S. cities,
but we find that workers in those cities were observationally similar to those in a sample of residents
from all non-southern cities drawn from census records. To our knowledge, the survey’s
combination of data on union status, weekly wages, city of residence, and extensive background
information is unique for the time. It provides a new view of workers, their wages, and union
membership at the height of the American labor movement.
The peak of unionization coincided with the low-point of American wage inequality at midcentury. The results in this paper suggest that this was not merely a coincidence. Selection into
unions was negative in the sense that union workers had lower levels of education and had fathers
with lower levels of occupational status than non-union workers. Union workers appear to have
earned a wage premium in comparison with observationally similar men below the median of the

22

wage distribution. Based on this evidence, counterfactuals suggest that the overall wage distribution
was considerably narrower in 1950 than it would have been if union members had been paid like
non-union members with similar characteristics. We caution that selection on unobservables could
confound some of these interpretations. But it is worth reiterating that conditional on what we can
observe, there is no evidence that men who belonged to unions in 1951 came from better off families,
had better employment outcomes in 1940, or had better jobs when they first entered the labor force
than others.
Our historical interpretation is that in the wake of the Great Depression, workers sought and
policymakers delivered institutional reforms to labor markets that promoted unions, reduced
inequality, and helped lock in a relatively narrow distribution of wages that lasted for a generation.
There is some evidence, albeit imperfect, that by 1950 better educated workers were sorting out of
industries that had experienced large changes in union density during the 1940s, which is consistent
with seeking higher rates of return to investments in education. But a better understanding of the
dynamics and the implications of worker sorting in this period awaits future research.
By 1973, when the CPS began collecting information on union status, the prevalence of
unions had started to decline in the United States. Nonetheless, the basic patterns we observed for
1950 were still discernable in the 1973 data. Male union members still had substantially lower levels
of education than non-members even though the entire distribution of educational attainment had
shifted in a positive direction after 1950. The union wage premium was still relatively large at lower
quantiles in the earnings distribution. Finally, the evidence was still consistent with unions
compressing the overall wage distribution relative to a counterfactual in which union workers are
paid like similar non-union workers.
In the modern literature’s broad discussion of rising inequality, the supply and demand for
skills has taken center stage, but institutional factors appear to have been important as well (DiNardo,
Fortin, and Lemieux 1996; Card, Lemieux, and Riddell 2004). With a longer-run view in mind, and
at a time when concerns about inequality are salient, the underpinnings of the post-1940 period of
wage compression and broadly shared economic growth merit closer examination. Unions were an
important and frequently studied feature of the U.S. economy at that time, yet there is still much to
learn about their role in shaping workers’ outcomes, firms’ decisions, and labor-related policy.

23

References
Abramitzky, Ran. 2008. “The Limits of Equality: Insights from the Israeli Kibbutz.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 123, 3: 1111-1159.
Abramitzky, Ran. 2009. “The Effect of Redistribution on Migration: Evidence from the Israeli Kibbutz.”
Journal of Public Economics 93: 498-511.
Abramitzky, Ran and Leah Platt Boustan. 2016. “Immigration in American Economic History.” NBER
Working Paper 21882.
Ashenfelter, Orley. 1972. “Racial Discrimination and Trade Unionism.” Journal of Political Economy 80,
3: 435-464.
Ashenfelter, Orley and John H. Pencavel. 1969. “American Trade Union Growth: 1900-1960.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 83, 3: 434-448.
Bauman, Alvin. 1970. “Measuring Employee Compensation in the United States.” Monthly Labor Review
93, 10: 17-24.
Blanchflower, David and Alex Bryson. 2004. “What Effect Do Unions Have on Wages Now and Would
Freeman and Medoff Be Surprised?” Journal of Labor Research 25, 3: 383-414.
Borjas, George J. 1987. “Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants.” American Economic Review
77, 4: 531-53.
Burdin, Gabriel. 2016. “Equality under Threat by the Talented: Evidence from Worker-Managed Firms.”
Economic Journal 126, 594: 1372-1403.
Campbell, Angus and Gerald Gurin. American National Election Study 1952 Time Series Study.
ICPSR07213-v4. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
[distributor], 2015-11-10. https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR07213.v4.
Card, David. 1996. “The Effects of Unions on the Structure of Wages: A Longitudinal Analysis.”
Econometrica 64, 4: 957-979.
Card, David. 2001. “The Effect of Unions on Wage Inequality in the U.S. Labor Market.” Industrial &
Labor Relations Review 54, 2: 296-315.
Card, David, Thomas Lemieux, and W. Craig Riddell. 2004. “Unions and Wage Inequality.” Journal of
Labor Research 25, 4: 519-559.
Collins, William J. 2000. “African American Economic Mobility in the 1940s: A Portrait from the Palmer
Survey.” Journal of Economic History 60, 3: 756-781.
Collins, William J. 2001. “Race, Roosevelt, and Wartime Production: Fair Employment in World War II
Labor Markets.” American Economic Review 91, 1: 272-286.
Collins, William J. and Gregory T. Niemesh. 2016. “Unions and the Geography of the Great Compression
of American Inequality, 1940-1960.” Unpublished working paper.
DiNardo, John and David S. Lee. 2004. “Economic Impacts of New Unionization on Private Sector
Employers: 1984-2001.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 4: 1383-1441.
DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. “Labor Market Institutions and the
Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach.” Econometrica 64, 5: 1001-1044.
Doksum, Kjell. 1974. “Empirical Probability Plots and Statistical Inference for Nonlinear Models in the
Two-Sample Case.” The Annals of Statistics 2, 2: 267-277.
Epple, Dennis and Thomas Romer. 1991. “Mobility and Redistribution.” Journal of Political Economy

24

99, 4: 828-858.
Farber, Henry S. and Bruce Western. 2001. “Accounting for the Decline of Unions in the Private Sector,
1973-1998.” Journal of Labor Research 22, 3: 459-485.
Feldstein, Martin and Marian Vaillant Wrobel. 1998. “Can State Taxes Redistribute Income?” Journal of
Public Economics 68: 369-396.
Firpo, Sergio. 2007. “Efficient Semiparametric Estimation of Quantile Treatment Effects.” Econometrica
75, 1: 259-276.
Foote, Christopher L., Warren C. Whatley, Gavin Wright. 2003. “Arbitraging a Discriminatory Labor
Market: Black Workers at the Ford Motor Company, 1918-1947.” Journal of Labor Economics 21, 3:
493-532.
Frandsen, Brigham R. 2012. “Why Unions Still Matter: The Effects of Unionization on the Distribution
of Employee Earnings.” Unpublished working paper. MIT.
Freeman, Joshua. 1978. “Delivering the Goods: Industrial Unionism during World War II.” Labor History
19: 570-593.
Freeman, Richard B. 1980. “Unionism and the Dispersion of Wages.” Industrial & Labor Relations
Review 34, 1: 3-23.
Freeman, Richard. 1998. “Spurts in Union Growth: Defining Moments and Social Processes.” In Michael
D. Bordo, Claudia Goldin, and Eugene N. White (eds.), The Defining Moment: The Great Depression and
the America Economy in the Twentieth Century, pp. 265-295. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Freeman, Richard and James L. Medoff. 1984. What Do Unions Do? New York, NY: Basic Books.
Friedman, Milton. 1962. Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Frolich, Markus and Blaise Melly. 2013. “Unconditional Quantile Treatment Effects under Endogeneity.”
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 31, 3: 346-357.
Frydman, Carola and Raven Molloy. 2012. “Pay Cuts for the Boss: Executive Compensation in the
1940s.” Journal of Economic History 72, 1: 225-251.
Goldin, Claudia. 1991. “The Role of World War II in the Rise of Women’s Employment.” American
Economic Review 81, 4: 741-756.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race between Education and Technology. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Goldin, Claudia and Robert A. Margo. 1992. “The Great Compression: The Wage Structure in the United
States at Mid-Century.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 1: 1-34.
Hammond, Cordy and James C. Nix. 1953. “Union Status Provisions in Collective Agreements, 1952.”
Monthly Labor Review 76, 4: 383-387.
Hill, Herbert. 1967. “The Racial Practices of Organized Labor—The Age of Gompers and After.” In
Arthur M. Ross and Herbert Hill (eds.), Employment, Race, and Poverty, pp.365-402. New York:
Harcourt, Brace, & World.
Hirano, Keisuke, Guido W. Imbens, Geert Ridder. 2003. “Efficient Estimation of Average Treatment
Effects Using the Estimated Propensity Score.” Econometrica 71, 4: 1161-1189.
Hirsch, Barry T. 2004. “Reconsidering Union Wage Effects: Surveying New Evidence on an Old Topic.”
Journal of Labor Research 25, 2: 233-266.
Hirsch, Barry T. and David A. Macpherson. 2016. Union Membership and Earnings Data Book.

25

Arlington, VA: Bureau of National Affairs, Inc.
Hirsch, Barry T. and Edward J. Schumacher. 1998. “Unions, Wages, and Skills.” Journal of Human
Resources 33, 1: 201-219.
Hirsch, Barry T. and Edward J. Schumacher. 2004. “Match Bias in Wage Gap Estimates Due to Earnings
Imputation.” Journal of Labor Economics 22, 3: 689-722.
Kersten, Andrew E. 2006. Labor’s Home Front: The American Federation of Labor during World War II.
New York: New York University Press.
Lee, Lung-Fei. 1978. “Unionism and Wage Rates: A Simultaneous Equations Model with Qualitative and
Limited Dependent Variables.” International Economic Review 19, 2: 415-433.
Lehmann, Erich L. 1975. Nonparametrics: Statistical Methods Based on Ranks. Holden-Day.
Lester, Richard A. 1954. Hiring Practices and Labor Competition. Princeton, NJ: Industrial Relations
Section, Princeton University.
Lester, Richard A. 1964. Economics of Labor. New York: The MacMillan Company.
Lewis, H. Gregg. 1962. “The Effects of Unions on Industrial Wage Differentials.” In National Bureau of
Economic Research, Aspects of Labor Economics, pp. 319-344. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Lewis, H. Gregg. 1963. Unionism and Relative Wages in the United States: An Empirical Inquiry.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Lewis, H. Gregg. 1986. Union Relative Wage Effects: A Survey. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Lichtenstein, Nelson. 1982. Labor’s War at Home: The CIO in World War II. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Miller, Herman P. 1958. “Change in the Industrial Distribution of Wage in the United States, 1939-1949.”
In An Appraisal of the 1950 Census Income Data. National Bureau of Economic Research, Studies in
Income and Wealth, Volume 23. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Millis, Harry A. and Emily Clark Brown. 1950. From the Wagner Act to Taft-Hartley: A Study of
National Labor Policy and Labor Relations. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Northrup, Herbert. 1944. Organized Labor and the Negro. New York, NY: Harper.
Oster, Emily. forthcoming. “Unobservable Selection and Coefficient Stability: Theory and Evidence.”
Journal of Business Economics and Statistics.
Palmer, Gladys L. 1954. Labor Mobility in Six Cities: A Report on the Survey of Patterns and Factors in
Labor Mobility, 1940-1950. New York, NY: Social Science Research Council.
Pencavel, John and Catherine E. Hartsog. 1984. “A Reconsideration of the Effects of Unionism on
Relative Wages and Employment in the United States, 1920-1980.” Journal of Labor Economics 2, 2:
193-232.
Reder, Melvin W. 1988. “The Rise and Fall of Unions: The Public Sector and the Private.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 2, 2: 89-110.
Rees, Albert. 1962. The Economics of Trade Unions. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1969. “Trade Union Power, Threat Effects and the Extent of Organization.” Review of
Economic Studies 36, 2: 185-196.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1970. “Unionism and the Occupational Wage Structure in the United States.”

26

International Economic Review 11, 2: 269-286.
Ross, Arthur M. 1948. “The Influence of Unionism upon Earnings.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 62,
2: 263-286.
Roy, A.D. 1951. “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings.” Oxford Economic Papers 3, 2: 135146.
Ruggles, Steven, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew Sobek. Integrated Public
Use Microdata Series: Version 6.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota,
2015.
Saad, Lydia. 2015. “Americans’ Support for Labor Unions Continues to Recover.”
http://www.gallup.com/poll/184622/americans-support-labor-unions-continues-recover.aspx. Accessed
May 27, 2016.
Schmidt, Peter and Robert P. Strauss. 1976. “The Effect of Unions on Earnings and Earnings on Unions:
A Mixed Logit Approach.” International Economic Review 17, 1: 204-212.
Seidman, Joel, Jack London, and Bernard Karsh. 1951. “Why Workers Join Unions.” Annals of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science 274 (March): 75-84.
Seidman, Joel. 1953. American Labor from Defense to Reconstruction. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Sobotka, Stephen P. 1953. “Union Influence on Wages: The Construction Industry.” Journal of Political
Economy 61, 2; 127-43.
Stigler, George J. 1957. “The Tenable Range of Functions of Local Government.” In Federal Expenditure
Policy for Economic Growth and Stability: Papers Submitted by Panelists Appearing before the
Subcommittee on Fiscal Policy, November 5, 1957. Joint Economic Committee, Washington, DC.
Troy, Leo. 1957. The Distribution of Union Membership among the States, 1939 and 1953. New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Troy, Leo. 1965. “Trade Union Membership, 1897-1962.” NBER Occasional Paper 92.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 1952. Census of Population: 1950, Volume II.
Washington, DC: GPO.
U.S. Department of Labor. 1952. “Work Injuries in the United States During 1950: A Collection of Basic
Work-Injury Data for Each of the Major Industries in the United States.” Bulletin Number 1098.
Washington, DC: GPO.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 1976. Statistical Abstract of the United States:
1976. Washington, DC: GPO.
Weiss, Leonard W. 1966. “Concentration and Labor Earnings.” American Economic Review 56, 1/2: 96117.
Zieger, Robert H. 2007. For Jobs and Freedom: Race and Labor in America since 1865. Lexington, KY:
University Press of Kentucky.

27

Figure 1: U.S. Union Membership as a Share of Non-agricultural Employment
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Notes and sources: The series for 1900 to 1995 is from Freeman (1998). For 1995-2000, we used BLS data series
LUU0204899600, which pertains to wage and salary workers in all industries (www.bls.gov/data, accessed Sept. 7,
2016). We spliced the BLS series to the Freeman series in 1995.

28

Figure 2A-D: Constructing QTE Estimates

Notes: Panel A (upper left) shows the observed density of earnings for union members and their counterfactual
distribution of earnings after re-weighting so that they have the same distribution of observable characteristics as in
the population. Panel B (upper right) shows the observed density of earnings for non-union workers and their
counterfactual distribution of earnings after re-weighting to have the same distribution of characteristics as the
population. See the appendix for more information on reweighting techniques. Panel C (lower left) compares union
and non-union counterfactual densities. Circles and squares are placed at the 20th, 50th, and 80th percentiles of each
distribution. The horizontal distance between each pair of circles and squares gives the Quantile Treatment Effect
(QTE) for 𝜏 = (0.2, 0.5, 0.8), respectively. The plot of the QTE (which is the standard result reported in the rest of
the paper) is given in Panel D (lower right). At 𝜏 = (0.2, 0.5, 0.8), the vertical distance in the plot is the same as the
horizontal distance in Panel C. The distributions in panels A-C are smoothed for presentation, but the QTE
estimates do not require or use smoothing.
Sources: Palmer Survey, as described in the text.

29

Figure 3: QTE Estimates of the Union Wage Premium for Men

Notes: This figure plots QTEs after re-weighting the distributions of union and non-union earnings so that they have
the same distribution of observable characteristics based on a first step estimation of the propensity score. The
propensity score is estimated by logit; the dependent variable is union status and the explanatory variables are a
cubic in age, a dummy variable for completing at least some high school but no college, a dummy variable for
completing at least some college, race dummy variables, a dummy variable indicating whether an individual has
lived in the area for less than 10 years, marital status dummy variables, a dummy variable indicating whether an
individual was born outside of the U.S., and a dummy variable for whether an individual was a World War II
veteran. The analysis uses sampling weights as described in the text. Due to the censoring of earnings, the results
are available up to the 80th percentile. The 90th percentile is exactly equal to zero due to top-coding of both union
and non-union earnings. Pointwise confidence intervals are obtained using the bootstrap with 1,000 iterations.
Sources: Palmer Survey, as described in the text.

30

Figure 4: QTE Estimates of Union Wage Premium for Men with Less Than High School Education

Notes: This figure plots QTEs after re-weighting the distributions of union earnings and non-union earnings for lesseducated men to be the same as the distribution of observed covariates for all men who never attended high school.
The estimates depend on a first step estimation of the propensity score, as described in the text and Figure 3 except
that education control variables are not included here. The analysis uses sampling weights as described in the text.
Pointwise confidence intervals are obtained using the bootstrap with 1,000 iterations.
Sources: Palmer Survey, as described in the text.

31

Figure 5: QTE Estimates of Union Wage Premium for Black Men

Notes: This figure plots QTEs after re-weighting the distributions of union earnings and non-union earnings for
African Americans to be the same as the distribution of observed covariates for all African American men. The
estimates depend on a first step estimation of the propensity score, as described in the text and Figure 3 except that
race control variables are not included here. The analysis uses sampling weights as described in the text. Pointwise
confidence intervals are obtained using the bootstrap with 1,000 iterations.
Sources: Palmer Survey, as described in the text.

32

Figure 6: QTE Estimates at the 20th Percentile and Median, by Subgroup

Notes: The panel on the left plots QTE estimates at the 20th percentiles of earnings for union and non-union workers
by subgroup after adjusting for differences in covariates. The panel on the right does the same at the medians. The
results depend on a first step estimation of the propensity score, as described in previous figures with the exception
that when a particular covariate is used to form the group, that covariate is omitted from the propensity score
specification. The analysis uses sampling weights as described in the text. Standard errors are computed using the
bootstrap with 1,000 iterations.
Sources: Palmer Survey, as described in the text.

33

Figure 7. Estimate of Quantile Treatment Effects in 1973

Notes: The figure plots QTEs for the union earnings premium in 1973. The distributions are calculated based on reweighting the union earnings distribution and non-union earnings distribution so that each has the same distribution
of covariates as in the population of workers in 1973. The sample includes residents of metropolitan areas that are
outside of the southern census region. The results depend on a first step estimation of the propensity score that
includes a cubic in age, race dummy variables, whether an individual completed some high school, whether an
individual completed some college, whether an individual is married, whether an individual is a veteran, and dummy
variables for each metropolitan area. The estimates also apply CPS sampling weights.
Sources: CPS, May 1973 from NBER (http://www.nber.org/data/cps_may.html).

34

Table 1: Summary Statistics for the Palmer Survey Data
Mean, Std. dev.,
Mean, Std. Dev.,
no
no
weighted
weighted
Variable
weights
weights
Union
0.51
0.50
0.50
0.50
Age
43.34
12.22
43.02
11.77
White
0.90
0.30
0.86
0.34
Black
0.08
0.28
0.12
0.32
Other
0.01
0.12
0.02
0.13
Foreign born
0.17
0.38
0.16
0.37
Education
9.79
3.59
9.83
3.63
WWII veteran
0.32
0.47
0.32
0.47
Father, white collar
0.26
0.44
0.28
0.45
Father, blue collar
0.68
0.47
0.66
0.47
Father, missing
0.06
0.23
0.06
0.24
Years in area
26.22
16.59
24.09
16.51
Married
0.82
0.38
0.82
0.39
Income, weekly
71.73
26.09
73.93
27.20
Ln(income)
4.21
0.38
4.23
0.38
White collar
0.34
0.47
0.34
0.48
Blue collar
0.66
0.47
0.66
0.48
Manufacturing
0.35
0.48
0.34
0.48
Construction
0.08
0.27
0.09
0.28
Transportation, utilities
0.14
0.35
0.12
0.33
Trade
0.19
0.39
0.19
0.39
Finance, business, government
0.21
0.41
0.22
0.42
Personal service
0.02
0.14
0.02
0.15
Ag., mining
0.01
0.07
0.01
0.08
PH
0.22
0.41
0.39
0.49
NH
0.22
0.41
0.03
0.17
SP
0.21
0.41
0.06
0.23
SF
0.18
0.39
0.16
0.36
LA
0.17
0.38
0.36
0.48
Notes: The sample is restricted to men age 25 and older with information on earnings, education, and union status.
The number of observations is 5,569 (of this, three are missing information on birth place and one is missing
information on occupation). Columns 1 and 2 do not weight observations by duplicate status or by city size. In
Columns 3 and 4, the weights are the ratio of each city’s male labor force (age 25 and above) to the sample size in
the survey including duplicates as described in the text. This gives more weight to larger cities like Philadelphia and
Los Angeles. Union membership pertains to status at the time of interview (January or February 1951). Earnings,
occupation, and industry pertain to longest job in 1950. Topcoded earnings are assigned $125 here but not in
subsequent quantile analyses.
Sources: Archived transcription sheets from the Palmer Survey (Palmer 1954), as described in text. Labor force
estimates are from the 1950 Census of Population, Volume II, Table 66 for each city.

35

Table 2: Selection into Union Membership, Palmer Survey Data

Variable

Union

Non-Union

Difference

p-value on
mean
difference

Personal characteristics
Age
42.97
43.07
-0.098
0.81
White
0.87
0.86
0.004
0.77
Black
0.12
0.12
-0.002
0.87
Other
0.02
0.02
-0.002
0.72
Foreign born
0.18
0.14
0.045
0.00
Education
8.95
10.69
-1.740
0.00
High school, 4 yrs
0.29
0.49
-0.204
0.00
College, 4 yrs
0.02
0.15
-0.127
0.00
WWII vet
0.30
0.34
-0.034
0.04
Years in area
24.29
23.89
0.396
0.49
Married
0.84
0.80
0.035
0.01
Background characteristics
Father white collar
0.21
0.35
-0.132
0.00
Father blue collar
0.72
0.59
0.131
0.00
Father missing occ
0.06
0.06
0.002
0.85
Father occscore
26.28
28.85
-2.560
0.00
Unemployed 1940
0.04
0.03
0.008
0.19
First-job occscore
21.73
23.83
-2.091
0.00
Industrial distribution
Manu., mining, ag.
0.39
0.31
0.085
0.00
Construct., transport, utilities
0.30
0.12
0.173
0.00
Trade, personal service
0.22
0.27
-0.054
0.00
Finance, business, govt
0.09
0.30
-0.205
0.00
Notes: The sample is restricted to men ages 25 and over with earnings, education, and
union status reported. Observations are weighted as described in the text and notes to
Table 1. The differences and p-values are from separate regressions for each variable;
standard errors are robust to heteroscedasticity. Father’s occupation is not available for
all men in the base sample (see “Father Missing Occ” variable). The variable occscore
represents the median income in each three-digit occupation, as described in the
IPUMS documentation (Ruggles et al. 2015). Employment status in 1940 is missing
for 13 percent of men in the base sample, primarily because they were young and not in
the labor force (of those missing, the median age was 28 in 1951). First job’s
occupation is missing for less than 2 percent of men. Results are similar when
regressions include fixed effects for each city.
Sources: Archived transcription sheets of the Palmer Survey, as described in the text.

36

Table 3: QTE Estimates, Baseline and Specifications with Additional Control Variables
Quantile
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
N

(1A)
0.203
(0.023)
0.095
(0.02)
0.087
(0.015)
0.080
(0.014)
0.029
(0.019)
-0.013
(0.019)
-0.012
(0.018)
-0.054
(0.025)
5,553

(1B)
0.182
(0.031)
0.095
(0.022)
0.087
(0.021)
0.080
(0.019)
0.059
(0.020)
0.027
(0.017)
0.000
(0.025)
0.000
(0.029)
5,553

(2A)
0.091
(0.032)
0.095
(0.027)
0.087
(0.023)
0.080
(0.020)
0.059
(0.022)
0.027
(0.019)
0.000
(0.026)
0.043
(0.032)
4,919

(2B)
0.113
(0.032)
0.095
(0.028)
0.087
(0.022)
0.080
(0.021)
0.059
(0.022)
0.027
(0.019)
0.000
(0.026)
0.043
(0.031)
4,919

(3A)
0.223
(0.026)
0.113
(0.017)
0.087
(0.011)
0.080
(0.010)
0.014
(0.023)
0.000
(0.018)
-0.024
(0.018)
-0.063
(0.028)
4,423

(3B)
0.223
(0.027)
0.113
(0.018)
0.087
(0.011)
0.080
(0.010)
0.014
(0.022)
0.000
(0.018)
-0.012
(0.016)
-0.053
(0.028)
4,423

Notes: The table reports QTE estimates for union versus non-union members using subsets of the Palmer data.
Column 1A reports the baseline results. Column 1B reports results with additional controls for occupation and
industry as described in the text. The next two columns use a subset of the sample for which detailed industry-level
injury rates are observed. Column 2A uses the baseline specification plus broad occupation and industry controls.
Column 2B adds the industry-level injury rate and median hours worked variables described in the text. The last
two columns use a subset of the sample for which employment status in 1940, occupational score in 1940, and
father's occupational score are available. Column 3A uses the baseline specification. Column 3B adds 1940
employment status, 1940 occupation score, and father’s occupational score as controls. We re-weight the
distributions of union and non-union earnings so that they have the same distribution of observable characteristics
based on a first step estimation of the propensity score. Because weekly earnings are expressed as whole numbers
and there is some bunching, the QTEs are often stable in response to slight changes in weighting across columns.
The appendix provides more details on the reweighting procedure. The propensity score is estimated by logit; the
dependent variable is union status and the explanatory variables are a cubic in age, a dummy variable for completing
at least some high school but no college, a dummy variable for completing at least some college, race dummy
variables, a dummy variable for living less than 10 years in the area, marital status dummy variables, a dummy
variable indicating whether an individual is born outside of the U.S., and a dummy variable for whether an
individual is a World War II veteran. Due to topcoding of income, not much can be learned about differences in
quantiles above the 80th. Pointwise confidence intervals are obtained using the bootstrap with 1000 iterations.
Sources: Archived transcription sheets of the Palmer Survey, as described in the text.

37

Table 4: Unions and Inequality in 1950 Weekly Earnings
Actual inequality

80-10
0.715

50-10
0.427

80-50
0.288

Panel A
Counterfactual 1
Difference
Percentage change

0.865
0.150
20.9%

0.531
0.103
24.1%

0.334
0.047
16.2%

Panel B
Counterfactual 2
Difference
Percentage change

0.811
0.096
13.4%

0.501
0.073
17.1%

0.310
0.022
7.8%

Notes: The first column provides the difference between the 80th and 10th percentiles of log earnings. The second
and third columns provide results for other percentiles. Actual inequality is the observed difference between the
percentiles. The counterfactuals are estimated using re-weighting techniques as discussed in the appendix. Panel A
results are based on re-weighting using the baseline specification. Panel B additionally includes broad occupation
(four categories) and industry (four categories) controls. Rows labeled “Difference” are the difference between the
counterfactual and actual level of inequality. Rows labeled “Percentage change” are the Difference divided by
“Actual Inequality.”
Sources: Archived transcription sheets of the Palmer Survey, as described in the text.

38

Table 5: Selection into Union Membership in 1973 CPS Data

White
Black
Age
Education
High School, 4 years
College, 4 years
Married
Veteran
Blue Collar Occupation
White Collar Occupation
N

Union
0.88
0.10
42.27
11.33
0.64
0.06
0.88
0.58
0.72
0.19
3,868

Non-Union
0.93
0.05
41.09
13.23
0.81
0.31
0.86
0.57
0.30
0.62
5,324

Difference
-0.044
0.050
1.174
-1.903
-0.175
-0.242
0.015
0.006
0.425
-0.424

p-value on
mean
difference
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.55
0.00
0.00

Notes: The sample is restricted to men, age 25 and over, who work full time as wage and salary workers and
reside in a metropolitan area but not in the southern census region. Men without observed union status or
earnings are dropped. Education variables pertain to highest grade attended. CPS sampling weights are
applied.
Sources: CPS, May 1973, from NBER (http://www.nber.org/data/cps_may.html).

39

Appendix
A1. Reweighting distributions
The goal is to re-weight observed distributions of earnings for union and non-union workers
to what they would be if union members and non-union members had the same distribution of
observed characteristics (age, education, race, etc.) as in the population of male workers. To
construct these counterfactual distributions, we use a re-weighting approach similar to Dinardo,
Fortin, and Lemiuex (1996), Hirano, Imbens, and Ridder (2003), and Firpo (2007). The idea is to
build the counterfactual distribution under the restriction that if union workers were not in a union,
their non-union wage would come from the distribution of wages observed for non-union workers
with the same characteristics. Under this framework, because the distribution of observable
characteristics is not the same for union and non-union workers, we re-weight the distribution of nonunion outcomes to account for these differences. Let 𝐹!!,!! be the distribution of earnings when
workers are paid according to the wage schedule of group 𝐽 ∈ {𝑈, 𝑁} and have the distribution of
observable characteristics as group 𝐾 ∈ {𝑈, 𝑁, 𝑃} where 𝑈 denotes union, 𝑁 denotes non-union, and
𝑃 denotes the population of all workers. Thus, 𝐹!!,!! is the observed distribution of earnings for
union members, 𝐹!!,!! is the observed distribution of earnings for non-union individuals, and
𝐹!!,!! is the counterfactual distribution of earnings for union members if they faced the non-union
wage schedule. We focus primarily on comparing 𝐹!!,!! and 𝐹!!,!! , the counterfactual
distributions of earnings for the population of workers if they faced the union wage schedule or if
they faced the non-union wage schedule.
Next, we provide the details for estimating counterfactual distributions. The details of the
procedure are very similar for each counterfactual distribution; thus, we focus here on identifying and
estimating 𝐹!!,!! . The definition of 𝐹!!,!! is

𝐹!!,!! 𝑦 =

!!

𝐹!! |!! 𝑦 𝑥 𝑑𝐹!! 𝑥

where 𝐹!! |!! 𝑦 𝑥 is the union wage structure. This is a counterfactual distribution because we

are integrating the union wage structure over the distribution of population (rather than union)
characteristics. Using results from Dinardo, Fortin, and Lemieux (1996) and Firpo (2007), one can
show that this distribution is equal to

40

𝐹!!,!! 𝑦 =

!!

𝐹!! |!! 𝑦 𝑥 Ψ 𝑥 𝑑𝐹!! 𝑥

where Ψ 𝑥 = 𝑝 𝑝 𝑥 is a weighting function that puts additional weight on the earnings of union
workers with characteristics that are relatively more common in the non-union sector (low 𝑝(𝑥)).
Moreover, this can be rewritten as an expectation

𝐹!!,!! 𝑦 = 𝐸 Ψ 𝑋 ⋅ 1 𝑌 ≤ 𝑦 | 𝑈 = 1
where 𝑝 𝑥 = 𝑃(𝑈 = 1|𝑋 = 𝑥) is the propensity score, 𝑝 = 𝑃(𝑈 = 1) is the unconditional
probability that an individual participates in a union, and 1{⋅} is the indicator function.
Estimation proceeds in two steps. In the first step, we estimate the propensity score 𝑝(𝑥)
using a flexible logit specification:

𝑝 𝑥 = Λ(𝑅 𝑥 ! 𝜋)
where Λ is the logit function, 𝑅 𝑥 are functions of the observed covariates which can include
polynomials and interaction terms (a special case is 𝑅 𝑥 = 𝑥), and 𝜋 is a vector of parameters to be
estimated.28 Estimating this model results in estimates of 𝑝(𝑥). In the second step, we plug in these
estimates of the propensity score to obtain estimates of the counterfactual distribution:

𝐹!!,!!

1
𝑦 =
𝑛!

!!

Ψ 𝑋! ⋅ 1{𝑌! ≤ 𝑦}
!∈!

Most of the results presented in the paper are sample quantiles such as the median, the 80th percentile,
and the 20th percentile rather than the distribution itself. For some quantile 𝜏 ∈ (0,1), that 𝜏thquantile can be obtained by inverting the above distribution; that is,

𝑄!!,!! 𝜏 = inf 𝑦 ∶ 𝐹!!,!! 𝑦 ≤ 𝜏
Results throughout the paper given by subgroup can be obtained by following exactly the same

28 Hirano, Imbens, and Ridder (2003) and Firpo (2007) show that similar re-weighting estimators are efficient
when the propensity score is estimated nonparametrically using a series logit estimator. Our flexible logit
model follows the same idea but is simpler in terms of choosing which higher order terms to include in the
model.

41

procedure while conditioning on membership in the subgroup. For example, in calculating the
adjusted median earnings for whites, we limit the sample to whites, calculate the first-step
propensity score for whites only (the race variable is dropped from 𝑋), and then calculate the
distribution function and median from the reweighted distribution on the white subset.
Counterfactual inequality
Constructing counterfactual inequality measures is very similar to the re-weighting procedure
outlined above though the weights are slightly different. The goal is to compare the observed
distribution of earnings in 1950 to a counterfactual distribution of earnings where there are no
unions, union workers retain the same observable characteristics such as age and education, and
union workers are paid according to the non-union wage schedule for workers with the same
observable characteristics. Let 𝐹! (𝑤) denote the observed distribution of earnings in 1950. This
distribution can be directly estimated from the Palmer data using all observations – both union and
∗
non-union. Let 𝐹!
𝑤 denote the counterfactual distribution where no workers are unionized. Our
!

main counterfactual results come from adjusting the distribution of earnings for non-union workers to
account for differences in observed characteristics. To see this, notice that
∗
𝐹!
𝑤 = 𝑃(𝑊!∗ ≤ 𝑤)
!

= 𝑃 𝑊 ≤ 𝑤 𝑈 = 0 1 − 𝑝 + 𝑃(𝑊!∗ ≤ 𝑤|𝑈 = 1)𝑝
where 𝑝 is the fraction of unionized workers. The first term is equal to 𝐸 1 − 𝑈 1 𝑊 ≤ 𝑤 .
Using the same types of arguments as in the previous section, the second term is equal to
𝐸

! !
!!! !

1 − 𝑈 1 𝑊 ≤ 𝑤 . Combining these implies that the counterfactual distribution is given

by
∗
𝐹!
𝑤 = 𝐸
!

1
1−𝑝 𝑋

1−𝑈 1 𝑊 ≤𝑤

Quantiles of this distribution (and differences between quantiles of this distribution) along with those
of the observed distribution of earnings are what are used to construct the counterfactual inequality
measures reported in the paper.

42

A2. Descriptive statistics and detailed results
Appendix Table 1: Similarity of Palmer Cities and All Cities in 1950 IPUMS
Palmer cities
Age
White*
Black
Foreign born*
Education*
WWII veteran*
Married*
Occscore
Average income, weekly
Median income, weekly
Std. dev. income, weekly
White collar job*
Blue collar job*
Manufacturing*
Construction*
Transportation, utilities
Trade*
Finance, business, government*
Personal services
N

All non-southern
cities
43.18
0.90
0.10
0.20
9.64
0.33
0.79
27.41
66.99
62.50
26.40
0.31
0.68
0.37
0.07
0.14
0.17
0.20
0.03
22,074

All US cities

43.08
42.81
0.88
0.87
0.10
0.13
0.17
0.17
9.91
9.58
0.34
0.34
0.77
0.79
27.53
27.36
67.53
65.69
62.50
61.00
27.39
27.03
0.33
0.32
0.67
0.68
0.32
0.35
0.09
0.08
0.14
0.14
0.19
0.18
0.22
0.21
0.03
0.03
3,720
27,236
Notes: Figures are means unless otherwise labeled. Asterisks indicate variables for which there are statistically
significant differences between men in the “Palmer cities” and men in other “non-southern cities,” based on separate
bivariate OLS regressions of each variable on a dummy for “Palmer city” in the full non-southern sample.
Specifically, * denotes p-values under 0.05 with standard errors robust for heteroskedasticity. Such regressions are
not applied to the sample summary statistics for the standard deviation or median of weekly income. All data are
from the 1950 IPUMS 1-percent sample (Ruggles et al. 2015). In this table, the “Palmer cities” are Philadelphia,
New Haven, San Francisco/Oakland, Los Angeles, and St. Paul/Minneapolis. Although the Palmer Survey pertains
specifically to St. Paul and San Francisco, the 1950 IPUMS does not provide separate codes for Minneapolis and St.
Paul nor for San Francisco and Oakland. Topcoded annual wage and salary income was assigned a value of 1.25
times the topcode (10,000*1.25). The sample includes all men classified as wage or salary workers, ages 25 and
over, who lived in cities identified in the IPUMS (97 total cities), who worked at least four weeks in 1949 (to
approximate the Palmer Survey’s restriction to those who worked at least one month in 1950) and earned more than
$10 per week and less than $240 per week (approximately omitting the bottom 1 percent and top 1 percent).
Sample-line weights are applied. IPUMS provides the “occscore” variable, which represents the median total
income of persons employed in each detailed occupation in 1949 according to the 1950 Census of Population. The
industry variables reported in the table are not exhaustive (i.e., do not sum to 1), and a small number of men are
included in the samples who do not have occupation codes (their occscore is set to missing).
Sources: Authors’ calculations from IPUMS 1950 microdata sample (Ruggles et al. 2015).

43

Appendix Table 2: Similarity of Palmer Survey Data and 1950 Census Data for Palmer Cities
Palmer Survey
data, weighted

IPUMS

Age
White
Black
Foreign born
Education
WWII veteran*
Married*
Occscore*
Income (weekly)*
Std. dev. of income
White collar job
Blue collar job
Manufacturing*
Construction
Transportation, utilities
Trade
Finance, business, government
Personal service
PH*
NH*
SP*
SF*
LA*
Union
N

43.02
43.08
0.86
0.88
0.12
0.10
0.16
0.17
9.83
9.91
0.32
0.34
0.82
0.77
28.27
27.53
73.93
67.53
27.20
27.39
0.34
0.33
0.66
0.67
0.34
0.32
0.09
0.09
0.12
0.14
0.19
0.19
0.22
0.22
0.02
0.03
0.39
0.35
0.03
0.02
0.06
0.13
0.16
0.20
0.36
0.30
0.50
--5,569
3,720
Notes: Figures are means unless otherwise labeled. Asterisks indicate variables for which there are statistically
significant differences between men in the Palmer sample and men in the 1950 IPUMS sample, based on separate
bivariate OLS regressions of each variable on a dummy for “Palmer” in a pooled sample. Specifically, * denotes pvalues under 0.05 with standard errors robust for heteroskedasticity. Regressions are not applied to the summary
statistics for the standard deviation of weekly income. The Palmer sample is restricted to men age 25 and over with
information on earnings, education, and union status; weights are the ratio of each city’s male labor force (age 25
and above) to the sample size in the survey including duplicates as described in the text. For comparison, the
IPUMS sample is restricted to men, ages 25 and over who were wage or salary workers and worked at least four
weeks in 1949 (the Palmer Survey includes only men who worked at least one month in 1950); sample line weights
are applied. The IPUMS cities correspond as closely as possible to those in the Palmer Survey for men, but some
incongruities are unavoidable. The relatively large weight for “St. Paul” in the IPUMS data compared to the Palmer
data reflects that the same city code applies to both St. Paul and Minneapolis in the IPUMS (they cannot be
separated); a similar caveat applies to San Francisco and Oakland. Also, the weekly earnings variables are not
closely comparable for two reasons. (1) The Palmer Survey question specifically sought weekly earnings at the end
of 1950’s longest job, whereas the IPUMS-based variable is derived by dividing annual wage and salary in 1949 by
the number of weeks worked. (2) The Palmer variable is topcoded at 100, whereas annual income in the IPUMS is
topcoded at 10,000. In the table above, both topcodes (weekly for Palmer, annual for IPUMS) are multiplied by
1.25. The median value of weekly earnings in the Palmer Survey is 69; the median value in the IPUMS is 62.5.
IPUMS weekly income is trimmed at $10 and $240, as in the previous table.

44

Sources: The archived transcription sheets of the Palmer Survey, as described in the text. The IPUMS 1950 1percent sample (Ruggles et al. 2015).

45

Appendix Table 3: Union Earnings Premium at Medians, by Subgroups
Overall
Educ.-by-age
< HS / 20-29
< HS / 30-39
< HS / 40-49
< HS / 50+
HS / 20-29
HS / 30-39
HS / 40-49
HS / 50+
COL / 20-29
COL / 30-39
COL / 40-49
COL / 50+
Race
White
Black

Raw
Difference
0.0000
(0.0202)

(1)

(2)

Median nonunion ln(w)
4.1744

%U

N

0.0290
(0.0178)

0.0588
(0.021)

0.5043

5,553

0.1054
(0.0714)
0.1515
(0.0406)
0.0953
(0.0257)
0.1139
(0.0298)
0.0473
(0.0309)
0.0000
(0.0305)
-0.054
(0.0326)
-0.0134
(0.0411)
0.0290
(0.0798)
0.0791
(0.0707)
-0.1278
(0.099)
-0.2877
(0.0978)

0.1054
(0.0916)
0.0514
(0.0462)
0.0800
(0.0345)
0.1139
(0.0331)
0.0313
(0.0369)
0.0000
(0.0253)
-0.0811
(0.0324)
-0.0134
(0.0425)
0.0290
(0.1077)
-0.0607
(0.0873)
-0.0425
(0.1367)
-0.1949
(0.1276)

0.1054
(0.118)
0.0690
(0.0515)
0.0800
(0.034)
0.0800
(0.0355)
0.0163
(0.0387)
0.0426
(0.0338)
-0.0690
(0.0409)
0.0136
(0.0672)
0.0439
(0.1583)
0.1424
(0.1314)
-0.0425
(0.1621)
0.0833
(0.1272)

3.9608

0.6169

201

3.989

0.6104

444

4.0943

0.6329

621

4.0073

0.6296

1,015

4.0943

0.5568

555

4.2341

0.5912

866

4.3241

0.5595

563

4.3175

0.4662

444

4.1744

0.2287

188

4.4427

0.2669

296

4.5539

0.2674

187

4.5643

0.2672

116

-0.0420
(0.0173)
0.131
(0.0361)

0.0000
(0.0191)
0.1485
(0.0352)

0.0142
(0.0202)
0.1484
(0.0375)

4.2341

0.5069

5,012

3.912

0.4765

459

Occupation
Blue Collar

0.1420
0.0953
NA
4.0431
0.6308
3,657
(0.021)
(0.0179)
White Collar
-0.1013
-0.0892
NA
4.382
0.1391
1,896
(0.0269)
(0.0283)
Notes: The Column “Raw Difference” is the difference in medians of union and non-union earnings by subgroup.
Column (1) adjusts for differences age, education, race, years in the area, marital status, foreign born status, and
World War II veteran status (omitting these covariates when they are used to form the group). Column (2)
additionally adjusts four broad occupation and industry categories. Occupation categories are (i) professional,
managers, clerical, sales, (ii) craftsmen and similar, plus farmers, (iii) operatives and some service, laborers and
some service, and farm labor. Industry categories: (i) agriculture, mining, manufacturing, (ii) construction and
transportation/utilities, (iii) wholesale and retail trade, personal service, and (iv) finance, business, government.
Column “Median non-union ln(w)” gives the median log earnings for non-union members of each subgroup.
Column “N” provides the sample size for each subgroup.
Sources: Palmer Survey, as described in the text.

46

Appendix Table 4: The Union Wage Premium by City
Panel A
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Panel B
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8

LA

NH

PH

SF

SP

0.223
(0.045)
0.160
(0.034)
0.095
(0.026)
0.044
(0.025)
0.013
(0.029)
0.012
(0.023)
0.011
(0.043)
0.000
(0.010)

0.147
(0.056)
0.105
(0.020)
0.095
(0.020)
0.105
(0.024)
0.050
(0.031)
0.095
(0.036)
0.057
(0.030)
0.065
(0.030)

0.169
(0.051)
0.105
(0.031)
0.113
(0.024)
0.087
(0.013)
0.064
(0.023)
0.000
(0.035)
-0.041
(0.022)
-0.086
(0.038)

0.063
(0.055)
0.036
(0.042)
0.065
(0.030)
0.015
(0.031)
0.000
(0.020)
-0.025
(0.023)
-0.035
(0.034)
-0.032
(0.032)

0.198
(0.052)
0.095
(0.025)
0.069
(0.024)
0.049
(0.025)
-0.029
(0.035)
-0.069
(0.020)
-0.089
(0.037)
-0.134
(0.033)

0.219
(0.050)
0.160
(0.039)
0.095
(0.029)
0.059
(0.027)
0.041
(0.032)
0.025
(0.025)
0.034
(0.047)
0.000
(0.013)

0.100
(0.088)
-0.069
(0.059)
0.077
(0.055)
0.087
(0.052)
0.065
(0.051)
0.029
(0.060)
-0.041
(0.062)
-0.118
(0.068)

0.318
(0.149)
0.223
(0.116)
0.182
(0.098)
0.051
(0.082)
-0.080
(0.088)
-0.145
(0.101)
-0.134
(0.096)
-0.204
(0.108)

0.083
(0.063)
0.087
(0.048)
0.031
(0.035)
0.072
(0.035)
0.041
(0.023)
0.026
(0.027)
0.000
(0.038)
-0.021
(0.035)

0.178
(0.196)
0.201
(0.160)
0.070
(0.130)
0.033
(0.118)
-0.059
(0.097)
-0.133
(0.089)
-0.182
(0.099)
-0.069
(0.078)

Notes: Panel A estimates the union premium within each of the five Palmer cities. The distributions of union and
non-union earnings are re-weighted within cities to have the same distribution of covariates as all male workers in
that particular city. Panel B re-weights union and non-union earnings distributions to have the same distribution of
covariates as are found across all cities, not just that particular city. This setup distinguishes the within city union
premium from differences in the union premium across cities that may be due to differing distributions of covariates
across cities. In practice, this involves weighting up observations that have characteristics that occur infrequently in
a particular city but are commonly found across all cities and weighting down observations that have characteristics
that occur frequently in a particular city but are uncommon in other cities.
Sources: Archived transcription sheets of the Palmer Survey, as described in the text.

47

