                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     HOW RESTRICTED IS THE JOB MOBILITY OF SKILLED TEMPORARY WORK
                             VISA HOLDERS?

                                        Jennifer Hunt

                                     Working Paper 23529
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23529


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2017




I thank Bin Xie for excellent research assistance and Ron Hira, Lindsay Lowell, Hal Salzman,
and participants in seminars at Renselaer Polytechnic Institute, University College London, the
University of Illinois and the 2017 Centro Studi Luca-d'Agliano-Collegio Carlo Alberto
migration conference for helpful comments. I am grateful to the James Cullen Chair in
Economics for financial support. I am also affiliated with the IZA (Bonn), CEPR (London) and
DIW (Berlin). The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Jennifer Hunt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
How Restricted is the Job Mobility of Skilled Temporary Work Visa Holders?
Jennifer Hunt
NBER Working Paper No. 23529
June 2017
JEL No. J61

                                          ABSTRACT

Using the National Survey of College Graduates, I investigate the degree to which holders of
temporary work visas in the United States are mobile between employers. Holders of temporary
work visas either have legal restrictions on their ability to change employers (particularly holders
of intra-company transferee visas, L-1s) or may be reluctant to leave an employer who has
sponsored them for permanent residence (particularly holders of specialty worker visas, H-1Bs). I
find that the voluntary job changing rate is similar for temporary visa holders and natives with
similar characteristics. For the minority of temporary workers who receive permanent residence,
there is a considerable spike in voluntary moving upon receipt of permanent residence,
suggesting mobility is reduced during the application period by about 20%. My analysis of
reasons for moving suggests that applicants are prepared to pay a small but not large professional
price for permanent access to the U.S. labor market.


Jennifer Hunt
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and IZA, CEPR, DIW-Berlin
and also NBER
Jennifer.hunt@rutgers.edu
      Foreign nationals move to the United States either as permanent residents or on one
of several types of temporary visa. If the temporary visa is a work visa, it is issued to the
foreign national’s employer to hire him or her specifically for a specific job: the worker is
not free to choose an employer on arriving in the United States, and may face barriers to
changing employer after arrival. In addition, he or she may not take up self–employment,
and must leave the United States if non–employed. This has given rise to concern that
firms hold monopsony power over temporary workers, reducing worker bargaining power
and leading to lower wages and worse working conditions, and hindering entrepreneurship,
innovation and growth.1 Some believe monopsony–induced lower wages reduce demand
for natives (Matloff 2013), with substitution from natives to immigrants outweighing
increased output due to cheaper inputs. In this paper, I investigate the degree to which
the job mobility of skilled temporary work visa holders is curtailed.
      There are several types of temporary work visas for skilled workers, with different asso-
ciated restrictions on mobility. The two most common entry visas are the intra–company
transferee visa (L–1) and the specialty worker (H–1B) visa. Intra–company transferees
have been transfered to the United States by an employer for whom they have worked
abroad for at least a year, and must be managers or executives (L–1A) or have specialized
knowledge of the firm (L–1B). Such workers may not change employer. Conversely, U.S.
immigration rules permit H–1B workers, who must have a bachelor’s degree or equivalent,
to change employers. The worker may change employers as soon as the prospective new
employer has petitioned USCIS to have the visa transfered from the existing employer,
without waiting for the petition to be approved.2 There are many reports of compa-
nies engaging in practices to restrict worker mobility, however. These include forcing the
worker to post a bond or sign a non–compete agreement.3 Furthermore, the H–1B worker
  1
    Banerjee (2006), Dorning and Fanning (2012), Farmworker Justice (n.d.), Hira (2010a), Southern
Poverty Law Center (n.d.), Wasem (2016), Wadhwa (2012).
  2
     See https://www.uscis.gov/tools/ombudsman-liaison/practical-immigration-consequences-foreign-
workers-slowing-economy, accessed 9 May, 2016.
  3
     Banerjee (2006); https://www.revealnews.org/reports/job-brokers-steal-wages-entrap-indian-tech-
workers-in-us/; https://www.revealnews.org/reports/case-study-tata-consultancy-services/; accessed 3
May 2017.



                                                 1
may be reluctant to exercise the legal mobility option if his or her employer has sponsored
him or her for permanent residence (a green card), because during most of the lengthy
application period the worker cannot change employers without beginning the application
process anew.4
      I use the National Surveys of College Graduates (NSCG) cross–sections from 2003,
2010, 2013 and 2015 to examine the job changing behavior of skilled temporary work
visa holders. The NSCG is among the very few microdata sets containing information on
visa status, though it does not distinguish among types of temporary work visa. In each
survey, the NSCG asks whether respondents had changed employer in a recent two–year
window, and if so, for what reasons. In my first approach, I restrict the sample to workers
whose first visa on arrival in the United States was a temporary work visa, and I test
whether voluntary job changing is higher for those who recently obtained a green card.
The presence of such a spike would suggest that the workers had not been able to move as
much as desired while on the temporary visa. To assess the mobility of temporary work
visa holders more generally, I also compare the voluntary job changing rate of those who
entered the United States on a temporary work visa, and still hold such a visa, with that
of natives or immigrants who entered on a green card.
      My study complements that of Depew, Norlander and Sørensen (2017), who examine
microdata from six Indian IT firms for 2003–2011 to study job changes within the United
States and returns to India.5 Though their data are superior to mine in several respects,
including capturing workers with short stays in the United States, mine represent a more
general population of workers with medium or long–term stays, and allow a comparison
with natives. The authors conclude that many of the workers on temporary work visas
soon return to India, and that many others quit for other firms in the United States,
with the rates of both actions sensitive to salary and the unemployment rate. Of workers
who began U.S. employment spells in 2003–2005, 36% had quit by 2011, apparently for
  4
    An L–1 worker who might otherwise be considering changing employer by obtaining an H–1B visa
may be reluctant to move for the same reason.
  5
    Nairu et al. (2015) study firm monopsony power over immigrants in the United Arab Emirates.




                                               2
another firm in the United States, 50% had returned to India, while 14% remained with
the original firm in the United States, apparently having been able to apply for or receive
a green card.
   My results suggest that temporary work visa holders are constrained in their voluntary
job changing behavior only to the extent that they stay with an employer sponsoring them
for a green card. For such workers, who represent a minority of skilled workers who enter
the United States on temporary visas, the two–year mobility rate spikes by 4.7 percentage
points after green card receipt, compared to a 11.6% mobility rate for all workers who
entered on temporary work visas. This implies a 20% reduction in mobility during the
application period given an approximately four–year waiting period. There is no spike in
moves associated exclusively with pay and promotion and/or working conditions, nor with
moves unrelated to pay and promotion and/or working conditions. The spike is rather
in moves associated with pay and promotion and/or working conditions and at least one
other moving reason. Such moves may represent cases where pay and promotion and
working conditions are less different across the mover’s options than in moves associated
with pay and promotion and/or working conditions only. If so, the results suggest that
while some green card applicants pay a monopsony–related temporary price in professional
terms for permanent access to the U.S. labor market, applicants leave the sponsoring
employer if the professional price is too high.
   By contrast, the voluntary job changing rate for workers who entered the United States
on a temporary work visa and still hold such a visa is similar to that of both immigrants
who entered with a green card and natives with similar characteristics. Together, the
results therefore alleviate concerns that temporary work visa holders are exploited by
monopsonistic employers, though our data are unsuitable for a direct analysis of wages,
as only the post–move wage is available. If policy–makers nevertheless wish to increase
the mobility of green card applicants, the logical reforms would be to the green card
system rather than to the temporary work visa regulations, for example increasing the
number of employment–based green cards or separating the application process from the
employer. It is unclear what the effect would be of lifting the per country limits on (total)

                                             3
green cards (Argueta 2016).


1         Temporary work visas and mobility restrictions
The survey data I use do not distinguish among the types of temporary work visa held by
respondents, and there are no administrative data on the stock of people on temporary
visas in the United States. Administrative data on inflows by visa type are published, and
I show the inflows for visas likely to be held by workers with a college degree or more in
Table 1 (I exclude visas used for short visits by business visitors or tourists). The degree
to which these shares correlate with the shares of the stock of temporary visas holders
depends on the length of time holders stay in visa status before adjusting status or leaving
the United States.
        The table shows the most common entry visas are H–1B and L–1, which accounted in
FY2015 for 47% and 21% respectively of the inflows in the categories I am considering.
The H–1B numbers reported here by the Department of State are smaller than those
published by U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS), however: USCIS report
approving 113,603 initial H–1B visas in FY2015, 62,656 to workers outside the United
States and 50,947 to workers inside the United States, and 161,714 continuing H–1B visas
(renewals).6 The fact that some workers approved for visas by USCIS do not follow
through and obtain one from the Department of State seems insufficient to explain the
discrepancy.
        The next most common set of visas is for traders and investors from countries with
which the United States has a trade treaty (13% for E–1 and E–2); professionals from such
countries (E–3, E–3R, TN and H1–B1) account for a further 6% of visas (this category
grew quickly from 2005 to 2015). Another category of skilled visas is the subset of J–1 visas
for professors and research scholars (I have omitted the subset for short–term scholars):
these make up 9% of new skilled work visas. Finally, the O–1 category for workers of
    6
     https://www.uscis.gov/sites/default/files/USCIS/Resources/Reports%20and%20Studies/H-1B/H-
1B-FY15.pdf.



                                              4
extraordinary ability, which includes artists, entertainers and athletes in addition to more
conventional workers, accounts for about 4%.
       H–1B workers must have a bachelor’s degree or equivalent.7 The number of H–1B
visas is capped for for–profit employers, though uncapped for non–profit employers, and
in some years a lottery is held to apportion the capped visas.8 An H–1B visa is initially
issued for three years, and may be extended for another three. If a worker’s employer
takes the first steps towards obtaining the worker permanent residence (a green card) in
a timely manner, the H–1B visa remains valid until a decision on the green card is made
and a green card becomes available.
       H–1B visa holders are heterogeneous and stay for varying lengths of time. They are
employed disproportionately in information technology services (as shown in the admin-
istrative data on inflows): a common new recipient of an H–1B is an Indian computer
programmer working for an Indian company.9 H–1B employees of the large India–based
IT firm studied by Clemens (2010, 2013) had contracts for work in the United States
of 6–15 months, while the most common U.S. tenure for workers in the six Indian firms
studied by Depew et al. (2017) was about six months. Other H–1B holders stay longer in
the United States, some of them adjusting their status to permanent resident. However,
Hira (2010b) shows that only a small minority of those entering on an H–1B visa (or an
L–1 visa) are sponsored for a green card by their original employer: at least seven of the
top 15 employers of H–1B workers sponsored five percent or fewer, and five of the top six
employers of L–1 workers sponsored five percent or fewer.10
       An H–1B worker may change employers as soon as the prospective new employer has
petitioned USCIS to have the visa transfered from the existing employer, without waiting
   7
      Requirements for all temporary visas are described at https://www.uscis.gov/working-united-
states/temporary-nonimmigrant-workers, accessed 26 August 2016.
    8
      There are some exceptions to this characterization of which employers are subject to the cap. For
example, K–12 schools are subject to the cap.
    9
           http://www.computerworld.com/article/2954612/it-outsourcing/despite-h-1b-lottery-offshore-
firms-dominate-visa-use.html.
   10
      Hira updates his numbers to 2014 at http://www.epi.org/blog/top-h-1b-employers-use-visa-program-
for-temporary-labor-not-as-bridge-to-permanent-immigration/, accessed 3 May 2017.




                                                  5
for the petition to be approved.11 From 2006–2014, 91% of such petitions were approved,
constituting an average of 40,000 per year.12 This suggests considerable worker mobility;
in the same period an annual average of 100,000 petitions for initial H–1B were approved,
though the appropriate denominator is not clear. Any new employer does need to pay
fees equal to those it would have paid to get a worker’s initial H–1B visa, which amount
to $1075–$3825 depending on the firm size and share of workers with an H–1B visa.
       However, there are reports that Indian software staffing companies, in particular,
sometimes make a condition of employment in the United States the posting of a bond,
repayable upon return to India, the signing of a non–compete agreement, or the signing
of a contract stipulating penalties for breach of contract. The legality of such practices is
unclear, depending on the U.S. state in question and whether courts consider the contracts
to fall under American or Indian jurisdiction.13 Another constraint on moving to another
company is that H–1B visa holders may not become non–employed. For example, any
H–1B worker who is laid off must leave the United States if he or she does not change
employer before becoming unemployed.
       A different issue is that the prospect of a green card may make the worker want to stay
with the same employer, since changing employer means starting the lengthy application
process anew. Although workers may change employer while waiting for the last step of
the green card application to be processed (the I–485), for many applicants the lengthiest
part of the application is waiting for a visa to become available after being approved in
principle. Only then may the I–485 be filed. Jasso et al. (2010) report that in 2003, the
average elapsed time between application and receipt of an employment–based green card
was 4.3 years. Indian and Chinese workers have particularly long waits, because the delay
  11
      See https://www.uscis.gov/tools/ombudsman-liaison/practical-immigration-consequences-foreign-
workers-slowing-economy, accessed 9 May, 2016. However, workers who enter the U.S. on an H–1B
visa with an uncapped employer must enter the lottery for capped visas if they wish to transfer to an
employer subject to the cap.
  12
     Numbers from the annual reports on H–1B petitions at https://www.uscis.gov/tools/reports-
studies/reports-and-studies.
  13
     Banerjee (2006); https://www.revealnews.org/reports/job-brokers-steal-wages-entrap-indian-tech-
workers-in-us/, https://www.revealnews.org/reports/case-study-tata-consultancy-services/, accessed 3
May 2017.



                                                 6
arises from equal limits for each country on the annual number of green cards that may
be awarded.14 In the popular perception, this green–card related constraint on mobility
sometimes appears to be construed as a general constraint affecting all H–1B workers.
      Intra–company transferees have been transfered to the United States by an employer
for whom they have worked for at least a year abroad, and must be managers or executives
(L–1A) or have specialized knowledge of the firm (L–1B). The maximum duration of the
visa (with renewals) is seven years for the L–1A and five years for the L–1B. Contrary
to H–1B holders, L–1 visa holders may not change employer. They may find another
employer to apply for an H–1B on their behalf, but time on the L–1 visa counts towards
the H–1B maximum. The same considerations as for H–1Bs obtain regarding mobility
and the green card application. Even less is known about the durations of those entering
on L–1 visas than is known about the H–1B visa holders, except that few are sponsored
for a green card by the firm that transfers them (Hira 2010). It is likely that some L–1
workers are transfered abroad again after a relatively short stay in the United States.
      Mobility constraints vary across other types of temporary work visas. Holders of treaty
trader and investor visas may renew their two–year visa indefinitely, but may not work
for an employer based in the United States. Canadians’ and Mexicans’ TN visas are for a
particular job with a particular employer for three years, but obtaining a new visa is easy
(particularly for Canadians), so such visa holders could be considered mobile. Professors
and scholars on J–1 visas may change employer, and the visa duration is whatever the
employer requests, though there are limitations on renewal. Holders of O–1 visas receive
an initial visa for up to three years, with extensions possible, and may change employer
in a fashion similar to H–1B workers. For most of these visas other than H–1B and L–
1, adjustment of status to green card is in principle excluded, though in practice green
card related mobility issues similar to those for H–1B visa holders may arise. The artists,
entertainers and athletes on O–1 visas, along with treaty investor visa holders, are the only
temporary visa workers who may be self–employed, but they may only be self–employed
in the job or event for which the visa is awarded.
 14
      https://www.uscis.gov/tools/glossary/country-limit.


                                                   7
2     Data
I use the 2003, 2010, 2013 and 2015 waves of the National Survey of College Graduates
(NSCG), data collected under the auspices of the National Science Foundation. The sur-
veys are stratified random samples of respondents to the 2000 census long form (for the
2003 wave) or to the American Community Survey (for the 2010, 2013 and 2015 waves)
who reported having a bachelor’s degree or higher. The surveys have the advantages
of a large sample size and information on the type of visa on which immigrants origi-
nally entered the United States, immigrants’ current visa status, and information on job
changing.
    Immigrants arriving between April 2000 and October 2003 are not in the sampling
frame for the 2003 survey, and obversely, all immigrants in the 2003 wave have been
in the United States at least three years. The interval between the establishment of
the sampling frame and the survey is smaller for the 2010, 2013 and 2015 waves, but
immigrants with very short term stays in the United States are still absent from the later
waves. The longer an immigrant’s stay in the United States, the more likely he or she is
to appear in a cross–section survey such as the NSCG.
    Respondents in my data who were born abroad without U.S. citizenship are asked
their visa status when they first came to the United States for six months or more, as
well as their current visa status. The survey options for the entry visa are: “Permanent
U.S. Resident Visa (Green Card)”; “Temporary U.S. Resident Visa for temporary work
(e.g., H–1B, L–1A, L–1B, etc.)”; “Temporary U.S. Resident Visa for study or training
(e.g., F-1, J-1, H-3, etc.)”; “Temporary U.S. Resident Visa as the dependent of another
person (e.g., F-2, H-4, J-2, K-2, L-2, etc.)”; and “Other Temporary U.S. Resident Visa”.
    A series of questions elicits the current status. All respondents are asked whether
they are a U.S. citizen, and those who answer yes are asked if they are a naturalized US
citizen. Those who answer no are asked if they are a permanent resident, and if so, the
year permanent residence (the green card) was obtained. Those who answer that they are
not a permanent resident are asked which of the temporary visa types listed above they


                                            8
hold.15
       Another set of questions allows me to measure workers’ job mobility. All respondents
are asked whether they were employed for pay or profit on both of two dates, one shortly
before the survey, and one approximately two years earlier. Those respondents who were
employed on both dates are asked whether they worked for the same employer and in the
same “job”. Those who changed jobs or employers or both are offered a set of possible
reasons for the change, of which more than one may be chosen.
       Using these questions, I construct a dummy for a voluntary change of employer for
a sample of workers employed at both dates. A worker is considered to have made a
voluntary change of employer if he or she reports having changed employers, if he or she
does not mention layoff as a reason, and if he or she does not give retirement or “other”
as the sole reason. I include in the sample those who appear to have switched to self–
employment (as evidenced by their reporting being self–employed in the survey week).
The results are not sensitive to their inclusion.16
       I also construct dummies for having received a green card in the year prior to the survey
reference date and two, three and four years prior (an immigrant must hold a green card
for five years before being eligible for U.S. citizenship). The job mobility windows do not
begin or end at the beginning or end of calendar years in any survey, whereas the date
of receipt of the green card is a calendar year, so the timing of green card receipt with
respect to the window contains considerable noise; in any case, the ideal timing (how long
respondents would take to move after receiving a green card) is not obvious. The Data
Appendix gives the exact definitions.
       I use both the full sample of workers employed in both periods, and a subsample
of immigrant workers who entered the United States on a temporary work visa. The
youngest respondents are aged 23, and I restrict the samples to those age 64 or younger. I
  15
     It is unclear whether workers using post–education Optional Practical Training would indicate being
on a work visa or a student visa, but the sampling frame makes it unlikely a large number of such workers
are captured.
  16
     In principle it is of interest to look at job changing with a given employer, but the covariates of
interest always had small and statistically insignificant coefficients in this analysis.



                                                   9
drop immigrants who appear to have moved to the United States during the job mobility
window (see the Data Appendix). Table 2 presents the unweighted means of the variables
used for both samples.


3     Method
I approach the question of whether temporary work visa holders are constrained in their
voluntary job mobility in two ways. First, I use a sample of workers who entered the
United States on a temporary work visa, and examine whether voluntary job moves spike
when such visa holders obtain a green card. Although the green card received by the
respondent need not necessarily have been obtained through his or her own employer –
it could have been received through a spouse’s job, for example – this does not affect the
interpretation.
    Because those successful in obtaining a green card may differ unobservably from those
who do not obtain one, I control for whether the respondent currently holds a green card
or is naturalized (one must hold a green card for five years to be eligible for citizenship).
This means that any spike in mobility on the part of recent green card recipients is relative
to the mobility of respondents who received a green card longer ago, not relative to those
still on a temporary visa.
    I define T Git as a dummy equal to one if the worker who entered on a temporary work
visa received a green card in year t, and estimate the linear probability of voluntarily
changing employer in the window spanning approximately t − 2 to t:

P (∆ employerit ) = β0 +β1 T Gi,t−1 +β2 T Gi,t−2 +β3 T Gi,t−3 +β4 T Gi,t−4 +Vit β5 +Xit β6 +φt +it ,
                                                                                                 (1)
where V is a set of dummies for the worker’s current visa status, including green card and
naturalized citizen, and a dummy for having received a green card in 2000–2015 (since
having received a green card shortly before any of the surveys implies having received it
in these calendar years). The cross–section nature of the data restricts the covariates X
to refer to the current period, and they include years since highest degree and its square;

                                                10
age and years since migration; highest degree and field of study of highest degree; as well
as dummies for gender, marital status, their interaction, presence of a child aged under
two, 2–5, 6–11, 12–18, or over eighteen, and their interaction with gender. Arrival year
cohort dummies are always jointly insignificant and are not included.
   The coefficients of interest are β1 , β2 , β3 and β4 . β1 may capture not only respondents
who received a green card in the middle of the mobility window and are then very likely to
move before the end of the window, but respondents who received their green card close
enough to the end of the mobility window that they are particularly unlikely to move
over the window if tied to their employer. This means that any spike may show up in a
positive β2 rather than a positive β1 . By three to four years after green card receipt, any
spike should have subsided, which I check by examining β3 and β4 . The patterns related
to recent receipt of a green card are sensitive to weighting; the Data Appendix explains
why I prefer unweighted regressions.
   I also seek to establish the degree to which any spike is caused by moves for pay and
promotion or working conditions reasons: an important role for such moves would indicate
possible use of monopsony power by employers. In order to do this, I estimate equation
(1) separately for the probability of voluntary job changes for the three mutually exclusive
sets of reasons: moves for pay and promotion and/or working conditions, but no other
reason; moves for pay and promotion and/or working conditions, and an additional reason
or reasons; and moves for reasons that include neither pay and promotion nor working
conditions. If firms make strong use of their monopsony power, I expect to find a spike
in moving for both the first and second set of reasons. If firms make weak use of their
monopsony power, I expect a spike in moving for the second but not the first set of reasons,
assuming that moves in the second set represent situations where pay and promotion and
working conditions are less different across the mover’s options than for moves in the first
set. If firms make no use of their monopsony power or have no monopsony power, there
should be no spike in the first two sets of reasons, but there could be a spike in the third
set of reasons.
   To examine more general barriers to mobility, I pool all workers in the data, and

                                            11
include dummies allowing different groups of immigrants to be compared with natives (the
omitted group). The voluntary job mobility rate of those who entered on a temporary
work visa and who currently hold the same type of visa (T T ) is of particular interest. In
principle, I am also interested in the mobility while on a temporary work visa of workers
who entered on a student visa, but I cannot determine whether such workers already had a
temporary work visa at the start of the mobility window. I also include dummies for those
who entered on a temporary work visa and have obtained a green card in various recent
years (T G) or obtained a green card more than four years prior to the survey (T Gt−5+ );
for those who entered on a green card and therefore still have permanent status whether
on a green card or as a naturalized citizen (GG) and other combinations of entry and
current visa (V V ). I estimate the linear probability regression
 P (∆ employerit,t−2 ) = γ0 + γ1 T Tit + γ2 GGit + γ3 T Gi,t−1 + γ4 T Gi,t−2

                       + γ5 T Gi,t−3 + γ6 T Gi,t−4 + γ7 T Gi,t−5+ + V Vit γ8 + Xit γ9 + νt + ηit .
                                                                                                (2)
The coefficient γ1 indicates whether temporary work visa holders (who entered on a tem-
porary work visa) are less mobile than natives; these immigrants may also be compared
to immigrants who entered on a green card by computing γ1 − γ2 . The coefficients γ3 and
γ4 capture any spike associated with obtaining a green card relative to natives rather than
other former temporary work visa holders as in equation (1). Subtracting γ7 from these
coefficients should yield a spike effect close to that of equation (1), though not exactly the
same, given that in equation (2) the coefficients on X (γ9 ) are constrained to be the same
for natives and all immigrants, and that the comparison is of recent to earlier green card
recipients regardless of the pre–green card visa if any. As with the estimation of equation
(1), I also examine the probability of changing employer for different sets of reasons to
assess the likelihood of monopsony power.
   There is some bias introduced to the estimation of equation (2) because immigrants
who leave the United States during the window of interest are not in the survey. If
duration analysis of the hazard of changing employer within the United States could be
performed with ideal data, and if leaving the United States were unrelated to changing

                                               12
employer within the United States, observations associated with leaving the United States
would be recorded as censored. However, the options of changing employer within the
United States and leaving the United States are likely to be related for some workers,
which means this approach would introduce bias of unknown sign. Had they remained
in the United States, dissatisfied emigrants might have been disproportionately employer
stayers or changers: dissatisfaction would increase their interest in a new U.S. employer,
but emigration may indicate that changing in the United States was difficult and that
they would have stayed with the same employer had leaving the United States not been
an option. There is no obvious fix for the problem with either ideal data or the NSCG,
and it is unclear whether equation (2) makes job changing in the United States appear
more or less difficult than it actually is.
       The motivation for studying job mobility is that constraints may lower the wages
of temporary visa holders. Unfortunately, the cross–section nature of the data preclude
study of the effects of constrained mobility on wages or salaries.17


4        Descriptive statistics
Table 3 summarizes (unweighted) voluntary job changing for different groups. The first
row shows the overall voluntary job changing rate, which for the full sample is 13.2%
(column 1). The 13.4% rate for natives (column 2) is very similar to the 13.1% rate for
those who entered on a temporary work visa and still hold such a visa (column 7).The
highest rate is for workers who entered on a temporary work visa and received their green
card two years prior to the survey (20.6% in column 9). These raw numbers suggest that
workers on temporary visas are indeed able to change jobs, but suggest that workers who
eventually get a green card may be tied to their employer and wait to change employer
until after they receive a green card.
       Table 3 also shows voluntary mobility rates for different groups distinguished by the
  17
    A subsample of the 2003 NSCG respondents was followed for some years, but contained only science
and engineering workers. The representative subsample common to the 2010 and 2013 surveys is too
small to be useful.


                                                13
(not mutually exclusive) reasons given for the job move. Pay and promotion opportunities
is the most commonly cited reason for every group, followed by working conditions. Few
voluntary movers say they moved for “other” reasons. These statistics obscure the fact
that a majority of voluntary movers gives more than one reason for moving: the share
giving a single reason is 27% in the full sample and 30% for workers who entered on a
temporary work visa. Certain reasons are commonly given together. 73–77% of voluntary
movers citing work conditions as a reason also cited pay and promotion as a reason, while
48–61% of respondents citing pay and promotion as a reason also cited work conditions.
61-69% of movers citing family also cited job location, while 32–35% of movers citing job
location also cited family.
    The bottom panel of Table 3 therefore shows mobility rates for the three mutually
exclusive sets of reasons for moving. The most common set of reasons is that encompassing
both pay and promotion and/or working conditions as well as at least one additional
reason, a type of move made by 7.2% of the full sample (column 1). This type of mobility
is particularly high for workers who received a green card two years prior to the survey
(12.5%, column 9), and slightly low for workers who entered on a temporary work visa
and still hold it (6.5% in column 7). It is high for holders of temporary work visas in
column 5 (9.1%), but the workers in this sample who are absent from column 7 are likely
to have changed visa type during the mobility window (for example, from a student visa).
Differences across groups are more muted for the two other sets of reasons (related to
pay and promotion and working conditions only and unrelated to pay and promotion or
working conditions).


5     Results
I next turn to regression analysis, first using the sample of workers who entered on a
temporary visa to investigate whether there is a spike in voluntary job changing for workers
initially on temporary visas who receive a green card, before comparing the voluntary job
changing rates of several immigrant groups with that of natives.


                                            14
5.1    Workers entering on temporary visas

Table 4 presents linear probability regressions controlling for dummies for recent receipt
of a green card, receipt of a green card in 2000–2015, current visa, American citizens born
abroad and survey year. The latter covariates capture, among other things, the fact that
the job mobility windows differ in length across surveys. The coefficients of interest are
those on recent green card receipt. In column 1, whose specification includes no other
covariates, the recent green card coefficients indicate no spike for those who received their
green card in the prior year, perhaps indicating that it takes a worker more than a year to
find a new job and move. A spike of 9.1 percentage points appears after two years, before
subsiding to about 3.5 percentage points in the third and fourth years. Since young and
inexperienced workers change jobs more frequently, I control in column 2 for years since
highest degree and its square, and age and years since migration. This reduces the size
of the two–year spike to 4.8 percentage points, while the coefficients on receipt of green
card three and four years prior decline to statistical insignificance. Adding dummies for
highest degree and field of study of highest degree (column 3) and gender, being married,
their interaction, the presence of children and their interaction with gender (column 4)
makes little difference.
   Because Indians and Chinese have to wait a particularly long time for their green cards
to become available, one would expect the spike to be more marked for them. However,
unreported regressions based on the specification in column 4 show that the sample is not
large enough to distinguish between groups based on birth place. Likewise, unreported
results fail to distinguish between men and women.
   In column 5, I present results based on the 2015 survey alone. This indicates a larger
two–year spike of 9.5 percentage points (albeit significant only at the 10% level), as well as
a dip in mobility after one year: a large 12.9 percentage points. Differences in coefficients
from the full sample are not statistically significantly different, but it is possible either
that effects have changed with time or that the timing of the 2015 survey and the mobility
window better capture changes in mobility. I thus view the 9.5 percentage point spike as


                                             15
an upper bound to an effect that may be attenuated by noise in other years.
   It is useful to put the size of the estimated spike in context by making a crude cal-
culation of the implied reduced mobility during the application period. A spike in the
two–year mobility rate of 4.7 percentage points (column 4) compares with an average
two–year mobility rate of 11.6%, and is in response to lower mobility over the average
wait for the green card of about four years. This means two–year mobility is depressed
in the application period by about 2.35 percentage points or 20%. If we focus on the
imprecise 2015 results, the spike is 9.5 percentage points compared to a mobility rate of
14.1%, which implies a 34% reduction in mobility.
   In Table 5, I use the sets of reasons movers give to assess the roles of pay and promotion
and work conditions in the mobility spike. If mobility is reduced for reasons related to
pay and promotion or working conditions, it suggests that employers are using their
monopsony power over temporary work visa holders. In Panel A, I repeat the results
from Table 4 column 4, showing the spike in moving for any reason. In Panel B, I present
the estimates for the three sets of reasons separately; the coefficients sum to the total
effects in Panel A. Panel B shows that there is a no spike for the set of reasons related
to pay and promotion or working conditions only, nor for the set of reasons unrelated
to these factors. Instead, 3.6 percentage points of the overall spike of 4.7 percentage
points is accounted for by moves for a mix of reasons (pay and promotion and/or working
conditions and at least one additional reason). Unreported results for the 2015 subsample
show qualitatively similar, though imprecisely estimated results. In Panel C, I show that
there is no spike in moves for pay and promotion reasons only, or for working conditions
only. The results suggest firms exercise moderate monopsony power.


5.2    All workers

The second approach is to compare current temporary visa holders (who entered on a
temporary visa) to natives or to current green card holders using the full sample of
workers. This captures any immobility of those immigrants waiting for a green card as



                                            16
well as temporary visa holders facing other mobility barriers. The approach also allows
a comparison of the mobility rates of recent green card holders with natives (or other
groups), rather than current temporary visa holders. All regressions include dummies for
survey year and American citizens born abroad, as well as dummies for various transitions
between entry and current visa status: temporary work visa to temporary work visa;
green card to green card or naturalized status; temporary work visa to green card in the
prior year or two, three, four or more than four years prior to the survey; corresponding
dummies for transitions from a study or training visa to a temporary work visa and other
temporary visa to a green card; and uncategorized transitions. The reference group is
natives.
   Table 6, column 1, shows that immigrants who entered on a temporary work visa have
the same mobility rate as natives: 0.1 percentage point lower. Controlling for age, expe-
rience and years in the United States in column 2 does render the coefficient statistically
significantly negative with a magnitude of 2.0 percentage points. However, controlling for
highest degree and its field of study in column 3 reduces the coefficient to -0.7 percentage
point, and further controls for gender, marital status and children (and interactions) in
column 4 reduce it to a small and statistically insignificant -0.5 percentage point. Using
the latter specification with the 2015 survey only (in column 5) actually shows higher
mobility for such immigrants by 3.6 percentage points, albeit statistically significant only
at the 10% level. Unreported regressions show no statistically significant differences by
gender, nor for Indians and Chinese versus others.
   The bottom panel of the table shows the results of comparing these continuing tem-
porary visa holders to immigrants who entered the United States with a green card (and
therefore either still have a green card or have naturalized), by subtracting the coefficient
for the latter in row b from the coefficient for the former in row a. In the specification
with few covariates (column 1), the temporary visa holders change employers statistically
significantly more than green card holders (by 2.6 percentage points), rather than less, but
the gap is explained by age, experience and years in the United States (column 2). The
coefficient in the specification with full covariates (column 4) is a statistically insignificant

                                               17
-0.3 percentage point, leaving again no evidence that current holders of temporary visas
are greatly constrained in their voluntary job moving.
   Table 6 may also be used to reassess the green card receipt spike by comparing recent
green card recipients to natives rather than to former temporary work visa holders. Com-
paring the mobility rate of temporary visa workers who have recently received a green card
two years previously with that of natives (row d), with full covariates (column 4), shows a
statistically significant spike of 5.0 percentage points, similar to the 4.7 percentage point
spike estimated in the previous section when the comparison was with temporary visa
holders yet to obtain a green card.
   In Table 7, I probe the same sample using moving reasons to uncover any evidence
of monopsony behavior that might have been masked in Table 6. Panel A repeats the
key coefficients from Table 6: the coefficient for workers who enter on a temporary work
visa and remain on such a visa, and the coefficient for workers who enter on a green card.
Panel B estimates the probability of moving for the three sets of reasons. Column 1,
where natives are the reference group, suggest that temporary visa holders are more
mobile by 1.0 percentage point for the set of reasons focused on pay and promotion and
work conditions, contradicting the null hypothesis of lower mobility due to monopsony.
On the other hand, temporary visa holders are less mobile by 1.2 percentage points for
the set of mixed reasons (pay and promotion and/or working conditions and at least one
additional reason), which supports the hypothesis. These two effects along with no effect
for reasons unrelated to pay and promotion and working conditions sum to the null total
effect in Panel A. Panel C shows that temporary work visa holders are more mobile for
pay and promotion reasons alone, though this is a relatively unusual type of move, and
no different from natives in terms of moves for working conditions only.
   The coefficients in column 1 are somewhat difficult to interpret, but nevertheless do
not give rise to great concern about temporary work visa holders being exploited by their
employers. Indeed, as green card holders show somewhat similar patterns relative to
temporary visa holders in column 2, when they are used as the comparison group instead
of natives by differencing the coefficients (column 4), there are no statistically significant

                                             18
differences in Panel B. Temporary visa holders remain more likely by 0.7 percentage point
to move for pay and promotion reasons alone (Panel C).


6     Conclusion
Workers who entered the United States on a temporary visa but transition to a green
card (permanent residence) are reluctant to leave their employer during the green card
application process, as evidenced by a spike in voluntary job changing following green
card receipt. The magnitude of the spike suggests mobility is depressed in the green card
application period by 20% in the preferred estimates, although estimates based on the
most recent year of data suggest a reduction of about one third. The spike is in moves
associated with pay and promotion and/or working conditions and at least one other
moving reason. Such moves may represent cases where pay and promotion and working
conditions are less different across the mover’s options than in moves associated with pay
and promotion and/or working conditions only, in which there is no spike. If so, the results
suggest that while some green card applicants pay a monopsony–related temporary price
in professional terms for permanent access to the U.S. labor market, applicants leave the
sponsoring employer if the professional price is too high.
    For the majority of temporary visa holders who are not sponsored for green cards, I
find less binding constraints. Whether compared to similar natives or otherwise similar
immigrants who entered on a green card, immigrants who enter on a temporary work
visa and maintain that status have a two–year voluntary job changing rate a statistically
insignificant 0.3–0.5 percentage point (2–4%) lower, compared to the two–year mobility
rate for the sample of 13.2%. Together, the paper’s results alleviate concerns that skilled
workers on temporary visas are exploited by employers, although direct evidence on wages
is not available.




                                            19
References
Argueta, Carla N. 2016. “Numerical Limits on Permanent Employment–Based Immigra-
  tion: Analysis of the Per–country Ceilings”. Congressional Research Service 7–5700.

Banerjee, Payal. 2006. “Indian Information Technology Workers in the United States: The
  H-1B Visa, Flexible Production, and the Racialization of Labor.” Critical Sociology, 32
  (2–3): 425–445.

Clemens, Michael A. 2013. “Why Do Programmers Earn More in Houston Than Hy-
  derabad? Evidence From Randomized Processing of U.S. Visas”. American Economic
  Review, 103 (3): 198–202.

Clemens, Michael A. 2010. “Why Do Programmers Earn More in Houston Than Hy-
  derabad? Evidence From Randomized Processing of U.S. Visas”. American Economic
  Review, Center for Global Development Working Paper 212.

Depew, Briggs, Peter Norlander and Todd A. Sørensen. 2017. “Inter–firm mobility and
  return migration patterns of skilled guest workers”. Journal of Population Economics,
  30(2): 681–721.

Dorning, Jennifer and Charlie Fanning. 2012. “Gaming the System 2012: Guest Worker
 Visa Programs and Professional and Technical Workers in the U.S.” AFL–CIO: Wash-
 ington, D.C.

Farmworker Justice. n.d. “No Way to Treat a Guest: Why the H-2A Agricultural Visa
  Program Fails U.S. and Foreign Workers”.
  https://www.farmworkerjustice.org/sites/default/files/documents/
  7.2.a.6%20No%20Way%20To%20Treat%20A%20Guest%20H-2A%20Report.pdf,            ac-
  cessed 1 May 2016.

Hira, Ron. 2010a. “The H–1B and L–1 Visa Programs: Out of Control”. Economic Policy
  Institute Briefing Paper 280.

Hira, Ron. 2010b. “Bridge to Immigration or Cheap Temporary Labor? The H–1B and
  L–1 Visa Programs Are a Source of Both”. Economic Policy Institute Briefing Paper
  257.

Jasso, Guillermina, Vivek Wadhwa, Gary Gereffi, Ben Rissing and Richard Freeman. 2010.
  “How Many Highly Skilled Foreign–Born are Waiting in Line for U.S. Legal Permanent
  Residence?” International Migration Review, 44(2): 477–498.

Matloff, Norman. 2013. “Immigration and the tech industry: As a labour shortage remedy,
 for innovation, or for cost savings?” Migration Letters, 10(2): 211–228.

Nairu, Suresh, Yaw Nyarko and Shing–Yi Wang. 2015. “Monopsony Power in Migrant
  Labor Markets: Evidence from the United Arab Emirates”. Wharton working paper.

                                           20
Solon, Gary, Steven J. Haider and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. 2015. “What Are We Weighting
  For?” Journal of Human Resources, 50 (2): 301–316.

Southern Poverty Law Center. n.d. “Close to Slavery: Guestworker Programs in the
  United States”.                https://www.splcenter.org/sites/default/files
  /d6 legacy files/downloads/Close to Slavery.pdf, accessed 1 May 2016.

Wadhwa, Vivek. 2012. The Immigrant Exodus: Why America is Losing the Global Race
 to Capture Entrepreneurial Talent. Wharton Digital Press: Philadelphia, P.A.

Wasem, Ruth Ellen. 2016. “Temporary Professional, Managerial, and Skilled Foreign
 Workers: Policy and Trends”. Congressional Research Service Report R43735.




                                         21
Data Appendix
A.1 Reasons for changing employer or job
The surveys ask those who reported changing employer or type of job “Why did you
change your employer or your job?”, with respondents checking yes or no for each of: Pay,
promotion opportunities; Working conditions (e.g., hours, equipment, working environ-
ment); Job location; Change in career or professional interests; Family–related reasons
(e.g., children, spouse’s job moved); School–related reasons (e.g., returned to school, com-
pleted a degree); Laid off or job terminated (includes company closings, mergers, buyouts,
grant or contract ended; Retired; Some other reason.

A.2 Dummies for receipt of green card
The window to which job mobility questions pertain is April 15, 2001-October 1, 2003
for the (October) 2003 survey; October 1, 2008–October 1, 2010 for the (October) 2010
survey; October 1, 2010–February 1, 2013 for the 2013 survey, administered in February–
July 2013; and February 1, 2013–February 1, 2015 for the 2015 survey, administered in
June–December 2015. For respondents to the 2003 survey, the dummy for receiving a
green card in the year prior to the survey equals one for receipt in 2003; for receiving a
green card two years prior equals one for receipt in 2002; for receiving a green card three
years prior equals one for receipt in 2001, and for receiving a green card four years prior
equals one for receipt in 2000. For respondents to the 2010 survey, the corresponding years
are 2010, 2009, 2008 and 2007. For respondents to the 2013 survey, the corresponding
years are 2012, 2011, 2010, and 2009, since little of 2013 is in the window and the survey
is administered early in the year. For respondents to the 2015 survey, the corresponding
years are 2014, 2013, 2012, and 2011, since little of 2015 is in the window. The dummy
for receiving a green card more than four years prior to the survey equals one for all other
green cards received except those received in 2013 for 2013 survey and in 2015 for the
2015 survey.

A.3 Samples
I drop the foreign–born who arrived in the United States the calendar year of the survey
or the calendar year prior to the survey, as such immigrants would have lived abroad
at the start of the job mobility window. I also drop respondents to the 2013 survey
who arrived in the United States in 2011, since the job mobility window begins in 2010,
and respondents to the 2015 survey who arrived in the United States in 2013 (since the
mobility window begins in February 2013). However, I include respondents to the 2010
survey who arrived in 2008 (most of whom would have arrived before the start of the job
mobility window). I include the tiny number (34 in the full sample) of respondents to the
2003 survey who reported arriving in 2001, respondents who are either wrongly reporting
their arrival year, or who left the United States and returned, given that the sampling
frame is residents of the United States in April 2000. I test the sensitivity of the results to

                                              22
dropping immigrants who arrived in the calendar year the window begins, and the results
are similar to those reported.

A.4 Measurement error
A survey design error in 2010 and 2013 meant that a minority of respondents who had
also been in the sample in 2003 were not asked what type of temporary visa they held,
and were instead assigned the same value as in 2003, thus introducing some measurement
error. This information is based on correspondence with NSF.

A.4 Sensitivity of recent green card recipients’ job mobility to
weighting
My preferred results would in principle be those from regressions weighted using the survey
weights. The NSCG sampling is stratified on demographics, highest degree, occupation
and (in 2010 and 2013) field of study of bachelor’s degree.18 I do not control for all of
these: for example, I do not control for race as it confounds the immigration effect, and I
do not control for occupation because only movers’ pre–move occupation is unknown. But
the omitted occupation is likely to be correlated with the error term, making weighting
desirable (Solon et al. 2015). However, recent green card recipients are much more mobile
in weighted than unweighted data. This is shown in Table A1 to be driven by a very high
weighted mobility rate for women in the 2010 and 2013 surveys. This odd sensitivity to a
group represented by 51 observations leads me to prefer unweighted results. NSF confirms
in email correspondence that weights were determined differently in 2010 and 2013 from
in 2003, though not in a way related to gender and probably not in a way related to visa
status.




 18
      http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/srvygrads/overview.htm


                                                 23
  Table A1: Share of workers with temporary work entry visa changing employers
                                   voluntarily

                                   2003/2015                  2010/2013
                             Weighted    Unweighted     Weighted    Unweighted
                               (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)
A. Men and Women               0.131        0.129         0.128         0.105
   Green card last year        0.074        0.106         0.452         0.171
   Green card 2 years ago      0.207        0.208         0.271         0.198
   Green card 3 years ago      0.176        0.144         0.163         0.147
B. Men                         0.136        0.127         0.133         0.101
   Green card last year        0.074        0.100         0.333         0.159
   Green card 2 years ago      0.222        0.206         0.221         0.190
   Green card 3 years ago      0.165        0.136         0.217         0.179
C. Women                       0.121        0.135         0.118         0.115
   Green card last year        0.071        0.129         0.743         0.211
   Green card 2 years ago      0.179        0.218         0.411         0.219
   Green card 3 years ago      0.230        0.184         0.020         0.050
Observations                   4065          4065         4645          4645




                                       24
         Table 1: Numbers of temporary work visas awarded to skilled workers

 Visa          Name                                    FY2005       FY2015
                                                       Number    Number    %
 E–1, E–2      Treaty trader, Treaty investor          37,157    48,587  13.2

 E–3, E–3R, Australian specialty occupation             2,174    20,995     5.7
 TN, H–1B1 professional, NAFTA professional,
            Trade agreement professional

 H–1B          Specialty occupation worker             124,099   172,748   46.8

 J–1           Professor and research scholar [only]     –       34,232     9.3

 L–1           Intra–company transferee                65,348    78,537    21.2

 O–1           Extraordinary ability workers            6,712     13,865    3.8
 All           All                                        –      368,964   100.0

Note: Numbers do not include spouses and children, except for E–1 and E–2. J–1 statis-
tics are for FY2014 and are not available for the sub–category of professor and research
scholars for FY2005. In FY2005, 63 shortage area nurses were admitted on H–1C visas.
Sources: https://travel.state.gov/content/dam/visas/Statistics/AnnualReports/
FY2015AnnualReport/FY15AnnualReport-TableXVIB.pdf;
http://j1visa.state.gov/basics/facts-and-figures/.




                                           25
                                Table 2: Summary Statistics

                                                                           Entered U.S. on
                                                          Full Sample
                                                                         Temporary Work Visa
 Voluntary employer change                                     0.132             0.116
 Age                                                           42.67             43.59
                                                              (11.02)            (8.89)
 Years since highest degree                                    15.45             17.35
                                                              (10.57)            (9.21)
 Female                                                        0.436             0.233
 Married                                                       0.699             0.843
 Immigrant                                                     0.209             1.000
 Bachelor                                                      0.631             0.598
 Master                                                        0.272             0.304
 Doctorate                                                     0.035             0.065
 Professional                                                  0.062             0.032
 Native born in mainland                                       0.763               -
 Native born abroad                                            0.014               -
 Native born in U.S. territories                               0.013               -
 Naturalized citizen                                           0.133             0.371
 Green card holder                                             0.048             0.383
 Green card received 2000-2015                                 0.032             0.294
 Temporary work visa holder                                    0.020             0.233
 Study/training visa holder                                    0.007             0.002
 Dependent of temporary visa holder                            0.000             0.002
 Other temporary visa holder                                   0.001             0.009
 Entered   U.S.   on green card                                0.068               -
 Entered   U.S.   on temporary work visa                       0.032             1.000
 Entered   U.S.   on study/training visa                       0.072               -
 Entered   U.S.   as dependent of temporary visa holder        0.023               -
 Entered   U.S.   On other temporary visas                     0.014               -
 Children   under 2 in family                                  0.098             0.116
 Children   aged 2-5 in family                                 0.144             0.201
 Children   aged 6-11 in family                                0.188             0.284
 Children   aged 12-18 in family                               0.193             0.240
 Children   over 19 in family                                  0.103             0.106
 Observations                                                 271,818            8710
 Years since migration (immigrants)                            20.37             13.36
                                                              (11.51)            (7.91)
 Observations                                                 57,013              8710

Note: The table reports the unweighted means, with standard deviations in parentheses. Column 2
reports the statistics for the respondents who held temporary work visas when they first entered
the U.S. for more than six months.
                                             26
                                          Table 3: Voluntary employer changes by reason

                                             Current visa/citizenship status is:     Entry visa temporary work, current is:
                                                                          Tempo-             Tempo-      Green       Green
                                           U.S.     Natural-    Green
                                  All                                      rary     Any       rary      card last    card 2
                                           Born      ized       card
                                                                           work               work        year      years ago
                                  (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)      (6)       (7)         (8)         (9)
      Any reason                 13.2      13.4       10.1       15.2       18.8    11.6       13.1       12.9        20.6
      Individual reasons:
        a. Pay, promotion         8.3       8.4       6.7        10.1       12.9     8.4       10.0        9.9        15.3
        b. Working conditions     7.0       7.3       5.2        7.2        7.0      5.2        5.5        5.6        9.5
        c. Job location           5.2       5.4       3.8        5.9         6.1     4.3        4.6        4.3        8.5
        d. Career interests       4.9       5.0       3.8        5.8         6.9     4.6        5.5        4.3        8.5
        e. Family                 2.7       2.8       1.8        3.6         2.8     2.2        2.3        2.6        6.5
27




        f. School                 2.5       2.6       1.3        1.7         4.1     0.7        0.8        1.7        0.8
        g. Other                  0.3       0.3       0.3        0.4         0.7     0.4        0.6        0.0        0.8
      Groups of reasons:
       a and/or b only            3.0       3.0       2.7        3.7         4.8     3.5       4.3         4.3           5.8
       a and/or b, and
       any other reason(s)        7.2       7.4       5.3        8.2         9.1     6.1       6.5         6.4        12.5
       Neither a nor b            3.0       3.0       2.0        3.4         4.9     2.0       2.3         2.1         2.3
      Observations              271,818   214,805    36,415     13,328      5382    8710      2032        233            399

     Note: The means are unweighted. U.S born includes those born in U.S. territories and born abroad as U.S citizens.
          Table 4: Effect on voluntary employer change of green card receipt

                                                        All years                   2015
                                    (1)              (2)         (3)      (4)        (5)
 Green card last year              0.012            -0.031     -0.031    -0.032   -0.129∗∗∗
                                  (0.024)          (0.024)    (0.024)   (0.024)    (0.034)
 Green card 2 years ago           0.091∗∗∗         0.048∗∗    0.049∗∗   0.047∗∗    0.095∗
                                  (0.023)          (0.023)    (0.023)   (0.023)    (0.049)
 Green card 3 years ago            0.035∗            0.000      0.002     0.001     0.035
                                  (0.020)          (0.020)    (0.020)   (0.020)    (0.052)
 Green card 4 years ago            0.034             0.014      0.013     0.012     0.018
                                  (0.021)          (0.021)    (0.021)   (0.021)    (0.049)
 Green card                        0.013            -0.002     -0.005    -0.005    -0.019
   received 2000–2015             (0.015)          (0.015)    (0.015)   (0.015)   (0.047)
 Green card                        -0.032∗∗        0.032∗∗    0.032∗∗   0.032∗∗    0.030
   received any time               (0.013)         (0.014)    (0.014)   (0.014)   (0.050)
 Naturalized                      -0.042∗∗∗        0.024∗∗    0.019∗    0.020∗     -0.014
                                   (0.009)         (0.011)    (0.011)   (0.011)   (0.026)
 Study/training                    0.280∗∗         0.222∗∗    0.228∗∗   0.237∗∗    0.239
                                   (0.113)         (0.111)    (0.112)   (0.112)   (0.193)
 Dependent of temp–                 -0.063          -0.052     -0.046    -0.050   -0.144∗∗
    orary visa holder              (0.059)         (0.063)    (0.062)   (0.062)   (0.061)
 Other temporary visa               -0.035          -0.015     -0.007    -0.005   -0.115∗∗
                                   (0.033)         (0.033)    (0.033)   (0.034)   (0.054)
 Age, exp, exp2 , years in U.S.     No              Yes         Yes      Yes        Yes
 Highest degree, field of study     No              No          Yes      Yes        Yes
 Female, married, interaction       No              No          No       Yes        Yes
 Children, children×female          No              No          No       Yes        Yes
 R2                                0.016           0.037       0.044    0.045      0.071
 Observations                      8710            8710        8710     8710       2096

Note: Coefficients from linear probability estimation of the probability of a voluntary
change of employer. The sample in columns (1)-(4) is all immigrants who entered the
U.S. on a temporary work visa and column (5) is the subsample from the 2015 survey.
All regressions include dummies for sample year, born abroad as U.S. citizen, and born
in a U.S. territory. “Exp” is years since highest degree. Highest degree comprises four
dummies, field of study 31 dummies, children (present in the household) five dummies.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
∗
  p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                              28
Table 5: Effect on voluntary employer change of change in status from temporary work
                                   visa, by reason

                             Green card   Green card    Green card    Green card
                                                                                    Mean
                              last year   2 years ago   3 years ago   4 years ago
                                 (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)        (5)

 Panel A
  Any reason                    -0.032      0.047∗∗        0.001         0.012      0.116
                               (0.024)      (0.023)       (0.020)       (0.021)
 Panel B
  Pay–promotion and/or          0.004        0.019         0.013         0.014      0.035
  working conditions only      (0.014)      (0.013)       (0.012)       (0.013)
  Pay–promotion and/or          -0.028      0.036∗∗        0.002         -0.023     0.061
  working conditions, and      (0.018)      (0.019)       (0.016)       (0.014)
  any other reason(s)
  Reasons other than pay        -0.008       -0.008       -0.013∗       0.021∗      0.020
  and promotion, working       (0.011)      (0.009)       (0.007)       (0.012)
  conditions
 Panel C
  Pay and promotion only        0.011        0.014         0.014         0.009      0.009
                               (0.011)      (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.008)
  Working conditions only       -0.002       0.001         0.000         0.005      0.004
                               (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.004)       (0.006)

Note: Coefficients from linear probability estimations of the probability of a voluntary
change of employer for the specific reason or combination of reasons. The sample is 8710
immigrants who entered the U.S. on a temporary work visa. All regressions include the full
covariates of column 4 in Table 4. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
∗
  p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                          29
        Table 6: Effect on voluntary employer change of entry and current visas

                                                        All years                     2015
                                     (1)             (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)

 Entry visa, current visa
  a. Temporary work,                -0.001     -0.020∗∗        -0.007     -0.005      0.036∗
      Temporary work               (0.007)     (0.008)        (0.008)    (0.008)     (0.019)
  b. Green card,                  -0.027∗∗∗    -0.010∗∗        -0.005     -0.001      0.017
      Green card/naturalized       (0.002)     (0.005)        (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.010)
  c. Temporary work,                -0.026      -0.037         -0.027     -0.024    -0.095∗∗∗
      Green card last year         (0.024)     (0.024)        (0.024)    (0.024)     (0.033)
  d. Temporary work,               0.051∗∗      0.039∗        0.048∗∗    0.050∗∗     0.133∗∗∗
      Green card 2 years ago       (0.023)     (0.023)        (0.023)    (0.023)     (0.049)
  e. Temporary work,                -0.008      -0.011         0.000       0.005      0.075
      Green card 3 years ago       (0.020)     (0.020)        (0.020)    (0.020)     (0.053)
  f. Temporary work,                -0.008      0.012           0.020     0.024       0.065
      Green card 4 years ago       (0.021)     (0.021)        (0.021)    (0.021)     (0.050)
  g. Temporary work,              -0.039∗∗∗    0.011∗∗        0.019∗∗∗   0.023∗∗∗    0.041∗∗∗
      Green card>4 years ago       (0.005)     (0.005)        (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.012)
  i. Temporary work,               0.022∗∗       0.017         0.018∗     0.019∗      0.015
      Green card 2000-2015         (0.011)     (0.011)        (0.011)    (0.011)     (0.019)
  j. Study/training,               0.088∗∗∗      0.010         0.013∗     0.013∗      0.001
      Temporary work               (0.008)     (0.008)        (0.008)    (0.008)     (0.014)

 Age, exp, exp2 , years in US        No             Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
 Highest degree, field of study      No             No          Yes        Yes        Yes
 Female, married,
                                     No              No          No        Yes        Yes
 female×married
 Children, children×female           No              No         No         Yes        Yes
 R2                                 0.008           0.071      0.076      0.078      0.073
 Observations                      271,818         271,818    271,818    271,818     67,880
 Coefficient a-coefficient b      0.026∗∗∗          -0.010     -0.003     -0.003     0.019
                                  (0.008)          (0.008)    (0.008)    (0.008)    (0.020)

Note: Coefficients from linear probability estimation of the probability of a voluntary change
of employer on a sample of all workers. The sample in columns (1)-(4) is all workers and
the subsample in column (5) is workers in the 2015 survey. All regressions include dum-
mies for sample year, born abroad as U.S. citizen, born in a U.S. territory, immigrants with
other types of temporary entry visa who currently hold a green card (for different lengths of
time), and uncategorized immigrants. “Exp” is years since highest degree. Highest degree
comprises four dummies, field of study 31 dummies, children (present in the household) five
dummies. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
∗
  p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                              30
  Table 7: Effect on voluntary employer change of entry and current visas, by reason

                               Temp. work,        Green card,     Mean     Column (1)-
                               temp. work         green card/              column (2)
                                                 naturalization
                                    (1)               (2)          (3)          (4)
 Panel A
  Any reason                       -0.005            -0.001       0.132        -0.003
                                  (0.008)           (0.005)                   (0.008)
 Panel B
  Pay–promotion and/or            0.010∗∗           0.006∗∗       0.030        0.004
  working conditions only         (0.005)           (0.002)                   (0.005)
  Pay–promotion and/or           -0.012∗∗           -0.007∗       0.072        -0.005
  working conditions, and        (0.006)            (0.003)                   (0.006)
  any other reason(s)
  Reasons other than pay           -0.003            0.000        0.030        -0.003
  and promotion, working          (0.003)           (0.002)                   (0.004)
  conditions
 Panel C
  Pay and promotion only          0.013∗∗           0.006∗∗∗      0.011       0.007∗∗
                                  (0.003)           (0.002)                   (0.004)
  Working conditions only          -0.001            0.000        0.006        -0.001
                                  (0.001)           (0.001)                   (0.002)

Note: Coefficients from linear probability estimation of the probability of a voluntary
change of employer for the specific reason. The sample is all workers, 271,818 observations.
All regressions include the covariates of Table 6 column 4. Robust standard errors are re-
ported in parentheses.
∗
  p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                            31
