                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    HIGH SCHOOL GENETIC DIVERSITY AND LATER-LIFE STUDENT OUTCOMES:
     MICRO-LEVEL EVIDENCE FROM THE WISCONSIN LONGITUDINAL STUDY

                                         C. Justin Cook
                                        Jason M. Fletcher

                                       Working Paper 23520
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23520


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2017




This research uses data from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (WLS) of the University of
Wisconsin-Madison. Since 1991, the WLS has been supported principally by the National
Institute on Aging (AG-9775, AG-21079, AG-033285, and AG-041868), with additional support
from the Vilas Estate Trust, the National Science Foundation, the Spencer Foundation, and the
Graduate School of the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Since 1992, data have been collected
by the University of Wisconsin Survey Center. A public use file of data from the Wisconsin
Longitudinal Study is available from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, 1180 Observatory Drive, Madison, Wisconsin 53706 and at http://
www.ssc.wisc.edu/wlsresearch/data/. The opinions expressed herein are those of the authors. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by C. Justin Cook and Jason M. Fletcher. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
High School Genetic Diversity and Later-life Student Outcomes: Micro-level Evidence from
the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study
C. Justin Cook and Jason M. Fletcher
NBER Working Paper No. 23520
June 2017
JEL No. J24,O4

                                         ABSTRACT

A novel hypothesis posits that levels of genetic diversity in a population may partially explain
variation in the development and success of countries. Our paper extends evidence on this novel
question by subjecting the hypothesis to an alternative context that eliminates many alternative
hypotheses by aggregating representative data to the high school level from a single state
(Wisconsin) in 1957, when the population was composed nearly entirely of individuals of
European ancestry. Using this sample of high school aggregations, we too find a strong effect of
genetic diversity on socioeconomic outcomes. Additionally, we check an existing mechanism and
propose a new potential mechanism of the results for innovation: personality traits associated
with creativity and divergent thinking.


C. Justin Cook
School of Social Sciences, Humanities and Arts
University of California, Merced
jcook9@ucmerced.edu

Jason M. Fletcher
University of Wisconsin-Madison
La Follette School of Public Affairs
1225 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
jfletcher@lafollette.wisc.edu
Introduction
Novel and controversial research at the intersection of the macroeconomics, economic growth, and
population genetics literatures posits that both contemporary and historic differences in country-level
economic development could be tied to population level genetic processes. Specifically, the hypothesis
is that levels of genetic diversity, at the population- (i.e. country-) level, shape long term patterns of
economic development. The hypothesized mechanisms of this relationship are twofold: genetic
diversity increases the ability of a society to innovate, but genetic variation also increases ethnic
fractionalization and decreases trust within a population.2 Taken together, these two effects create a
non-linear (hump shaped) effect of genetic diversity in determining economic success—a hypothesis
supported in a theoretical framework and empirically in an initial and thorough analysis by Ashraf and
Galor (2013a; hereafter AG) and further confirmed and extended by ongoing research (Ager and
Brueckner 2016; Arbalti, Ashraf, and Galor 2015; Ashraf and Galor 2013b; Ashraf, Galor, and Kemp 2014
and 2015; and Depetris-Chauvin and Özak 2016).

        These findings have been the focus of a multidisciplinary debate (Ashraf and Galor 2013c,
2013d; Callaway 2012; d’Alpoim Guedes et al. 2013; and Gelman 2013), though much of the discussion
has focused on the conceptual framing and interpretation of the original analysis rather than on
specifying and attempting to rule out alternative hypotheses consistent with the results. In the current
paper, we propose a strong test of the robustness of the relationship between genetic diversity and
indicators of economic development through leveraging a unique setting that limits several of the
remaining empirical challenges to the results of AG. These challenges include: (i) Accounting for the
potential of unmeasured country-level factors related to genetic diversity and economic success (i.e.
confounding) (ii) Accounting for the potential influence of population stratification—the conflation of
impacts of genetics and race/ethnicity/ancestral origin on outcomes of interest, which could result in
cryptic associations between genetic diversity and ancestry that confound the analysis (iii) Clarifying



2
 The more ultimate rationale for these two mechanisms is tied to the survival advantages of increased genetic
diversity weighed against the resulting weakening of kin networks.

                                                                                                                1
and further exploring the proposed mechanisms, particularly increases in innovation from genetic
diversity, which lack previous human evidence and are difficult to measure.

         To accomplish our goals, we leverage a novel dataset from a single country (eliminating across-
country confounders) comprised entirely of European ancestry (limiting issues of population
stratification) to assess the robustness of the key findings in AG in an entirely different context. Thus,
we consider our analysis to be a strong test of their original hypothesis, while ruling out several
important alternative hypotheses consistent with their results. We also pursue initial findings in this
literature by further exploring the mechanisms of genetic diversity. Specifically, we take advantage of
measures of the Big Five personality traits in our sample to examine whether openness-to-experience
and extraversion, which have associations with creativity and divergent thinking (Hirsh et al. 2009;
Kaufman et al. 2016), may be affected by genetic diversity in a way consistent with the hypothesis of AG
and the diversity literature more generally.3 We also provide new evidence consistent with a prior
hypothesis of genetic diversity’s role in task specialization (Depetris-Chauvin and Özak 2016).

         Our analysis will use survey-level data to measure both the genetic diversity of a high school and
its impact on the socio-economic outcomes of its students. High school genetic diversity intends to
measure the general social environment and interactions faced by the student and represents a time in
life in which personality and beliefs are flexible (Costa & McCrae, 1994; McCrae & Costa, 1999; McCrae
et al. 2000).4 Our hypothesis is that these early-life interactions help to shape personality and other
beliefs in a similar way to other forms of diversity.

Background: The benefits of diversity
Following the theory and evidence provided by AG, the beneficial effects of genetic diversity are similar
to those of other identity-based diversity measures—e.g., sex, race, ethnicity, etc. (Kemeny 2017). In
short, diversity introduces novel perspectives that increases both the set and quality of solutions in
problem solving (Hong and Page 2001, 2004).

         Our motivating theory is derived from Hong and Page (2001), who show that the increased
number of perspectives from a group of diverse individuals is more likely to lead to novel solutions to
problem solving. In adapting this theory to the current work, we argue that exposure to diversity in

3
  As reviewed by Pickering et al. (2016), neuroticism has routinely been shown to have a negative association with
creativity. This relationship is also weakly supported in our analysis as shown in Panel C of Table 6.
4
  Additional findings suggest that personality may be change over the life course (Srivastava et al. 2004); however,
the personality traits that show change—conscientiousness, agreeableness, and neuroticism—are those that are
not of primary interest for the current work.

                                                                                                                       2
early-life increases the set of perspectives held by an individual, and that this increase in perspective
operates in a similar manner at the individual level as Hong and Page’s theory at the group level.
Furthermore, this increase in perspective is likely to be measured by changes to personality; hence, our
focus on openness to experience and extraversion and the shared variation between the two personality
traits.

          Empirically, the benefits of diversity are explored in a recent study by Freeman and Huang
(2015), who show that research articles from an ethnically diverse set of authors are more highly cited
than those from ethnically homogeneous authors. This finding is extended into the private sector.
Firms with more diverse workplaces are shown to have a greater quantity and diversity of patent
applications (Parrotta et al. 2014) as well as greater revenue from sales, more customers, increased
market share, and larger relative profits (Herring 2009). Lazear (1999) proposes and finds evidence that
the costs of the globalization of firms—i.e., cultural differences, etc.—are offset by beneficial cross-
cultural complementarities.

          The ideas of the current work are also echoed in the immigration and urban economics
literature that routinely show beneficial effects from immigration, which is representative of an influx of
ethnically diverse groups that is likely correlated with increased genetic diversity. While addressing
obvious concerns of endogeneity, increased immigration (primarily of groups ethnically distinct from the
native population) is shown to increase innovation, total factor productivity, wages, and the rental price
of housing (Alesina et al. 2016; Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle 2010; Ottaviano and Peri 2006; Peri 2012).
Furthermore, Peri and Sparber (2009) find evidence that immigration spurs task diversity; this is similar
to the hypothesis posed by Özak and Depetris-Chauvin (2017) that is tested in Table 7.

          In contrast to identity-based diversity measures, we argue that genetic diversity more accurately
measures differences within and across groups. For example, traditional ethnic fractionalization
measures do not account for the degree of difference between ethnic groups: ethnic diversity from a
country (or other aggregation) with a 50/50 composition of people ancestral to the United Kingdom and
Germany would be identical to a 50/50 composition of people ancestral to the United Kingdom and
China. Genetic diversity accounts for the degree of difference of all individuals within the group. It does
so by calculating root differences amongst individuals through measured differences in individual
genetic markers. Furthermore, ethnic, or ancestry, based measures of diversity may be biased by errors
in the self-reporting of ethnicity. This is especially likely in countries with long running histories of
migration and intermingling; e.g., the “one-drop rule” in the United States.

                                                                                                            3
Data and Empirical Methodology
Data and Limitations
We use a unique sample, clustered at the level of secondary school, that contains data on a wide array
of variables throughout the life course. The Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (hereafter WLS) is a
prospective longitudinal data set collected from a one-third random sample of 1957 high school
graduates in Wisconsin.

         Importantly, for the 2004 wave of the WLS, genetic biomarker data were collected for both WLS
graduates and selected siblings, which consists of roughly 95 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs).
We are able to aggregate this individual-level survey data to the high school-level in order to create
population-level measures for schools.5 This allows us to treat high schools as distinct aggregate groups
in which to measure the effects of genetic diversity. In so doing, allele frequencies for each high school
are used to calculate a population-level measure of expected heterozygosity, our primary measure of
genetic diversity, which is defined as the probability that two randomly selected individuals possess
different alleles for a specified locus. Summary statistics of this variable and all other variables used are
found in Table 1, and detailed descriptions and sources of each variable are found in the Variable
Appendix.

         One point that needs to be mentioned is the selection of SNPs within the WLS is not random nor
genome-wide. Genetic biomarkers were chosen from previous candidate gene and genome-wide
association studies that link particular loci, or SNPs, to a range of phenotypic outcomes (e.g., IQ and
cognitive performance, BMI, risk for certain types of cancer, etc.). Previous measures of expected
heterozygosity are measured by neutral genetic variants in order to measure population differences that
have arisen due to populations being separated over time (AG, Cavali-Sforza 2005). An important
assumption of the current paper is that expected heterozygosity that is calculated from the non-random
genetic variants found within the WLS serves as a valid proxy to heterozygosity calculated from neutral
variants.6 As a check of this potential source of bias, robustness exercises in Table 8 control for each
individual SNP.


5
  To increase sample size, school-level gene frequencies are calculated from genetic data for both graduates and
siblings. Appendix Section 5 replicates all estimations using a genetic diversity score that is calculated only from
WLS graduates.
6
  One potential source of bias from violating this assumption may be tied to favorable interactions amongst the
population of possessing a particular trait tied to cognition. However, complicated phenotypes, such as those of
differential economic wellbeing, are not likely to be linked to singular genetic variations (Chabris et al. 2012 and
Chabris et al. 2013).

                                                                                                                       4
           As a check of this assumption, we compute a county-level measure of genetic diversity from the
non-neutral SNPs of the WLS. We then compare this county-level measure to Ager and Brueckner’s
county-level data that is constructed from ancestral shares and the country-level genetic diversity
measure from AG. The correlation coefficient between the two measures is 0.33 and is significant at the
1% level. This statistical relationship provides support for our assumption that genetic diversity from the
non-neutral variants of the WLS serves as a valid proxy for a similar measure calculated from neutral
genetic variants. Both county-level measures of genetic diversity are given in Figure 1. Going further,
we will leverage this independent source of genetic diversity to semi-replicate our base findings in a
sample of the WLS graduate’s parents, who were of high school age for the 1920 measure of Ager and
Brueckner’s county genetic diversity.

           Another major concern with our data is sample selection.7 Genetic biomarker data were
collected in the 2004 wave, a time period in which the graduates were approximately 65 years of age.
Individuals possessing genetic variants that were favorable for economic or cognitive outcomes are
likely to survive at a greater rate than those with alleles that provide no clear advantage.8 For our
purposes, however, this scenario likely leads to a reduction in heterozygosity as survivors will possess
identical alleles for a particular locus, leading to bias in the opposite direction of the primary hypothesis
of this paper. Additionally, our base set of controls includes a measure for individual IQ, accounting for
this potential mechanism.

           A secondary concern related to selection is that our variable of interest, high school
heterozygosity, is positively correlated with other characteristics of the high school that may increase
the average later-life income or wealth associated with a particular high school. Higher educated and
higher earning parents self-select into neighborhoods and school districts (Sampson and Sharkey 2008).
If this mechanism of selection is related to a particular genetic endowment shared amongst parents, and
in turn offspring, the level of genetic diversity within a school is potentially accounting for other school
level factors that are associated with the economic outcomes of the school population. To partially
account for this potential selection our base set of controls include measures for county fixed effects,
parent economic well-being, parent education, and the WLS graduate’s IQ, which intends to proxy more




7
    This is also a potential issue in AG, who do not use population representative genetic data.
8
    In recent work, Domingue et al. (2017) show correcting for mortality selection does not alter genetic associations.

                                                                                                                     5
favorable early life environments and heritable benefits that are unrelated to the high school
environment.9

Estimation Strategy
While our measure of genetic diversity is at the school level, our base analysis is at the individual level
with our primary estimating equation being of the following form:

                𝑦𝑖𝑗 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑐 𝐷𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑗 + 𝜷𝟐 ′ 𝑿𝒊𝒋 + 𝜷𝟑 ′ 𝒁𝒋 + 𝜸′ 𝑰𝒄 + 𝜖𝑖𝑗                   (1)

The primary analysis considers the effect of school level genetic diversity on a range of economic
outcomes for 𝑖 individuals in school 𝑗. Our coefficient of interest is the measure of genetic diversity for 𝑗
high schools. Individual and family level controls are denoted by 𝑋𝑖𝑗 . These controls are entered in a
piecemeal fashion for most analyses. The set of “Individual” controls include measures for IQ, sex, birth
year, WLS graduate’s cohort’s size, and an indicator for being in either Madison or Milwaukee (urban
areas with more than 100K in population). The set of “Family” controls an index of family
socioeconomic status in 1957 and mother and father’s education.

           One way to account for the potential selection in our set of genes is to account for ancestral
geo-climatic environments that may be associated with potentially omitted cultural traits that are
correlated with both our outcomes of interest and our measure of genetic diversity. To create these
variables in our data set, we first match country-level historic geo-climatic characteristics to the WLS
graduate’s reported father’s ancestral country. We then average these variables at the high school
level, creating our set of “Historic” controls represented by 𝑍𝑗 in the above equation. These include
absolute latitude, fraction of arable land, mean temperature, mean precipitation, mean elevation,
roughness index, mean distance to the coast or navigable river, and the fraction of land within 100km of
the coast or navigable river.

            Finally, to further mitigate selection effects and to account for hard-to-measure spatial
differences in culture and lifestyle across Wisconsin, our base analysis includes county fixed effects,
which are denoted in the above estimating equation by 𝐼𝑐 .

           Of note, our estimation strategy differs from that of AG in that we hypothesize a positive linear
effect of genetic diversity instead of non-linear hump-shaped effect. The proposed linear association is
due to our focus on the relatively homogenous population of Wisconsin. The population is composed


9
    As shown in Appendix Table A2, genetic diversity is unrelated to IQ for our base specification.

                                                                                                               6
nearly entirely from Northern European ancestry, so the negative channel of genetic diversity—mistrust
and ethnic conflict—is likely to be substantially weakened in this setting.10 This argument in supported
in the recent work of Ager and Brueckner (2016), who find linear increases in economic growth from
genetic diversity of European immigrants to US counties. This narrow range of genetic diversity is
further reduced by our empirical strategy of estimating within county effects.11 Additionally, the
population of Wisconsin in 1957 is likely to be assimilated into a common American-based culture,
further limiting the possibility of ethnic based conflict and mistrust.

        Our analysis follows a standard form: column (1) simply regresses our outcome of interest on
the measure for high school heterozygosity; column (2) includes county fixed effects; columns (3)-(5)
piecemeal add individual, family, and ancestral-origin controls to the estimation of column (2); and
column (6) includes all controls, comprising our baseline estimation. Within-county associations
between genetic diversity and our socioeconomic and personality outcomes of interest are plotted in
Figures 2-5. All standard errors are clustered at the county level.


Results
Socioeconomic Effects of Genetic Diversity

The first outcome of interest we explore is years of schooling. In regards to this measure of education,
substantial selection is present in the WLS. This is due to the nature of the WLS, which again, is a
random one-third sample of high school graduates, therefore the minimum level of education in our
primary sample is high school graduates. This selection may lead to concerns about generalizability;
however, we do not expect bias from this selection.12 Our sample consists solely of high school
graduates, so we are testing the effect of genetic diversity on years of schooling in excess of high school.

        As shown in Table 2, high school genetic diversity has a statistically significant positive
association with a WLS graduate’s years of schooling. Going from the simple bivariate regression of
column (1) to the inclusion of a large number of relevant controls in our baseline specification of column
(6), the magnitude of the coefficient is slightly reduced; however, a positive, statistically significant
effect is found throughout. From our baseline estimates of column (6), a one standard deviation


10
   Roughly 75% of the population belongs to one of five ethnicities—British, Irish, Norwegian, German, and Polish,
with 47% being derived solely from Germany.
11
   The within-county standard deviation of high school genetic diversity is 0.0138 compared to 0.0162 for the
overall sample.
12
   Concerns of generalizability are addressed in part by the replication of Table 10.

                                                                                                                     7
increase in a high school’s expected heterozygosity (0.01) results in an increase of roughly one month of
schooling. Going from the bottom 10% of genetically diverse schools to the top 10% (0.32 to 0.34) is
associated with roughly a 3 month increase in schooling on average.

        Following the findings of Table 2 and the previous literature on the benefits of diversity, we test
in Table 3 whether individuals that were exposed to higher levels of genetic diversity in high school
selected into more prestigious occupations. Occupations at the higher end of the prestige scale tend to
be those that require higher years of schooling that provide higher earnings—e.g., architects, dentists
and physicians, engineers, lawyers and judges, etc. Each panel of Table 3 considers a different measure
of prestige for the WLS graduate’s first job. Summary statistics for each measure are given in Table 1,
and a fuller description and source of each variable is given in the variable appendix.

        The pattern of Table 2 is seen again in the findings of Table 3: the point estimate reduces slightly
with the inclusion of relevant controls, but genetic diversity has a consistent positive and statistically
significant effect on each measure of job prestige. WLS graduate’s that went to high schools with more
genetically diverse populations tended to seek out more cognitively challenging and more admired
occupations.

        Building off Tables 2 and 3, Table 4 considers the effect of genetic diversity on the natural log of
family income in two different waves of the WLS—1974 (respondent age ~ 35) and 1992 (respondent
age ~ 53). For income in both waves, the coefficient of genetic diversity has a positive and significant
effect (at conventional levels) for all specifications. For the baseline estimate of 1974 (column (6) of
Panel A), increasing genetic diversity by one standard deviation is associated with roughly a 2% increase
in income.

        A larger estimated coefficient is seen for the 1992 wave. This is likely due to differential earning
profiles in later age, i.e., due to cumulative advantages as incomes diverge over the life course. This is
shown in the standard deviations of income for the two periods (Table 1). For the base estimation,
increasing genetic diversity by a standard deviation is associated with a 6% increase in family income in
the 1992 wave. Though it is difficult to directly compare results across studies, Ager and Brueckner find
a similar (10%) increase for a standard deviation increase in county-level genetic diversity.13




13
  The closest estimations to those of the current work are found in Table 2 (p.29), which regress contemporary
county incomes on county-level genetic diversity for 1870 while controlling for income in 1870.

                                                                                                                 8
        The findings of Tables 2-4 taken together are highly supportive of the hypothesis posited by AG.
Our estimations consistently find that WLS graduates that attended more genetically diverse schools
had higher levels of education, more prestigious jobs, and larger earnings later in life.

An Examination of Mechanisms: Personality

Our use of a rich survey-level data set that is focused on a wide range of variables throughout the life-
course presents a unique opportunity to examine the possible mechanisms of genetic diversity in
affecting differential economic outcomes. In particular, we are interested in the beneficial effects of
diversity.14 AG propose that the positive channel of genetic diversity is tied to a diversity in ideas that
can increase technological innovation, raising the production possibilities frontier. In short, AG argue
that more genetically diverse populations are likely to be more creative populations. This is similar to
the diversity literature in Section 2 that shows diversity is associated with novel solutions. As a test of
this idea, we test the relationship between genetic diversity and personality traits tied to creativity:
openness to experience and extraversion.

        AG’s empirical evidence for genetic diversity’s role in increasing creativity is shown by a strong
positive effect from a country’s level of genetic diversity on its total scientific publications. Relating this
finding to personality, the two biggest personality predictors of creativity amongst scientist are
openness and extraversion (Feist 1998; Hirsh et al. 2009; Kaufman et al. 2016). Further studies also find
beneficial effects from both extraversion and openness for both creativity and divergent thinking
(Furnham and Bachtiar 2008, Furnham and Chamorro-Premuzic 2004, King et al. 1996).

        Tables 5 and 6 regress indices for the big five personality traits on our measure of high school
genetic diversity.15 Panel A tests our hypothesis of genetic diversity’s role in influencing the personality
trait of openness, from which a generally positive and statistically significant effect of genetic diversity is
observed. The inclusion of our baseline set of controls reduces the coefficient of genetic diversity, but a
positive effect is still estimated that is statistically significant at conventional levels. This reduction in




14
   A number of studies have focused on the negative effects of genetic diversity on income, paying particular
attention to the formation of ethnic groups and resulting ethnic conflict (Arbalti, Ashraf, and Galor 2015; Ashraf
and Galor 2013b). To our knowledge, only one other study focuses on the positive aspects of diversity (Depetris-
Chauvin and Özak 2016).
15
   Personality indices are recorded for the 1992 and 2004 wave of the WLS. We take the average of each index for
individuals that responded to both waves, while including individuals that contain data for only one of the waves.

                                                                                                                 9
the coefficient of genetic diversity can be attributed to the inclusion of IQ, which has a strong
relationship with openness (McCrae and John 1992).16

         Panel B tests the association between the personality index of extraversion and our measure of
high school genetic diversity. As with openness, a positive and statistically significant coefficient is
estimated. Furthermore, the estimated relationship with extraversion is consistent across all
specifications.

         Given the role of both openness and extraversion in creativity and divergent thinking, Panel C
regresses the shared variation (i.e., the first principal component) between these two personality
measures on our measure of high school genetic diversity. Again, a statistically significant effect is seen
for all specifications, providing evidence for individual increases in creativity and divergent thinking from
greater exposure to more diverse individuals.

         The effect on remaining personality traits is examined in Table 6. In general, genetic diversity
exhibits no consistent relationship with these other personality measures. Of note is the negative
bivariate relationships with agreeableness and neuroticism. The negative effect on agreeableness may
be symptomatic of the negative channel of diversity, which is associated with reduced cooperation or
being less agreeable. And neuroticism has been previously found to have a negative association with
creativity, which we hypothesize to have a positive association with diversity (Pickering et al. 2016).
These two associations do not retain statistical significance when accounting for county fixed effects and
our baseline set of controls.

         The estimates of Tables 5 and 6 support genetic diversity’s role in creativity. The two
personality traits that have been routinely related to creativity and divergent thinking have statistically
significant positive association with genetic diversity, while indices for other personality traits that have
no associations with creativity are unrelated to genetic diversity.

An Examination of Mechanisms: Task Diversity

In recent work, Depetris-Chauvin and Özak (2016) propose and provide evidence that genetic diversity
has a positive association with the number of individualized tasks performed within a society prior to
European colonization. The idea being that variation provides comparative advantages to differential



16
  The indicator for Madison, which is the state capital and home to the University of Wisconsin, is also highly
correlated with openness.

                                                                                                                  10
tasks within a society, leading to unique specialization by members of the society. We propose an
additional test of this potential mechanism by using the occupation code of first job for the WLS
graduates. Using this occupation code, a high school job diversity score is created.

         Following the hypothesis of Depetris-Chauvin and Özak, a positive linear relationship is expected
between our genetic diversity measure and task specialization, measured by our job diversity score.
Table 7 presents evidence of this relationship. Table 7 follows a similar form as previous tables, but due
to the job diversity score also being an aggregate measure, the analysis is conducted at the high school
level instead of for individuals. As is shown, a positive statistically significant relationship is found
between a high school’s genetic diversity and the number of unique jobs its graduates find. This
relationship holds for the previously mentioned specifications. Again, our unique and independent
sample produces results consistent with prior evidence, providing support for the role of genetic
diversity and a previously proposed mechanism.

Robustness

Table 8 examines the robustness of our previous findings to a set of ethnic and genetic controls. Column
(1) replicates our baseline findings (col. (6) of previous tables). Column (2)-(4) include a number of
ethnic/ancestry based controls. These include an indicator for the WLS graduate’s father’s ancestry in
column (2), an ethnic fractionalization score calculated from this ancestry in column (3), and both in
column (4). Comparing the estimate of column (1) to those of columns (2)-(4), the magnitude of the
point estimates of genetic diversity is not significantly altered for any outcome, suggesting our results
are not being driven by the presence of one ethnicity or a high school’s specific ethnic makeup.

         Columns (5) and (6) include gene-specific controls. First, column (5) includes an additive score
for a particular variant (i.e., 0, 1, or 2) for each SNP used to calculate our high school measure of genetic
diversity.17 In general, the inclusion of all individual specific genetic variants does not qualitatively
change our estimated coefficients.18 In place of the gene-specific controls of column (5), column (6)




17
   Each SNP is available for roughly 4,500 WLS graduates. To keep sample sizes maximized, we replace missing
values with the mean. A dummy variable for those with missing values is also included in the estimation of
columns (5) and (7).
18
   Conventional levels of statistical significance are lost, however, when considering family income in 1974 and all
personality measures. This loss in statistical significance is not associated with a large change in p-values; rather,
the p-value slightly increases above the 10% threshold.

                                                                                                                     11
controls for the shared variation across all SNPs. Controlling for the first principal component of each
genetic variant does not substantially alter the coefficient of genetic diversity.

           Columns (7) and (8) control jointly for the additional ethnic and genetic variables. Both columns
include ethnic indicators and high school ethnic fractionalization, whereas column (7) includes additive
markers for each SNP and column (8) includes the first principal component of these SNPs. As with the
previous columns, the inclusion of these additional controls does not substantially alter the previously
estimated coefficients of genetic diversity. We have no strong reason to believe that our results are
driven by either a particular ethnicity or a particular genetic variant.

Replication

In an extension of our main findings, we explore the effects of genetic diversity in a similar but distinct
sample: the WLS graduate’s parents. In so doing, we will use the county-level measure of genetic
diversity for 1920 from Ager and Brueckner (2016). On average, WLS graduate’s fathers were born in
1907 and mothers were born in 1911, so genetic diversity in 1920 is representative of the environment
faced by both parents in early life. The use of parents also generalizes our base findings, since the
parents were not selected as being in a graduating high school class.19

           Table 10 provides estimations that are similar to our baseline findings for the WLS graduates. In
place of schools, the unit of observation for genetic diversity is the county and outcomes are given for
each WLS graduate’s family. Due to a lack of controls, all estimations (excluding Panel D) simply regress
the parent’s socioeconomic outcome on 1920’s county genetic diversity. Parental outcomes are
denoted by column and include an index of family socioeconomic status in 1957, father’s (Duncan)
occupational prestige, father’s education, mother’s education, and a measure of county-level
occupational diversity.

           The baseline analysis shows a positive statistically significant effect of genetic diversity for all
parental outcomes. In comparing the estimates of Panel A to those of the WLS graduates, a standard
deviation increase in a county’s genetic diversity is associated with roughly a 5.3 month increase in
father’s years of schooling and 1.6 months for mothers. This is in line with the estimates of WLS
graduates in Table 2, which show that a standard deviation increase in high school diversity is associated
with a 2.5 month increase in schooling for the simple within-county estimation and a 1.8 month increase



19
     It is possible that those parents with high school graduates differ from those without high school graduates.

                                                                                                                     12
for our baseline estimation. In comparing Duncan occupational prestige, a respective one standard
deviation increase in genetic diversity is associated with roughly 0.22 of a standard deviation increase in
father’s job prestige and a 0.07 standard deviation increase in the WLS graduate’s job prestige. And
finally, for occupational diversity a respective one standard deviation increase in genetic diversity leads
to roughly identical increases for fathers and WLS graduates (~0.04 vs. 0.03).20

        A concern is that the WLS parents do not reside in the county where their children eventually
graduate high school from in 1957. Given that the focus of the WLS is on the high school graduates and
not their parents, no data exists that documents how long a particular family has lived in the 1957
county. To try and correct for measurement error associated with moving, Panels B-D make a few
sample adjustments.

        First, Panel B excludes the major urban areas of Wisconsin—Dane (Madison) and Milwaukee
counties. As shown, excluding these two counties does not have a major effect on the estimated effect
of genetic diversity. Panels C and D attempt to more accurately measure a county’s propensity for
migration. To do so, we use the complete sample of the 1940 census to measure the fraction of a
county’s 1940 population that lived in a different county in five years past (Ruggles et al. 2015).21 Panel
C excludes those counties in which 10% or more (~75th percentile) of the county’s population lived in a
different county five years ago. Panel D simply includes our county-level fraction of migration to the
estimation of Panel A. For both attempts at accounting for migration, we see increases in the coefficient
of genetic diversity, suggesting classical measurement error that is somewhat alleviated by accounting
for county migration.


Discussion
Using novel and independent populations that extend the previous literature, we find a statistically
significant relationship between genetic diversity and socioeconomic outcomes that supports the
hypothesis posited by AG. Our analysis provides a strong test of this hypothesis by considering micro-
oriented aggregations that avoid potential confounders by country or ethnic level differences. The use


20
   In creating comparisons, we use the coefficients from the simple within-county estimations (column 2 in
specified table) for WLS graduates. The standard deviation for the individual sample is used for individual
estimates—i.e., education and job prestige, and the standard deviation for the aggregate sample is used for
occupational diversity.
21
   The 1940 Census is the most recent census with full coverage. Ideally, we’d use a census that is closer to the
1957 graduation date; however, 1% and 5% samples for the years 1950 and 1960 do not contain spatial data for
areas with under 100,000 in population. This would exclude a majority of the rural counties that are central to our
study.

                                                                                                                 13
of schools in place of countries as the relevant “populations” allows us to avoid potential confounding
factors of institutional quality, human capital, and cultural differences that may be tied to both the level
of genetic diversity and the economic outcomes across countries. The elimination of these potential
confounders allows for more accurate measurement and interpretation of the effect proposed by AG.
Given the level of separation between the country-level results reported in the literature and the
findings of the current work, the statistically significant association between genetic diversity and
socioeconomic outcomes does indeed appear to be non-spurious.

        Ashraf and Galor do not ascribe their findings strictly to genomic differences; rather, they argue
that the observed genetic variation may be accounting for unobserved cultural variation. We too cannot
rule out that our measure of genetic diversity is simply accounting for cultural differences that are
strongly tied to the measured genetic diversity score. However, our use of relatively homogeneous (i.e.,
European ancestry), small, and local population aggregations as well as the inclusion of ethnic -specific
controls does help reduce the overlap between the genetic and cultural channels, strengthening the
argument of genetic diversity’s role in influencing economic outcomes.

        The precise mechanism for the relationship between genetic diversity and economic
productivity remains debatable; but, as first argued by AG, creativity and divergent thinking is a likely
channel. A further potential mechanism is offered by Özak and Depetris-Chauvin. The use of survey
data allows us to leverage ideas of societal interaction being driven by underlying genetic compositions
to show evidence linking (local) genetic diversity with the development of non-cognitive skills such as an
orientation towards openness to new experiences or task specialization.

        We, along with others (Ager and Brueckner 2016), provide a further step in validating the
relationship between genetic diversity and economic development. Our findings are immune to most
previous criticisms of Ashraf and Galor’s initial empirical evidence. The relevance of this research to
policy applications will likely be controversial, and given the infancy of the empirical evidence, further
replications and extensions are needed to verify this contentious relationship, with particular attention
given to the precise mechanism through which genetic diversity is operating. However, the evidence so
far suggests that the underlying genetic composition of groups does have an impact on behavior—
personality and cooperation (Ashraf and Galor 2013b)—with a resulting impact on economic outcomes
of interest.




                                                                                                             14
References
  Ager, P., & Brueckner, M. (2016). Immigrants’ genes: Genetic diversity and economic development
  in the US. Working Paper.

  Alesina, A., Harnoss, J., & Hillel, R. (2016). Birthplace diversity and economic prosperity. Journal of
  Economic Growth, 21(2), 101-138.

  Almund, M., Duckworth, A., Heckman, J., & Kautz, T. (2011). Personality, psychology, and
  economics. NBER Working Paper No. 16822.

  Arbalti, E., Ashraf, Q., & Galor, O. (2015). The nature of conflict. Working Paper.
  https://ideas.repec.org/p/bro/econwp/2013-15.html

  Ashraf, Q., & Galor, O. (2013a). The `out of Africa’ hypothesis, human genetic diversity, and
  comparative economic development. American Economic Review, 103(1), 1-46.

  Ashraf, Q., & Galor (2013b). Genetic diversity and the origins of cultural fragmentation. American
  Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 103(3), 528-533.

  Ashraf, Q., & Galor, O. (2013c). Response to comments made in a letter by Guedes et al. on “The
  Out of Africa Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diversity and Comparative Development.”
  http://www.econ.brown.edu/fac/Oded_Galor/pdf/Ashraf-Galor%20Response.pdf

  Ashraf, Q., & Galor, O. (2013d). The ‘Out of Africa” hypothesis, human genetic diversity, and
  comparative economic development: A response to commonly raised criticisms.
  https://docs.google.com/file/d/0Bw0xeVVYEG5XSGxDTms4ZllCb2M/edit

  Ashraf, Q., Galor, O., & Klemp, M. (2014). The out of Africa hypothesis of comparative development
  reflected by light intensity. Working Paper. https://ideas.repec.org/p/bro/econwp/2014-4.html

  Ashraf, Q., Galor, O., & Klemp, M. (2015). Heterogeneity and productivity. Working Paper.
  https://ideas.repec.org/p/bro/econwp/2015-4.html

  Boardman, J., Domingue, B., & Fletcher, J. (2012). How social and genetic factors predict friendship
  networks. PNAS, 109(43), 17377-17381.

  Callaway, E. (2012). Economics and genetics meet in uneasy union. Nature, 490(7419), 154-155.

  Chabris, C., Lee, J., Benjamin, D., Beuchamp, J., Glaeser, E., Borst, G., Pinker, S., & Laibson, D. (2013).
  Why is it hard to find genes that are associated with social science traits? Theoretical and empirical
  considerations. American Journal of Public Health, 103(S1), S152-S166.

  Chabris, C., Benjamin M. Hebert, Daniel J. Benjamin, Jonathan P. Beauchamp, David Cesarini,
  Matthijs J.H.M. van der Loos, Magnus Johannesson, Patrik K.E. Magnusson, Paul Lichtenstein, Craig
  S. Atwood, Jeremy Freese, Taissa S. Hauser, Robert M. Hauser, Nicholas A. Christakis, and David
  Laibson (2012). “Most Published Genetic Associations with General Intelligence Are Probably False
  Positives.” Psychological Science, 23(11), 1314–1323. doi:10.1177/0956797611435528

  Comin, D., & Hobijn, B. (2010). An exploration of technology diffusion. American Economic Review,
  100(5), 2031-2059.

                                                                                                           15
Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1994). Set like plaster: Evidence for the stability of adult
personality. In T. F. Heatherton & J. L. Weinberger (Eds.), Can personality change? (pp. 21–40).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association

d’Alpoim Guedes, J., Bestor, T., Carrasco, D., et al. (2013). Is poverty in our genes? A critique of
Ashraf and Galor, “The ‘Out of Africa’ Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diversity, and Comparative
Economic Development,” American Economic Review (Forthcoming). Current Anthropology, 54(1),
71-79.

Depetris-Chauvin, E., & Özak, Ö. (2016). Population diversity, division of labor and comparative
development. Working Paper.

Domingue, B.W., Belsky, D.W., Harrati, A., Conley, D., Weir, D.R., & Boardman, J.D. (2017). Mortality
selection in a genetic sample and implications for association studies. International Journal of
Epidemiology, doi: 10.1093/ije/dyx041.

Duncan, O.D. (1961). A Socioeconomic index for all occupations. In Occupations and Social Status.
New York: Free Press of Glencoe.

Feist, G.J. (1998). A meta-analysis of the impact of personality on scientific and artistic creativity.
Personality and Social Psychological Review, 2, 290-309.

Fowler, J., Settle, J., & Christakis, N. (2011). Correlated genotypes in friendship networks. PNAS,
108(5), 1993-1997.

Furnham, A., & Bachtiar, V. (2008). Personality and intelligence as predictors of creativity.
Personality and Individual Differences, 45, 613-617.

Furnaham, A., & Chamorro-Premuzic, T. (2004). Personality, intelligence, and art. Personality and
Individual Differences, 36, 705-715.

Herring, C. (2009). Does diversity pay?: Race, gender, and the business case for diversity. American
Sociological Review, 74, 208.

Hibbs, D., & Olsson, O. (2004). Geography, biogeography, and why some countries are rich and
others are poor. PNAS, 101(10), 3715-3720.

Hirsh, J.B., DeYoung, C.G., & Peterson, J.B. (2009). Metatraits of the big five differentially predict
engagement and restraint of behavior. Journal of Personality, 77(4), 1085-1102.

Hong, L., & Page, S. (2001). Problem solving by heterogeneous agents. Journal of Economic Theory,
97, 123-163.

Hong, L., & Page, S. (2004). Groups of diverse problem solvers can outperform groups of high-ability
problem solvers. PNAS, 101, 16385-16389.

Hunt, J., & Gauthier-Loiselle, M. (2010). How much does immigration boost innovation. American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2, 31-56.

Fogel, R.W. (2004). Health, nutrition, and economic growth. Economic Development and Cultural
Change, 52(3), 643-658.

                                                                                                          16
Gelman, A. (2013). Ethics and statistics: They'd rather be rigorous than right. Chance 26(2), 45-49.

Kaufman, S.B., Quilty, L.C., Grazioplene, R.G., Hirsh, J.B., Gray, J.R., Peterson, J.B., & DeYoung, C.G.
(2016). Openness to experience and intellect differentially predict creative achievement in the arts
and sciences. Journal of Personality, 84(2), 248-258.

Kemeny, T. (2017). Immigrant diversity and economic performance in cities. International Regional
Science Review, 40(2), 164-208.

Lazear, E. (1999). Globalization and the market for teammates. The Economic Journal, 109, 15-40.

King, L., Walker, L., & Broyles, S. (1996). Creativity and the five factor model. Journal of Research in
Personality, 30, 189-203.

McCrae, R., & John, O. (1992). An introduction to the five-factor model and its applications. Journal
of Personality, 60(2), 175-215.

McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T., Jr. (1996). Toward a new generation of personality theories:
Theoretical contexts for the five-factor model. In J. S. Wiggins (Ed.), The five-factor model of
personality: Theoretical perspectives (pp. 51–87). New York: Guilford Press.

McCrae, R. R., Costa, P. T., Ostendorf, F., Angleitner, A., Hrebickova, M., Avia, M. D., et al. (2000).
Nature over nurture: Temperament, personality, and life span development. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 78, 173–186.

Nunn, N., & Puga, D. (2012). Ruggedness: The blessing of bad geography in Africa. The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 94(1), 20-36.

Ottaviano, G., and Peri, G. (2006). The economic value of cultural diversity: Evidence from US cities.
Journal of Economic Geography, 6, 9.

Parrotta, P., Pozzoli, D., & Pytlikova, M. (2014). The nexus between labor diversity and firm’s
innovation. Journal of Population Economics, 27, 303-364.

Peri, G. (2012). The effect of immigration on productivity: Evidence from US states. The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 94, 348-358.

Peri, G., & Sparber, C. (2009). Task specialization, immigration, and wages. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 1, 135-169.

Pickering, A.D., Smillie, L.D., & DeYoung, C.G. (2016). Neurotic individuals are not creative thinkers.
Trends in Cognitive Science, 20(1), 1-2.

Preston, S.H. (1975). The changing relation between mortality and level of economic development.
Population Studies, 29(2), 231-248.

Ruggles, S., Genadek, K., Goeken, R., Grover, J., & Sobek, M. (2015). Integrated Public Use Microdata
Series: Version 6.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
http://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V6.0.




                                                                                                       17
Siegel, P.M. (1971). Prestige in the American occupational structure. University of Chicago (doctoral
dissertation).

Spolaore, E., & Wacziarg, R. (2009). The diffusion of development. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
124(2), 469-529.

Spolaore, E., & Wacziarg, R. (2013). How deep are the roots of economic development? Journal of
Economic Literature, 51(2), 325-369.Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., & Robinson, J. (2001). The colonial
origins of comparative development: An empirical investigation. American Economic Review, 91(5),
1369-1401.

Srivastava, S., John, O., Gosling, S., & Potter, J. (2003). Development of personality in early and
middle adulthood: Set like plaster or persistent change? Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 84(5), 1041-1053.

Stevenson, B., & Wolfers, J. (2008). Economic growth and subjective well-being: Reassessing the
Easterlin Paradox. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring.

Stevenson, B., & Wolfers, J. (2013). Subjective well-being and income: Is there any evidence of
satiation? American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 101(3), 598-604.




                                                                                                      18
Variable Appendix
Regressors of Interest
High School Genetic Diversity: An expected heterozygosity score calculated from high school gene
frequencies. Beginning in 2007, the Wisconsin Longitudinal Survey began collecting data on 96 single
nucleotide polymorphisms. These data were collected for roughly half of the original WLS respondents
and selected siblings (~7,000). In constructing our high school level genetic diversity score, we first
tabulate the high school frequency of each SNP variant using all available genetic data (graduates and
siblings). These high school specific gene frequencies are then used to calculate expected
heterozygosity as specified in Ashraf and Galor (2013). This gives us a high school specific measure of
genetic diversity.

County Genetic Diversity: This measure is for 1920 and comes from Ager and Brueckner (2016). It is
found by matching the ancestry of European immigrants to the estimated genetic diversity score for
1500 CE from Ashraf and Galor (2013).



Outcomes
Years of Schooling: The number of completed years of education for the WLS graduate. From the WLS
variable rb003red.

Duncan Job Prestige: A measure of job prestige for the WLS graduate’s first job based on rankings by
Duncan (1961). From the WLS variable ocsx1u2.

Siegel Job Prestige: A measure of job prestige for the WLS graduate’s first job based on rankings by
Siegel (1971). From the WLS variable ocpx1u2.

Occupational Education Score: A measure of job prestige for the WLS graduate’s first job that is based
on percentage of people in an occupation that completed one year of college. From the WLS variable
ocex1.

Family Income, 1974: Total earnings for WLS graduate’s family during 1974. From the WLS variable
yfam74.

Family Income, 1992: Total earnings for the WLS graduate’s family during 1992. From the WLS variable
rp044hef.

Openness to Experience: An additive score from a series of questions intended to measure the WLS
graduate’s personality trait of openness. We use the average from two waves of the WLS—1992 and
2004. From the WLS variables mh032rei and ih032rei.

Extraversion: An additive score from a series of questions intended to measure the WLS graduate’s
personality trait of extraversion. We use the average from two waves of the WLS—1992 and 2004.
From the WLS variables mh001rei and ih001rei.

Conscientiousness: An additive score from a series of questions intended to measure the WLS
graduate’s personality trait of conscientiousness. We use the average from two waves of the WLS—
1992 and 2004. From the WLS variables mh017rei and ih017rei.


                                                                                                       19
Agreeableness: An additive score from a series of questions intended to measure the WLS graduate’s
personality trait of agreeableness. We use the average from two waves of the WLS—1992 and 2004.
From the WLS variables mh009rei and ih009rei.

Neuroticism: An additive score from a series of questions intended to measure the WLS graduate’s
personality trait of neuroticism. We use the average from two waves of the WLS—1992 and 2004.
From the WLS variables mh025rei and ih025rei.

High School Occupational Diversity: Using data on detailed occupation code, we construct high school
frequency of each occupation. This high school occupational frequency is then used to calculate the
high school’s occupational diversity in an identical manner as genetic diversity (both being roughly
identical to a Hirfendahl Index). From the WLS variable ocx1u.



Controls
Individual

IQ: WLS graduate’s IQ score mapped from raw Henmon-Nelson test score. For the high school level
sample of Tables 8 and 9, the high school mean is used. From WLS variable gwiiq_bm.

Female: An indicator for the WLS graduate’s sex. For the high school level sample of Tables 8 and 9, the
high school mean is used. From WLS variable sexrsp.

Birth Year: The WLS graduate’s year of birth. For the high school level sample of Tables 8 and 9, the
high school mean is used. From WLS variable brdxdy.

High School Size: The size of the WLS graduate’s graduating class. From WLS variable hssize.

Family

SES, 1957: Index comprised of the WLS graduate’s father’s years of schooling, mother’s years of
schooling, father’s Duncan job prestige, and parental income in 1957, the year of the initial wave of the
WLS. For the high school level sample of Tables 8 and 9, the high school mean is used. From WLS
variable ses57.

Father’s Years of Schooling: WLS graduate’s father’s years of schooling. For the high school level sample
of Tables 8 and 9, the high school mean is used. From WLS variable bmfaedu.

Mother’s Years of Schooling: WLS graduate’s mother’s years of schooling. For the high school level
sample of Tables 8 and 9, the high school mean is used. From WLS variable bmmaedu.

Historic

All historic controls are found by matching the WLS graduate’s father’s ancestry to country-level data in
Ashraf and Galor (2013). These data are then averaged at the high school level. The set of country-level
variables includes absolute latitude, the fraction of arable land, the mean temperature, mean
precipitation, mean elevation, an index of roughness, the mean distance to the coast or navigable river,
and the fraction of land within 100km of the coast or a navigable river. All variables and prior sources
are found in Ashraf and Galor (2013).


                                                                                                        20
Robust

Indicator for Father’s Nationality: The WLS graduate’s reported father’s ancestral nationality. For the
high school level sample of Table 9, the high school fraction of each reported ancestry is used. From the
WLS variable natfth.

Ethnic Fractionalization: An ethnic fractionalization score derived from the high school frequency of
father’s nationality. Calculated in identical manner as high school genetic diversity and high school
occupational diversity. From the WLS variable natfth.

Genetic Markers: An additive score (e.g., 0,1, or 2) of the variant for each SNP in the WLS. These data
are for roughly 4,500 WLS graduates. To prevent a loss in sample size, missing graduates are assigned
the mean for each SNP; an individual-level indicator for those with missing genetic data is also included.
For the high school level sample of Table 9, the high school frequency is used.

Principal Component of Genetic Markers: The first principal component of all SNPs used to calculate
high school genetic diversity.

Industry Diversity: A measure of diversity based on the WLS graduate’s industry associated with their
first job. Graduates are assigned to one of twelve industry classifications. The fraction of the high
school within each industry is then used to calculate a measure of diversity. From WLS variable inmx1u.




                                                                                                        21
                                             Table 1. Summary Statistics

           Variable                                        N      Mean      Std. Deviation     Max       Min
           Genetic Diversity
            Individual Sample                             8675    0.3296        0.0129        0.2687    0.3519
            High School Sample                             338    0.3209        0.0162        0.2687    0.3519
            County Sample                                  70     7.8970        0.8204        6.2801    11.43
            (from Ager and Brueckner 2016)

           Baseline Controls
            IQ                                            8675    101.07        14.80           61        145
            Female Indicator                              8675     0.53          0.50            0         1
            Birth Year                                    8675   1938.85         0.52          1930      1941
            High School Class Size                        8675    180.00        133.31          11        482
            Family SES Index, 1957                        8675    16.40         10.94            1         97
            Mother’s Years of Schooling                   8675     10.47         2.79            0         21
            Father’s Years of Schooling                   8675      9.78         3.40            0         26
            Madison/Milwaukee Indicator                   8675     0.18          0.38            0         1
            Historic School-Level Controls
               Absolute Latitude                          8675    52.20          1.82            41        61
               Frac. Arable                               8675    28.98          5.07           5.56     43.36
               Avg. Temperature                           8675     7.70          1.08          2.12      13.08
               Roughness Index                            8675     0.11          0.02          0.02       0.24
               Land within 100 km of coast or river       8675     0.86          0.07          0.46        1
               Avg. Dist. to Coast or River               8675     0.09          0.07           0.03      0.46
               Avg. Elevation                             8675     0.27          0.05          0.05       0.62
               Precipitation                              8675    69.97          5.99          54.27     91.66

           Dependent Variables
            Years of Schooling                            7703     13.65          2.27          12        21
            Duncan Occupation Prestige                    8098    436.97        231.32          20       960
            Siegel Occupation Prestige                    8098    405.55        143.13         141       812
            Occupational Education                        8098    321.44        294.85           8       995
            Family Income, 1974 (in $1,000s)              8270     20.62         17.15           0      501.79
            Family Income, 1992 (in $1,000s)              7444    73.852        178.96           0     9999.99
            Openness to Experience                        7148     21.60         4.47            6        36
            Conscientiousness                             7170    28.96          3.92           13        36
            Extraversion                                  7159     22.86         5.02            6        36
            Agreeableness                                 7167     28.60         4.11          7.5        36
            Neurotocism                                   7156     15.61          4.51           5        30
            Job Diversity                                  338      0.91          0.05         0.61      0.98

Summary & Notes: This table provides summary statistics for all variables used within the empirical analysis. Variable
descriptions and sources can be found in the Variable Appendix.




                                                            22
                                     Table 2. Genetic Diversity’s Effect on Education

                                               Dependent Variable: Years of Schooling
                                          (1)            (2)               (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
                                                ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗               ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
              Genetic Diversity        17.6377        16.1662         13.5578          10.1605        14.8302        11.5417∗∗∗
                                        (3.9636)       (3.4429)        (3.3630)         (2.6310)       (3.3960)       (2.7988)

              County Fixed Effects         N              Y                 Y              Y              Y              Y
              Individual                   N              N                 Y              N              N              Y
              Family                       N              N                 N              Y              N              Y
              Historic                     N              N                 N              N              Y              Y
              Observations               7703           7703               7703          7703           7703           7703
              R Sqr.                    0.0100         0.0063             0.2242        0.1574         0.0213         0.3009

Summary & Notes: Our primary hypothesis is that attending more genetically diverse high school is positively associated
with later-life socioeconomic outcomes. To test this hypothesis, Table 2 regresses an individual’s years of schooling on the
genetic diversity score of their 1957 Wisconsin high school. Individual controls include IQ, sex, birth year, high school size, and
an indicator for being in either Madison or Milwaukee–the two major urban areas of Wisconsin. Family controls include an
index of socioeconomic status in 1957, father’s years of schooling, and mother’s years of schooling. Historic controls include
ancestral high school averages of absolute latitude, fraction of arable land, mean temperature, mean precipitation, mean
elevation, roughness index, mean distance to the coast or navigable river, and the fraction of land within 100km of the coast or
navigable river. County fixed effects are included in columns (2)-(6). Standard errors are clustered by county. Statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is respectively denoted by *, **, and ***.




                                                                     23
                                  Table 3. Genetic Diversity’s Effect on Job Prestige

                                 Dependent Variable: Std. Occupational Prestige for First Job
                                             (1)            (2)                 (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                                                                  Panel A. Duncan Prestige Score
                 Genetic Diversity        7.9318∗∗∗      5.5102∗∗∗           3.9997∗∗∗   3.4324∗∗∗   5.1104∗∗∗   3.1425∗∗∗
                                           (1.8473)       (1.2145)            (1.3087)    (1.0005)    (1.1239)    (1.0637)

                 County Fixed Effects         N             Y                   Y           Y           Y           Y
                 Individual                   N             N                   Y           N           N           Y
                 Family                       N             N                   N           Y           N           Y
                 Historic                     N             N                   N           N           Y           Y

                 Observations               8098           8098                8098        8098        8098        8098
                 R Sqr.                    0.0107         0.0039              0.1563      0.0894      0.0128      0.1992
                                                                   Panel B. Seigel Prestige Score
                                                   ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
                 Genetic Diversity        6.4212         4.6992              3.4590∗∗∗   2.5498∗∗∗   4.4322∗∗∗   2.7275∗∗∗
                                           (1.5691)       (1.1137)            (1.1675)    (0.8357)    (1.0172)    (0.9753)

                 County Fixed Effects         N             Y                   Y           Y           Y           Y
                 Individual                   N             N                   Y           N           N           Y
                 Family                       N             N                   N           Y           N           Y
                 Historic                     N             N                   N           N           Y           Y

                 Observations               8098           8098                8098        8098        8098        8098
                 R Sqr.                    0.0069         0.0028              0.1483      0.0949      0.0115      0.1939
                                                                Panel C. Occupational Education
                 Genetic Diversity        5.9120∗∗∗      5.5408∗∗∗           4.7123∗∗∗   3.0573∗∗∗   5.1307∗∗∗   3.7882∗∗∗
                                           (1.4148)       (1.1059)            (1.1426)    (0.8063)    (0.9968)    (0.9102)

                 County Fixed Effects         N             Y                   Y           Y           Y           Y
                 Individual                   N             N                   Y           N           N           Y
                 Family                       N             N                   N           Y           N           Y
                 Historic                     N             N                   N           N           Y           Y

                 Observations               8098           8098                8098        8098        8098        8098
                 R Sqr.                    0.0058         0.0038              0.1561      0.1235      0.0160      0.2196

Summary & Notes: Exposure to diverse individuals is hypothesized to increase creativity and aptitude associated with a
more prestigious occupation. As a test of this, Table 3 regresses an individual’s job prestige on the genetic diversity score of
their 1957 Wisconsin high school. Panel A considers the measure of prestige from Duncan (1961); Panel B considers a similar
measure from Siegel (1971); and Panel C considers the fraction with one or more years of college for a given occupation.
Individual controls include IQ, sex, birth year, high school size, and an indicator for being in either Madison or Milwaukee–the
two major urban areas of Wisconsin Family controls include an index of socioeconomic status in 1957, father’s years of
schooling, and mother’s years of schooling. Historic controls include ancestral high school averages of absolute latitude, fraction
of arable land, mean temperature, mean precipitation, mean elevation, roughness index, mean distance to the coast or navigable
river, and the fraction of land within 100km of the coast or navigable river. County fixed effects are included in columns (2)-(6).
Standard errors are clustered by county. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is respectively denoted by *, **,
and ***.




                                                                        24
                                     Table 4. Genetic Diversity’s Effect on Income

                             Dependent Variable: Natural Log of Family Income in Specified Wave
                                              (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)
                                                                         Panel A. 1974
                                                    ∗∗           ∗∗
                   Genetic Diversity        2.6595       2.8973        2.4163∗    2.1835∗    2.7556∗∗   2.0548∗
                                            (1.1152)     (1.2847)      (1.2266)   (1.2301)   (1.2411)   (1.1843)

                   County Fixed Effects        N            Y             Y          Y          Y          Y
                   Individual                  N            N             Y          N          N          Y
                   Family                      N            N             N          Y          N          Y
                   Historic                    N            N             N          N          Y          Y

                   Observations               8270        8270          8270       8270       8270        8270
                   R Sqr.                    0.0013      0.0011        0.0179     0.0116     0.0018      0.0241
                                                                          Panel B. 1992
                   Genetic Diversity        6.3307∗∗     5.7768∗∗      6.7742∗∗   4.5701∗    6.0929∗∗   6.7962∗∗∗
                                            (2.4720)     (2.8556)      (2.5819)   (2.7092)   (2.8879)    (2.5535)

                   County Fixed Effects        N            Y             Y          Y          Y          Y
                   Individual                  N            N             Y          N          N          Y
                   Family                      N            N             N          Y          N          Y
                   Historic                    N            N             N          N          Y          Y

                   Observations               7443        7443          7443       7443       7443        7443
                   R Sqr.                    0.0009      0.0005        0.0509     0.0057     0.0015      0.0520

Summary & Notes: Table 3 examines the relationship between an individual’s family income in two waves of the WLS on the
genetic diversity score of their 1957 Wisconsin high school. Panel A considers the natural log of family income in the 1974 wave
of the WLS, while Panel B considers an equivalent measure for the 1992 wave. Individual controls include IQ, sex, birth year,
high school size, and an indicator for being in either Madison or Milwaukee–the two major urban areas of Wisconsin. Family
controls include an index of socioeconomic status in 1957, father’s years of schooling, and mother’s years of schooling. Historic
controls include ancestral high school averages of absolute latitude, fraction of arable land, mean temperature, mean
precipitation, mean elevation, roughness index, mean distance to the coast or navigable river, and the fraction of land within
100km of the coast or navigable river. County fixed effects are included in columns (2)-(6). Standard errors are clustered by
county. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is respectively denoted by *, **, and ***.




                                                                  25
                                   Table 5. Genetic Diversity’s Effect on Personality

                                   Dependent Variable: Index of Specified Personality Trait
                                           (1)            (2)                 (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
                                                                Panel A. Openness to Experience
                                                 ∗∗∗
               Genetic Diversity       26.4792         19.0542∗∗∗          10.5875∗    12.4703∗∗∗   18.4017∗∗∗   8.5416∗
                                        (5.6082)        (4.5326)           (5.5806)     (3.9486)     (4.3346)    (5.0169)
               County Fixed Effects        N               Y                  Y            Y            Y           Y
               Individual                  N               N                  Y            N            N           Y
               Family                      N               N                  N            Y            N           Y
               Historic                    N               N                  N            N            Y           Y

               Observations               7148           7148                7148        7148         7148         7148
               R Sqr.                    0.0058         0.0022              0.0768      0.0510       0.0060       0.1005
                                                                       Panel B. Extraversion
                                                  ∗∗             ∗∗
               Genetic Diversity        13.8282        14.2696             13.5955∗∗   10.9299∗     12.3704∗     11.0301∗
                                         (5.8665)       (6.5161)            (6.5688)   (6.3029)     (6.3031)     (6.3743)
               County Fixed Effects        N               Y                  Y            Y            Y           Y
               Individual                  N               N                  Y            N            N           Y
               Family                      N               N                  N            Y            N           Y
               Historic                    N               N                  N            N            Y           Y

               Observations               7159           7159                7159        7159         7159         7159
               R Sqr.                    0.0013         0.0010              0.0041      0.0089       0.0030       0.0148
                                                        Panel C. p.c. of Openness and Extraversion
                                                 ∗∗∗
               Genetic Diversity        6.1735         5.0368∗∗∗           3.5951∗∗    3.5316∗∗∗    4.6726∗∗∗    2.9181∗∗
                                         (1.5232)       (1.4111)           (1.4869)     (1.2753)     (1.3502)    (1.3818)
               County Fixed Effects        N               Y                  Y            Y            Y           Y
               Individual                  N               N                  Y            N            N           Y
               Family                      N               N                  N            Y            N           Y
               Historic                    N               N                  N            N            Y           Y

               Observations               7145           7145                7145        7145         7145         7145
               R Sqr.                    0.0049         0.0024              0.0299      0.0384       0.0061       0.0539

Summary & Notes: As a test of the mechanisms behind genetic diversity’s beneficial role in later-life economic well-being,
Table 5 tests the relationship between high school genetic diversity and individual personality traits. Particular attention is
given to the traits of openness and extraversion, which have been routinely associated with individual creativity and divergent
thinking–two traits at the root of AG’s proposed beneficial effect of diversity. Panel A considers the index for openness to
experience; Panel B considers the index for extraversion; and Panel C considers the first principal component between openness
and extraversion: this shared variation attempts to more accurately measure divergent thinking. Individual controls include IQ,
sex, birth year, high school size, and an indicator for being in either Madison or Milwaukee–the two major urban areas of
Wisconsin. Family controls include an index of socioeconomic status in 1957, father’s years of schooling, and mother’s years of
schooling. Historic controls include ancestral high school averages of absolute latitude, fraction of arable land, mean
temperature, mean precipitation, mean elevation, roughness index, mean distance to the coast or navigable river, and the
fraction of land within 100km of the coast or navigable river. County fixed effects are included in columns (2)-(6). Standard
errors are clustered by county. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is respectively denoted by *, **, and ***.




                                                                      26
                                   Table 6. Genetic Diversity and Other Personality

                                   Dependent Variable: Index of Specified Personality Trait
                                               (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)
                                                                   Panel A. Conscientiousness
                    Genetic Diversity         -2.7853       -0.7780      -1.3895    -0.2638    0.1706     -0.4516
                                             (3.3642)      (4.0783)     (4.0154)   (4.0004)   (4.3224)   (4.1623)

                    County Fixed Effects        N             Y            Y          Y           Y         Y
                    Individual                  N             N            Y          N           N         Y
                    Family                      N             N            N          Y           N         Y
                    Historic                    N             N            N          N           Y         Y

                    Observations              7170          7170          7170      7170         7170     7170
                    R Sqr.                   0.0001        0.0000        0.0007    0.0003       0.0007   0.0018
                                                                    Panel B. Agreeableness
                                                      ∗
                    Genetic Diversity        -7.0674        -1.9628      -0.2853    -1.3920    -0.6895    0.2785
                                             (4.0366)      (4.4256)     (4.7672)   (4.6514)   (4.0611)   (4.6668)

                    County Fixed Effects        N             Y            Y          Y           Y         Y
                    Individual                  N             N            Y          N           N         Y
                    Family                      N             N            N          Y           N         Y
                    Historic                    N             N            N          N           Y         Y

                    Observations              7167          7167          7167      7167         7167     7167
                    R Sqr.                   0.0005        0.0000        0.0582    0.0018       0.0012   0.0596
                                                                      Panel C. Neurotocism
                                                     ∗∗∗
                    Genetic Diversity       -8.8302         -4.6416      -4.6592    -2.6619    -4.5488    -3.9698
                                             (3.1307)      (3.8957)     (3.8180)   (3.9730)   (3.9087)   (3.7616)

                    County Fixed Effects        N             Y            Y          Y           Y         Y
                    Individual                  N             N            Y          N           N         Y
                    Family                      N             N            N          Y           N         Y
                    Historic                    N             N            N          N           Y         Y

                    Observations              7156          7156          7156      7156         7156     7156
                    R Sqr.                   0.0006        0.0001        0.0351    0.0069       0.0009   0.0380

Summary & Notes: Additional personality indices are tested in Table 6. Individual controls include IQ, sex, birth year, high
school size, and an indicator for being in either Madison or Milwaukee–the two major urban areas of Wisconsin. Family controls
include an index of socioeconomic status in 1957, father’s years of schooling, and mother’s years of schooling. Historic controls
include ancestral high school averages of absolute latitude, fraction of arable land, mean temperature, mean precipitation, mean
elevation, roughness index, mean distance to the coast or navigable river, and the fraction of land within 100km of the coast or
navigable river. County fixed effects are included in columns (2)-(6). Standard errors are clustered by county. Statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is respectively denoted by *, **, and ***.




                                                                   27
                                  Table 7. Genetic Diversity’s Effect on Task Diversity

                                           Dependent Variable: Occupational Diversity
                                                (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
                                                      ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
              Genetic Diversity              2.0941         1.9191         1.3092         1.7368         1.9272         1.2584∗∗∗
                                              (0.1857)       (0.1627)       (0.1555)       (0.1589)       (0.1590)       (0.1383)

              County Fixed Effects              N              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y
              Individual/School Controls        N              N              Y              N              N              Y
              Family Controls                   N              N              N              Y              N              Y
              Historic Controls                 N              N              N              N              Y              Y
              Observations Observations        338             338            338            338            338           338
              R Sqr.                          0.4051         0.3591         0.4989         0.4130         0.3869         0.5498

Summary & Notes: As a second test of the mechanisms behind genetic diversity’s beneficial role in later-life economic
well-being, Table 7 tests the relationship between high school genetic diversity and a measure for high school job diversity. This
test follows the framework originally proposed by Depetris-Chauvin and Özak (2015). Individual/School controls include mean
high school IQ, mean birth year, fraction of female students, high school size class size, and an indicator for being in either
Madison or Milwaukee–the two major urban areas of Wisconsin. Family controls include the high school mean of socioeconomic
status in 1957, father’s years of schooling, and mother’s years of schooling. Historic controls include ancestral high school
averages of absolute latitude, fraction of arable land, mean temperature, mean precipitation, mean elevation, roughness index,
mean distance to the coast or navigable river, and the fraction of land within 100km of the coast or navigable river. County
fixed effects are included in columns (2)-(6). Standard errors are clustered by county. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% levels is respectively denoted by *, **, and ***.




                                                                     28
                                     Table 8A. Robustness: Education and Job Prestige
                                (1)            (2)            (3)                 (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)
                                                                           Panel A. Years of Schooling
                                      ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
   Genetic Diversity         11.5417        11.5586        11.5577             11.5586∗∗∗   11.1691∗∗∗    11.5171∗∗∗   11.2629∗∗∗   11.5367∗∗∗
                              (2.7988)       (2.8043)       (2.7619)            (2.8043)     (2.8936)      (2.7963)     (2.8807)     (2.8027)
   Observations                 7703           7703           7703                7703         7703          7703         7703         7703
   R Sqr.                      0.3009         0.3078         0.3009              0.3078       0.3193        0.3009       0.3260       0.3078
                                                                          Panel B. Std. Duncan Prestige
                                      ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
   Genetic Diversity         3.1425         3.0723         2.9601              3.0723∗∗∗    2.8276∗∗∗     3.1685∗∗∗     2.7542∗∗    3.0975∗∗∗
                              (1.0637)       (1.0535)       (1.0660)            (1.0535)     (1.0415)      (1.0577)     (1.0417)     (1.0482)
   Observations                 8098           8098           8098                8098         8098          8098         8098         8098
   R Sqr.                      0.1992         0.2049         0.1994              0.2049       0.2180        0.1993       0.2240       0.2050
                                                                          Panel C. Std. Siegel Prestige
   Genetic Diversity         2.7275∗∗∗      2.6516∗∗∗      2.5827∗∗∗           2.6516∗∗∗    2.5043∗∗∗     2.7749∗∗∗     2.4292∗∗    2.6975∗∗∗
                              (0.9753)       (0.9855)       (0.9677)            (0.9855)     (0.9016)      (0.9713)     (0.9172)     (0.9821)
   Observations                 8098           8098           8098                8098         8098          8098         8098         8098
   R Sqr.                      0.1939         0.1987         0.1940              0.1987       0.2156        0.1942       0.2206       0.1991
                                                                Panel D. Std. Occupational Education
   Genetic Diversity         3.7882∗∗∗      3.8964∗∗∗      3.7996∗∗∗           3.8964∗∗∗    3.5684∗∗∗     3.7991∗∗∗    3.6615∗∗∗    3.9087∗∗∗
                              (0.9102)       (0.9095)       (0.8991)            (0.9095)     (0.8908)      (0.9117)     (0.8941)     (0.9107)
   Observations                 8098           8098           8098                8098         8098          8098         8098         8098
   R Sqr.                      0.2196         0.2252         0.2196              0.2252       0.2406        0.2196       0.2463       0.2252

   County FE                     Y              Y              Y                   Y            Y             Y            Y            Y
   Baseline Controls             Y              Y              Y                   Y            Y             Y            Y            Y
   Ind. for Father’s Nat.        N              Y              N                   Y            N             N            Y            Y
   Ethnic Frac.                  N              N              Y                   Y            N             N            Y            Y
   Genetic Markers               N              N              N                   N            Y             N            Y            N
   P.C. of Genetic Markers       N              N              N                   N            N             Y            N            Y

Summary & Notes: Table 8 examines the robustness of the previously estimated effect of genetic diversity. Column (1)
replicates the baseline estimation (col. (6) in above tables). Columns (2)-(4) introduce controls to account for potential
broad-based ethnic differences. These include controlling for an indicator of ancestral background (col. 2) and the level of high
school fractionalization from this indicator (col. 3). Columns (5) and (6) attempt to account for gene-specific effects by
controlling for each individual’s genetic markers that are used to construct the diversity scores (col. 5) and the shared variation
of these markers (col. 6). Individual controls include IQ, sex, birth year, high school size, and an indicator for being in either
Madison or Milwaukee–the two major urban areas of Wisconsin. Family controls include an index of socioeconomic status in
1957, father’s years of schooling, and mother’s years of schooling. Historic controls include ancestral high school averages of
absolute latitude, fraction of arable land, mean temperature, mean precipitation, mean elevation, roughness index, mean
distance to the coast or navigable river, and the fraction of land within 100km of the coast or navigable river. County fixed
effects are included in columns (2)-(6). Standard errors are clustered by county. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels is respectively denoted by *, **, and ***.




                                                                          29
                                     Table 8B. Robustness: Income and Personality
                                      (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)        (5)          (6)        (7)        (8)
                                                                   Panel A. ln Family Income, 1974
                                            ∗
         Genetic Diversity          2.0548         1.9758      1.9145∗        1.9758     1.9618     2.0592∗      1.8676     1.9795
                                    (1.1843)      (1.1930)     (1.1452)      (1.1930)   (1.1922)    (1.1808)    (1.1961)   (1.1900)
         Observations                 8270          8270         8270          8270       8270        8270        8270       8270
         R Sqr.                      0.0241        0.0322       0.0242        0.0322     0.0424      0.0241      0.0509     0.0322
                                                                   Panel B. ln Family Income, 1992
                                            ∗∗∗           ∗∗
         Genetic Diversity         6.7962         6.5392       6.3451∗∗      6.5392∗∗   5.4366∗∗    6.7986∗∗∗   5.2202∗∗   6.5484∗∗
                                    (2.5535)      (2.6311)     (2.6522)      (2.6311)   (2.4801)     (2.5519)   (2.5320)   (2.6302)
         Observations                 7443          7443         7443          7443       7443         7443       7443       7443
         R Sqr.                      0.0520        0.0577       0.0521        0.0577     0.0803       0.0520     0.0861     0.0577
                                                                   Panel C. Openness to Experience
                                            ∗
         Genetic Diversity          8.5416         8.4021       8.0581        8.4021     6.2780     8.5077∗      6.0689     8.3899
                                    (5.0169)      (5.1642)     (5.1855)      (5.1642)   (4.9560)    (4.9823)    (5.1781)   (5.1384)
         Observations                 7148          7148         7148          7148       7148        7148        7148       7148
         R Sqr.                      0.1005        0.1082       0.1005        0.1082     0.1255      0.1005      0.1328     0.1082
                                                                            Panel D. Extraversion
                                             ∗             ∗
         Genetic Diversity          11.0301       11.0514      10.8324       11.0514∗    8.0204     11.0399∗     7.7389    11.0566∗
                                    (6.3743)      (6.6075)     (6.6593)      (6.6075)   (6.3758)    (6.3937)    (6.5713)   (6.6266)
         Observations                 7159          7159         7159          7159       7159        7159        7159       7159
         R Sqr.                      0.0148        0.0211       0.0148        0.0211     0.0398      0.0148      0.0466     0.0211
                                                           Panel E. Principal Component of Open. and Ext.
                                            ∗∗            ∗∗
         Genetic Diversity          2.9181        2.8995       2.8164∗       2.8995∗∗    2.1406     2.9141∗∗     2.0667    2.8984∗∗
                                    (1.3818)      (1.4362)     (1.4482)      (1.4362)   (1.3720)    (1.3800)    (1.4373)   (1.4356)
         Observations                 7145          7145         7145          7145       7145        7145        7145       7145
         R Sqr.                      0.0539        0.0613       0.0540        0.0613     0.0787      0.0539      0.0858     0.0613

         County FE                     Y             Y            Y             Y          Y           Y           Y          Y
         Baseline Controls             Y             Y            Y             Y          Y           Y           Y          Y
         Ind. for Father’s Nat.        N             Y            N             Y          N           N           Y          Y
         Ethnic Frac.                  N             N            Y             Y          N           N           Y          Y
         Genetic Markers               N             N            N             N          Y           N           Y          N
         P.C. of Genetic Markers       N             N            N             N          N           Y           N          Y

Summary & Notes: Table 8 examines the robustness of the previously estimated effect of genetic diversity. Column (1)
replicates the baseline estimation (col. (6) in above tables). Columns (2)-(4) introduce controls to account for potential
broad-based ethnic differences. These include controlling for an indicator of ancestral background (col. 2) and the level of high
school fractionalization from this indicator (col. 3). Columns (5) and (6) attempt to account for gene-specific effects by
controlling for each individual’s genetic markers that are used to construct the diversity scores (col. 5) and the shared variation
of these markers (col. 6). Individual controls include IQ, sex, birth year, high school size, and an indicator for being in either
Madison or Milwaukee–the two major urban areas of Wisconsin. Family controls include an index of socioeconomic status in
1957, father’s years of schooling, and mother’s years of schooling. Historic controls include ancestral high school averages of
absolute latitude, fraction of arable land, mean temperature, mean precipitation, mean elevation, roughness index, mean
distance to the coast or navigable river, and the fraction of land within 100km of the coast or navigable river. County fixed
effects are included in columns (2)-(6). Standard errors are clustered by county. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels is respectively denoted by *, **, and ***.




                                                                       30
                             Table 9. Genetic Diversity and Task Diversity: Robustness

                                           Dependent Variable: Occupational Diversity
                                                               (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
                                                                     ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
                       Genetic Diversity                    1.0895         2.5456         1.2124         2.3535∗∗∗
                                                             (0.1423)       (0.2289)       (0.1441)       (0.2614)

                       County Fixed Effects                    Y              Y              Y              Y
                       Base Controls                           Y              Y              Y              Y
                       Indicator for Father’s Nationality      Y              N              N              Y
                       Ethnic Fractionalization                Y              N              N              Y
                       Gene Frequencies                        N              Y              N              Y
                       Industry Diversity                      N              N              Y              Y
                       Observations                           338            338            338             338
                       R Sqr.                                0.6705         0.8138         0.5771         0.8744

Summary & Notes: Table 9 mirrors the robustness excercises of Table 8 except that the unit of observation is the high
school. Individual/School controls include mean high school IQ, mean birth year, fraction of female students, high school size
class size, and an indicator for being in either Madison or Milwaukee–the two major urban areas of Wisconsin. Family controls
include the high school mean of socioeconomic status in 1957, father’s years of schooling, and mother’s years of schooling.
Historic controls include ancestral high school averages of absolute latitude, fraction of arable land, mean temperature, mean
precipitation, mean elevation, roughness index, mean distance to the coast or navigable river, and the fraction of land within
100km of the coast or navigable river. County fixed effects are included in columns (2)-(6). Standard errors are clustered by
county. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is respectively denoted by *, **, and ***.




                                                               31
                                                         Table 10. County Replication with WLS Parents

                                         Dependent Variable:              SES           Father’s      Father’s    Mother’s       Father’s
                                                                          1957        Job Prestige     YOS         YOS         Job Diversity
                                                                           (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)
                                                                                               Panel A. Base Analysis
                                  County Genetic Diversity             1.7279∗∗∗        0.1591∗∗∗    0.3196∗∗∗    0.0947∗∗∗     0.0536∗∗∗
                                                                        (0.1473)         (0.0083)     (0.0322)     (0.0255)      (0.0123)
                                                                        [0.1776]         [0.0112]     [0.0524]     [0.0357]      [0.0170]
                                  Observations                            8690             7682         8690         8690           70
                                  R Sqr.                                 0.0501           0.0550       0.0170       0.0022        0.1490
                                                                                 Panel B. Excluding Dane and Milwaukee Counties
                                  County Genetic Diversity             1.7603∗∗∗        0.1763∗∗∗     0.2995∗∗      0.0539      0.0593∗∗∗
                                                                        (0.4465)         (0.0287)     (0.1185)     (0.1108)      (0.0158)
                                                                        [0.4454]         [0.0256]     [0.1417]     [0.0989]      [0.0240]
                                  Observations                            6539             5745         6539         6539           68
                                  R Sqr.                                 0.0118           0.0156       0.0034       0.0002        0.1303
                                                                                    Panel C. Excluding High Immigration Counties
                                                                              ∗∗∗
                                  County Genetic Diversity             1.8099           0.1658∗∗∗    0.3450∗∗∗    0.1202∗∗∗     0.0630∗∗∗




32
                                                                        (0.1039)         (0.0073)     (0.0271)     (0.0240)      (0.0145)
                                                                        [0.1160]         [0.0070]     [0.0366]     [0.0272]      [0.0127]
                                  Observations                            7499             6613         7499         7499           57
                                  R Sqr.                                 0.0574           0.0646       0.0217       0.0039        0.1942
                                                                                    Panel D. Controlling for County Immigration
                                                                              ∗∗∗
                                  County Genetic Diversity             2.2254           0.1913∗∗∗    0.4485∗∗∗    0.2002∗∗∗     0.0633∗∗∗
                                                                        (0.1517)         (0.0079)     (0.0479)     (0.0362)      (0.0125)
                                                                        (0.1308]         (0.0070]     (0.0385]     (0.0320]      (0.0134]

                                  County Frac. of Immigrants, 1940     53.2400∗∗∗       3.4317∗∗∗    13.7871∗∗∗   11.2915∗∗∗    1.3191∗∗∗
                                                                       (12.0030)         (0.5843)     (4.1823)     (3.2300)      (0.3578)
                                                                        [6.7648]         [0.3880]     [1.7530]     [1.8271]      [0.2699]
                                  Observations                            8690             7682         8690         8690           70
                                  R Sqr.                                 0.0612           0.0625       0.0262       0.0114        0.2205

     Summary & Notes: Table 10 explores the relationship between 1920 county-level genetic diversity (from Ager and Brueckner) and outcomes for the WLS
     graduate’s parents, who were of high school age in 1920. This analysis is seen as an independent replication for a sample individuals that were not selected by
     educational status. Panel A estimates the simple relationship; Panel B drops the two large urban areas of Wisconsin; Panel C restricts the sample by immigration;
     and Panel D controls for county immigration. County-level immigration fractions come the full 1940 census and measures the fraction of individuals who reported
     living in a different county in the last 5 years. Standard errors clustered by county are given in paranthesis; spatially adjusted standard errors (100km) are given
     in brackets. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels is respectively denoted by *, **, and ***.
33
                                (a) Ager and Brueckner, 1920                                                    (b) WLS, 1957

                                                  Figure 1. Two Measures of Genetic Diversity in Wisconsin
     Summary & Notes: This figure plots two independent measures of county-level genetic diversity. The correlation coefficient between the two measures is 0.33
     (p<0.01).
                                                   13.6 14.2
                                                        14   13.8
                                                Years of Schooling




34
                                                        13.4
                                                        13.2
                                                                       .3        .31          .32           .33        .34   .35
                                                                                       High School Genetic Diversity


                                                                     Figure 2. Years of Schooling and Genetic Diversity

     Summary & Notes: This figure plots the within county relationship between years of schooling and high school genetic diversity for 20 equally sized bins.
                      .2
                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                                                                                                                .2




                                .1
                                                                                                             .1
                                                                                                                                                                                            .1




                    0
                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                        Std. Siegel Prestige




           Std. Duncan Prestige
                      -.1
                                                                                                   -.1
                                                                                                                                                                   -.1
                                                                                                                                                                   Std. Occupational Education




35
                      -.2
                                                                                                   -.2
                                                                                                                                                                                -.2




                                     .3   .31          .32           .33          .34                      .35    .3   .31          .32           .33        .34                          .35    .3   .31          .32           .33        .34   .35
                                                High School Genetic Diversity                                                High School Genetic Diversity                                                  High School Genetic Diversity


                                          (a) Duncan                                                                     (b) Siegel                                                                   (c) Occ. Edu.

                                                                                Figure 3. Occupational Prestige and Genetic Diversity

     Summary & Notes: This figure plots the within county relationship between occupational prestige for the WLS graduate’s first job and high school genetic
     diversity for 20 equally sized bins.
                                                                                                                       10.6




                         9.8
                                                                                                                                 10.4




                          9.7      9.75
                                                                                                                      10.2




               ln Family Income, 1974
                                                                                                            ln Family Income, 1992
                                                                                                          10




             9.65




36
                         9.6
                                          .3   .31            .32           .33        .34      .35                    9.8              .3   .31          .32           .33        .34   .35
                                                       High School Genetic Diversity                                                               High School Genetic Diversity


                                                     (a) ln Family Income, 1974                                                                (b) ln Family Income, 1992

                                                                                  Figure 4. Family Income and Genetic Diversity
     Summary & Notes: This figure plots the within county relationship between later-life family income and high school genetic diversity for 20 equally sized bins.
                       22.5
                                                                                                                   23.5




                               22
                                                                                                                           23
                                                                                                              Extraversion




              21.5
                                                                                                          22.5




             Openness to Experience




37
                       21
                                      .3   .31            .32           .33           .34      .35                 22           .3   .31          .32           .33        .34   .35
                                                   High School Genetic Diversity                                                           High School Genetic Diversity


                                                 (a) Openness to Experience                                                                   (b) Extraversion

                                                                                   Figure 5. Personality and Genetic Diversity
     Summary & Notes: This figure plots the within county relationship between personality and high school genetic diversity for 20 equally sized bins.
