NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES STRATEGIC ABILITY AFFECT EFFICIENCY? EVIDENCE FROM ELECTRICITY
MARKETS
Ali Hortaçsu
Fernando Luco
Steven L. Puller
Dongni Zhu
Working Paper 23526
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23526

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017, Revised March 2019

Hortaçsu, Luco and Puller gratefully acknowledge financial support from the NSF (SES 1426823
and SES 1628864). We thank Colin Camerer, Natalia Fabra, Dan Fragiadakis, Avi Goldfarb,
Karen Palmer, Ariel Pakes, Mar Reguant, Mo Xiao, four anonymous referees, and many seminar
participants for their helpful comments. Any errors are our own. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Ali Hortaçsu, Fernando Luco, Steven L. Puller, and Dongni Zhu. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Strategic Ability Affect Efficiency? Evidence from Electricity Markets
Ali Hortaçsu, Fernando Luco, Steven L. Puller, and Dongni Zhu
NBER Working Paper No. 23526
June 2017, Revised March 2019
JEL No. D03,D22,L1
ABSTRACT
Oligopoly models of price competition predict that strategic firms exercise market power and
generate inefficiencies. However, heterogeneity in firms’ strategic ability also generates
inefficiencies. We study the Texas electricity market where firms exhibit significant
heterogeneity in how they deviate from Nash equilibrium bidding. These deviations, in turn,
increase the cost of production. To explain this heterogeneity, we embed a Cognitive Hierarchy
model into a structural model of bidding and estimate firms’ strategic sophistication. We find that
firm size and manager education affect sophistication. Using the model, we show that mergers
that increase sophistication can increase efficiency despite increasing market concentration.

Ali Hortaçsu
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
hortacsu@uchicago.edu

Steven L. Puller
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
3046 Allen
College Station, TX 77843-4228
and NBER
puller@econmail.tamu.edu

Fernando Luco
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
3044 Allen
College Station, Texas 77845
fluco@tamu.edu

Dongni Zhu
School of Finance
Shanghai Lixin University of Accounting
and Finance
995 Shangchuan Road
Shanghai, China, 201209
dongnizhu@lixin.edu.cn

1

Introduction

Firms that compete against one another can be quite different. Even if they compete in the
same market, firms can vary across a number of dimensions – corporate structure, production
capacity, market experience, and general core competency. Moreover, the managers who
develop corporate strategy differ as well. For any particular market, a quick scan of resumes
of firm managers often reveals differences in the type of academic training, the years of job
tenure, and previous job experience. These differences could cause firms to adopt different
types of strategic behavior when they compete against one another.
However, the potential existence of heterogeneity in strategic behavior does not play a role
in typical models used to analyze strategic behavior in oligopoly. In many empirical studies,
firms are modeled as being fully strategic and playing some form of a Nash equilibrium. In
a strategic equilibrium, the assumption is that all firms are best responding to the beliefs
of their rivals and that firms’ beliefs are mutually consistent. Implicit in this modeling
approach, the differences across firms – whether it be in firm or manager characteristics –
do not cause firms to adopt different competitive strategies. These models are used to study
the nature of competition and the welfare consequences of alternative market structures. For
example, when studying differentiated product industries, firms are modeled as engaging in
Bertrand-Nash competition in order to predict prices if firms were to merge. When studying
auctions, researchers use a Bayesian Nash model of bidding to “invert” bids in order to
estimate valuations and to predict revenue and efficiency under alternative auction formats.
In this paper we ask: What if all firms engage in some level of strategic behavior, but
some firms “fall short” of playing the Nash equilibrium? How does heterogeneity in strategic
sophistication affect the efficiency of a market?
While models of strategic equilibrium are ubiquitous in empirical industrial organization,
a large experimental literature on games demonstrates that subjects very often deviate from
Nash equilibrium behavior (for example, see Kagel and Roth [1995], Camerer [2003], and
Fudenberg et al. [2012]). To explain these deviations, a number of theoretical alternatives
to Nash equilibrium play have been proposed. Among these, a popular framework is the
Cognitive Hierarchy model of Camerer, Ho, and Chong [2004].1 In a pioneering paper,
Goldfarb and Xiao [2011] apply the Cognitive Hierarchy model to study the opening of
the U.S. local telephone market to competition, and find that heterogeneity in strategic
sophistication – driven by different manager characteristics – affects the amount of entry into
1
A rich literature in experimental economics has studied the behavior of laboratory participants in strategic games such a beauty contest games, documented deviation from Nash equilibrium play, and developed
hierarchy models that can explain such behavior. For examples, see Nagel [1995], Stahl and Wilson [1995],
Costa-Gomes, Crawford, and Broseta [2001], Crawford, Gneezy, and Rottenstreich [2008], and Arad and
Rubinstein [2012].

1

different local markets, and that more sophisticated firms are more likely to survive.
In this paper, we argue that the Cognitive Hierarchy model can capture observed firm
behavior in an oligopoly pricing setting very well. Our setting is the Texas electricity market,
previously studied in earlier work (Hortacsu and Puller [2008]), where we document that
some firms persistently deviate from Nash behavior. Our prior work did not provide a theory
explaining these deviations. In this paper, we show that the Cognitive Hierarchy model
captures the heterogeneity in deviations from Nash behavior quite well, in- and out-of-sample.
Moreover, Cognitive Hierarchy also provides a computationally tractable framework to study
firm behavior and market outcomes under counterfactual scenarios such as mergers.
In the Cognitive Hierarchy (CH) model, the least strategic players – level-0 players –
are entirely non-strategic in their bidding. Level-1 players assume that all other players
are level-0 players and choose actions that are the best-response to those beliefs. Level-2
players assume that all other players are some combination of level-0 or level-1 players and
best respond to those beliefs. In general, level-k players assume that all other players are
distributed between level-0 and level–k-1 and best respond to those beliefs.2
As noted above, Goldfarb and Xiao [2011] use the Cognitive Hierarchy (hereafter CH)
model in empirical work to study entry decisions. Utilizing the CH model to study oligopoly
pricing decisions is not straightforward, however. This is due to a critical identification
problem. Consider the large number of empirical studies that use a model of expected profit
maximization that maps marginal cost to prices, and then “invert” the model so that data on
prices can be used to estimate the underlying marginal cost. This approach – used in many
oligopoly and auction settings – hinges on the assumption of a particular form of strategic
behavior. Otherwise, multiple combinations of behavior and costs may be consistent with
the observed prices. Thus, in most empirical settings, the task of separately identifying
parameters of the CH model from unobserved costs becomes a difficult exercise.3 More
generally, once the researcher allows for the possibility that firms deviate from Nash-type
behavior, it is no longer possible to use observed prices to infer marginal cost.
This empirical challenge can be overcome if researchers have data on both the prices and
the marginal cost. This paper exploits the data-rich environment of the Texas electricity spot
2

As noted in Camerer, Ho, and Chong [2004], the limiting case of the Poisson-CH model corresponds
to the Nash equilibrium as long as the Nash equilibrium is reached by finitely-many iterations of weakly
dominated strategies; other Nash equilibria may not correspond to this case.
3
One novel approach to address this problem in the auctions setting is proposed by Gillen [2010], who
studies joint identification of types and valuations in the level-k setting. Gillen shows point identification of
the joint distribution can be obtained exploiting variation in the number of bidders and assuming constant
valuations across auctions. However, in the absence of either of these, only set identification is possible. An
[2017] also studies identification in the level-k model; he relaxes some of these assumptions present in Gillen’s
work but imposes constraints on the structure of the data to identify both the number of types in the data
and the type of each firm.

2

market, in which many firms, that vary in size and other characteristics, compete. We have
detailed data on individual firms’ marginal cost of production and bids into power auctions.
Having access to marginal cost data allows us to capture departures from Nash behavior and
to identify the parameters of the CH model.
We find that the strongest determinant of a firm’s level of strategic sophistication is
size. Larger firms are higher type in the cognitive hierarchy, and thus are more strategically
sophisticated. Manager characteristics, such as academic training, play a smaller but still
significant role. Strikingly, there is substantial heterogeneity in the level of strategic sophistication across the firms in the Texas electricity market. This heterogeneity in sophistication
impacts the efficiency of the market. Firms with lower levels of strategic sophistication submit bids that are so high that their plants are often priced out of the market despite the
fact that their plants are often low cost. As a result, the power grid operator instead dispatches higher cost plants, resulting in inefficiently costly production. Finally, we do not find
evidence of substantial learning in the early years of the market.
We also explore the extent to which our model predicts pricing behavior out-of-sample.
We exploit a two-month outage at a nuclear plant in the middle of our sample period that
significantly reduced nuclear power output. As a result, total demand for power intersected
market marginal cost at a steeper point on the marginal cost function. We first test whether
firms that are behaving strategically recognize that this publicly observable cost shock is likely
to make their residual demand in the market less elastic. We find that firms estimated by our
model to be a higher strategic type end up responding to the outage by recognizing that their
residual demand is steeper, while lower type firms do not. Second, we re-estimate our model
of bidding behavior without using the data from the outage period, and use these estimates
to predict profits during the outage period. We show that the CH model outperforms a
model of unilateral best response when predicting realized profits.
After estimating the model, we study how increases in strategic sophistication affect
efficiency. We use the model parameters to calculate market outcomes under various scenarios
in which the strategic sophistication of low-type firms is increased either exogenously or
through mergers with high-type firms. An important benefit of using the CH model to study
multi-unit auctions is that, unlike with Nash equilibrium models, we are able to simulate
unique predictions of market outcomes under various policy counterfactuals. For multi-unit
auctions, solving for Nash equilibria is difficult because the researcher is searching for a
fixed point in a multidimensional function space. Because CH specifies beliefs, solving for
outcomes is computationally straightforward because it is a sequence of best responses, as we
discuss below.4 Thus, not only does CH allow for more realistic models of real-world bidding
4

Camerer, Ho, and Chong [2004] note a related feature that the CH model can be viewed as a behavioral

3

behavior, but it provides a convenient computational strategy for researchers to simulate
outcomes under changes in strategic sophistication and market structure.
We simulate the effect on market efficiency of increasing sophistication through actions
such as hiring better managers. Our results show that increases in strategic sophistication
improve efficiency, though at a decreasing rate. For example, exogenously increasing the sophistication of low-type firms to the level of median-type firms will increase market efficiency
by 9-16 percent. However, efficiency improvements are smaller when firms with median levels
of sophistication are given higher sophistication levels.
We also simulate market outcomes if heterogeneous firms were to merge. For example,
consider a merger between a large and small firm that only affects the firms’ bidding operations. Such a merger is unlikely to lead to cost synergies because the costs of generating
electricity is almost entirely driven by technical characteristics of the power plants. One
might expect the increase in market concentration to enhance market power and reduce economic efficiency. However, if the firms are boundedly rational, this merger could increase
efficiency. Suppose that the large firm is a high-level strategic thinker and the small firm is
a low-level strategic thinker. If the merger causes the large firm to take over bidding operations, then the power plants of the small firm will subsequently be controlled by a higher
level strategic thinker. This can increase efficiency because the power plants of the low-type
firm are more likely to be bid in at prices that cause low-cost plants to produce. We evaluate
this conjecture by simulating mergers between various firms in the Texas market. We find
that, in this setting, if a small, low-type firm were to merge with a large, high-type firm, then
efficiency will improve despite the increase in concentration. However, when medium-sized
firms merge with large firms, the market power effect dominates the sophistication effect,
and efficiency decreases.
This paper makes four key contributions beyond the previous literature, including our
earlier work on this market. First, this paper is constructive as we show that an important
theoretical model of bounded rationality – Cognitive Hierarchy – can explain deviations
from Nash equilibrium in a field setting where firms engage in price competition. To our
knowledge, this is the first paper that examines pricing/bidding decisions, using field data,
through the lens of the Cognitive Hierarchy model. Second, we show that a behavioral game
theory model can make better out-of-sample predictions of pricing behavior than a Nash-type
model. Third, we show that behavioral game theory can be used to conduct computationally
efficient counterfactuals for multi-unit auctions, which is not possible in standard Nash-type
environments. And fourth, we quantify the insight that events that increase sophistication
such as mergers can improve efficiency, which is a contribution to antitrust, both for academia
equilibrium refinement in certain classes of games.

4

and practitioners.
More broadly, this paper contributes to two emerging bodies of literature: behavioral
industrial organization, and the study of firm sophistication and learning in new markets.
The literature on behavioral industrial organization has largely focused on the case of boundedly rational behavior by consumers, with less emphasis on boundedly rational behavior by
firms. However, evidence on boundedly rational firm behavior has been growing. (For a
recent comprehensive survey of structural behavioral economics, see DellaVigna [2017].) On
the pricing margin, Cho and Rust [2010] find, through a field experiment, that rental car
companies could increase profits by making rental rates a declining function of car mileage,
and by holding on to their inventory of cars longer. Massey and Thaler [2013] find evidence
that NFL teams consistently over-value top draft picks. Ellison et al. [2016] estimate a model
of price adjustment to capture price inertia and managerial inattention in an online market
for computer components. DellaVigna and Gentzkow [2017] report that many supermarket
chains engage in uniform pricing across outlets located in zip codes with very different household income levels. Doraszelski, Lewis, and Pakes [2018] use models of learning to predict
the evolution of pricing in a newly opened electricity market. Finally, other work also has
shown that larger firms perform better than smaller firms (Bloom and Reenen [2007] and
DellaVigna and Gentzkow [2017]).
Our paper also contributes to the literature on how electricity generating firms formulate
bids (e.g. Fabra and Reguant [2014]) and models of oligopoly competition in electricity
markets (e.g. Wolfram [1998], Borenstein, Bushnell, and Wolak [2002], Wolak [2003] and
Bushnell, Mansur, and Saravia [2008]). More broadly, this work relates to the literature that
studies differences in productivity across firms (e.g. Syverson [2004] and Hsieh and Klenow
[2009]) and how managerial practices affect productivity (e.g. Bloom and Reenen [2007]).
The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes the Texas electricity market. Section 3
introduces the data and provides descriptive evidence that motivates our modeling assumptions. Section 4 describes the Cognitive Hierarchy model and section 5 introduces our model
of non-Nash bidding. Section 6 discusses identification, estimation, and results. Section 7
discusses a reduced-form test of strategic vs. non-strategic behavior using a nuclear plant
shutdown, which provides additional support for our modeling assumptions. Section 8 shows
that our model predicts bidding out-of-sample. Section 9 measures the efficiency impact of
increases in strategic behavior and of counterfactual mergers. Section 10 concludes.

5

2

Institutional Setting

We study an early year of the restructured electricity market in Texas. Prior to 2001, the
Texas electricity industry consisted of vertically-integrated monopolies regulated by rateof-return regulation. In 2001, the industry was restructured with former utilities divested
into separate firms for power generation, transmission/distribution, and retailing. In August
2001, a wholesale market was opened through which generating firms that own powerplants
sell wholesale power to transmission and distribution utilities that serve customers. The
wholesale market allowed power trading via both bilateral transactions and an organized
‘spot’ auction. This paper focuses on competition in this wholesale market.
In the bilateral market, generating firms contract with utilities that serve customers.
One day before production and consumption occur, each generating firm schedules a fixed
quantity of production for each hour of the following day with the grid operator. This ‘dayahead schedule’ serves the role of an initial plan for the next day’s production. Importantly,
the production levels that are scheduled one day-ahead can differ from the quantities that
the firm has financially contracted in the bilateral market, so a firm can be net short or net
long on its contract position with its day-ahead schedule.
The second market for wholesale trading is an organized ‘day-of’ spot market that is run
by the grid operator to ensure that production and consumption exactly balance at every
point in time. For example, suppose that a summer afternoon turns out to be hotter than
anticipated so that realized demand for power exceeds the amount of generation that was
scheduled one day-ahead. Then the spot market, or ‘balancing market’ in electricity parlance,
is used to procure the additional supply needed to meet demand via an auction.
In the spot market, generating firms submit supply functions to increase or decrease
production relative to their day-ahead schedule. If total electricity demand is higher than
the aggregate day-ahead schedule, then the auction procures additional power and calls upon
winning bidders to increase, or ‘inc’, production relative to the firm’s day-ahead schedule.
In contrast, if total demand is smaller than the aggregate day-ahead schedule, then winning
bidders decrease, or ‘dec’, production relative to the firm’s day-ahead schedule. During
our sample period, approximately 2-5% of all power transactions occurred in the balancing
auction. We study bidding behavior in this auction. Although the balancing auction is small
relative to the bilateral market in percentage terms, we show below that substantial profits
can be earned with ‘sophisticated’ bidding into the auction.
The auction proceeds as follows. On the supply side, each firm bids a set of price-quantity
pairs to create a bid function. The bid function is a step function, and the firm is allowed
to submit up to 40 steps in its hourly bid function. For example, a firm may have scheduled

6

2000 MW to be produced in a given hour. In the balancing auction, the firm is bidding
to, say, increase production by 100, 200, or 300 MW (to 2100, 2200, or 2300 MW of total
production) or to decrease production from the 2000MW that was scheduled.5 Bid functions
are not tied to specific generating units; rather a firm’s bid function represent offers to sell
from the firm’s portfolio of power plants. The firm submits a separate bid function for each
hour of the day, and bids are finalized one hour before the operating hour.
The demand side of the market is driven by customer usage. However, the price that
customers pay – the retail price – is not tied to the hourly wholesale price in the balancing
auction. For this reason, the balancing demand function for each hour is perfectly inelastic.
This grid operator accepts supply bids from generating firms, observes the total balancing
demand, and clears the market. The format of the auction is a multi-unit, uniform-price
auction. Therefore, the grid operator finds the market-clearing price where aggregate supply
bids (a monotonically increasing step function) intersects the perfectly inelastic balancing
demand. Each firm is called to supply to the balancing market the quantity that was bid
at the market-clearing price, and it is paid the market-clearing price for all power called to
produce in the balancing auction. Thus, if a firm is called to increase production from its
day-ahead schedule, it is paid the market-clearing price for its incremental production. If a
firm is called to decrease production from its day-ahead schedule, it purchases power at the
market-clearing price to meet any existing contract obligations.
The generating firms that compete in the Texas market differ along a number of dimensions. Most importantly, firms vary in the size of their generating capacity. Two of the
former investor-owned utilities – TXU and Reliant – are the two largest players, owning
24% and 18% of installed capacity, respectively. Other major investor-owned utilities include
Central Power and Light (7% of installed capacity) and West Texas Utilities (2%). Private
firms without any historical connection to utilities – so called ‘merchant generators’ – include
firms such as Calpine (5% of installed capacity), Lamar Power Partners (4%), and Guadalupe
Power Partners (2%). Small municipal utilities such as Garland Power & Light and Bryan
Texas Utilities each comprise less than 1% of total capacity. The power plants are primarily
fueled by natural gas and coal, although there are small amounts of hydroelectric, nuclear,
and wind generation. Firms also vary in the education background and job experience of
personnel in charge of power marketing operations, as we discuss below.
5

To be precise, each generating firm submits monotonically increasing step functions with up to 40 elbow
points (up to 20 points to ‘inc’ production and 20 points to ‘dec’ production from the firm’s day-ahead
schedule).

7

3

Data

We study firm bidding behavior into the balancing auctions in an early year of the market’s
operation. Specifically, we study the first half of the second year of the market, as depicted
in Figure 1.6 Because our sample period begins in the second year of the market’s operation,
the firms had time to build up their trading operations and develop bidding strategies by the
time that our sample begins. By the beginning of our sample, firms had submitted bids into
the balancing market for every hour of every day for one year.
Market Opens
8,760 hourly auctions

8/1/2001

SAMPLE PERIOD

8/1/2002

1/31/2003

Figure 1: Market Timeline and Our Sample
One appealing feature of studying electricity markets is that detailed data are available
on firm operations and costs. For each hourly auction, we have data on total demand for
balancing power, each firm’s bid functions, and each firm’s marginal cost of providing power to
the balancing market. These are the same data used in Hortacsu and Puller [2008] (hereafter,
HP).
Total balancing demand is perfectly inelastic because virtually no consumers face wholesale prices during the time of our study. Our balancing demand data are the hourly demand
functions that were used by the grid operator to clear each auction. The bid data consist of
each firm’s bids to increase and decrease production relative to the firm’s day-ahead schedule.
A key feature of our empirical strategy is that we measure each firm’s marginal cost of
supplying power to the balancing auction. We focus on the 6pm hour of weekdays because
the generators online during this interval are the most flexible type of generators that can
respond to balancing calls without large adjustment costs.7
We measure the marginal cost that each firm faced in each hour to change production
from its day-ahead schedule. Our marginal cost function for a given firm consists of all the
firm’s generating units that are verified to be ‘on-line’ and operating during the hour of the
6

We obtained our data through a one-time arrangement with the Public Utility Commission of Texas, and
unfortunately we are unable to extend our sample period to later years of the market. We end the sample
period in January 2003 because a major ice storm hit Texas in February 2003 that caused large disruptions
of the electric transmission grid and general market operations.
7
The technologies that are able to quickly adjust consumption in response to balancing calls are naturalgas fired units and to a lesser extent coal-fired units. Nuclear and wind generated units are not marginal
production units during these hours. Texas has very few hydroelectric units, and we do not study the behavior
of the few firms that own hydro units.

8

auction.8 Our data from ERCOT indicate which generating units are operating and the
day-ahead scheduled quantity of each unit. Each unit is assumed to have constant marginal
cost up to capacity. For each generating unit, we observe the amount of capacity that the
firm declares the unit can produce on a given day. (Below we provide evidence that firms do
not misstate their capacity). In addition, we incorporate that firms cannot reduce generation
below a minimum operating level.
The primary variable cost for electricity generation is fuel. For each natural gas and
coal-fired unit, we have data on the ‘heat rate’ – the rate at which the generator converts the
energy content of the fuel into electricity (Henwood Energy Services). Fuel costs for natural
gas units are the daily natural gas spot prices at the nearest trading hub in Texas (Natural
Gas Intelligence) plus a distribution charge. For coal units, we use the monthly average spot
price for coal delivered to Texas (EIA). Variables costs also include a variable operating and
maintenance cost per MWh (Henwood Energy Services). Finally, units that emit SO2 incur
permit costs (EPA). This approach to measuring variable costs is standard in the literature
on electricity markets. We refer the reader to Online Appendix A for further details.
Using these data, we calculate each firm’s marginal cost of production in a given hour.
Because each firm is bidding to change production relative to its day-ahead schedule, we subtract the day-ahead scheduled quantity from its total marginal cost to measure the marginal
cost of supplying power to the balancing market. A stylized representation of this function is
shown in Figure 2 with M CiAuction . This function’s values in the first quadrant represents the
firm’s marginal cost of increasing production beyond its day-ahead schedule, i.e. supplying
positive power to the balancing market. And the function’s values in the second quadrant
represents the firm’s marginal savings of reducing production from its day-ahead schedule,
i.e. supplying negative production to the balancing market.
In our model below, marginal cost is public information. While this assumption may not
hold in many industries, it holds in the electricity industry because the production technology
is very similar across powerplants in Texas and fuel costs are publicly available. This was
confirmed in conversations with several market participants suggesting that traders have
good information about their rivals’ marginal cost. Moreover, firms likely know when major
generating units are on- or off-line; some firms purchase data from an energy information
company that measures real-time output using remote sensors installed near power plants.
In the majority of hours during our sample, the Texas market was fully integrated so
that all powerplants face the same selling price. However, in 26% of hours, transmission
lines were congested which led to different prices in different zones of the state. We exclude
8
Because the units are already operating when the balancing auction clears, we do not need to incorporate
any startup costs.

9

M Ci Auction

P

Total M Ci

MW

0
Day ahead schedule

Figure 2: Stylized Marginal Cost of Supplying to Balancing Market
those auctions when there was transmission congestion; HP show that this does not affect
our inference about bidding behavior. After restricting our sample to weekdays during the
six month sample period when there was no transmission congestion, we study 99 auctions.

3.1

Descriptive Evidence

As motivating evidence for our model, we show evidence that firms are not best-responding
to the bidding behavior of their rivals. In fact, if each firm were to use publicly available data
on recent bids, profits would significantly increase. To do so, first we explain how bids would
be chosen if firms best respond to their rivals’ actions.9 Figure 3 explains the basic intuition
of best-response bidding. Suppose that a firm has marginal cost of supplying to the balancing
market given by M Ci . And the firm has signed forward contracts to supply an additional
QCi units of power beyond it’s day-ahead schedule. Because the firm is a net seller after
it has covered its contract position, the firm has an incentive to bid prices above marginal
cost for quantities greater than QCi . Likewise, the firm is a net buyer for quantities less
than QCi , so it has an incentive to bid prices below MC for quantities less than the contract
position in order to drive down the market price. The size of the mark-up will depend on the
firm’s residual demand elasticity. The residual demand function RDi is equal to the total
market demand minus the supply bids by all other bidders. Suppose that it is a hot day and
the firm faces RD1 . A profit-maximizing firm will bid a quantity corresponding to the point
where Marginal Revenue equals Marginal Cost (M R1 = M Ci ) and the price on the (inverse)
9

We characterize a formal model of bidding in section 5.

10

P
SBR
M Ci
A

P1
P2

B

RD2

C
QC

Q2 Q1
M R 2 M R1

RD1
Q

Figure 3: Best-Response Bidding in Spot Auction
Residual Demand function at that quantity. This is given by point A. Alternatively, it could
be a cooler summer day so that total demand is lower and thus residual demand shifts in,
as given by RD2 . In that case, the same logic implies that the best response is point B.
Because the firm can submit a large number of (price, quantity) points, it can consider a
continuum of different residual demand functions. Thus, the firm can ‘trace out’ the set of
best-response bids, and submit a best-response bid function given by SiBR .10
We can construct data analogs to these stylized pictures. Importantly, no estimation is
required; the components of Figure 3 are available as data for each firm in each auction. We
view this data-rich environment as a major strength of our approach.
We now present descriptive evidence that some firms deviate from Nash equilibrium bidding, and we use this evidence to motivate our modeling assumptions. Figure 4 displays
representative bid functions for four different firms. The top-left and top-right firms both
have large quantities of generation capacity. The bottom-left firm has smaller generation
capacity and the bottom-right firm is very small. Each of these figures shows the bids on
the ‘inc’ side of the market (i.e. the horizontal axis includes only positive balancing market quantities). The firms also compete on the ‘dec’ side of the market (negative balancing
market quantities) which we include in our analysis but for exposition are not depicted here.
The top-left panel of Figure 4 displays a bid function for a large firm that submits bids that
10

In general, it is possible that the set of best-response points is not a monotonic function, however we
show in section 5 that in this setting the best-response points are monotonic.

11

(a) Large Firm

(b) Medium Firm

(c) Small Firm

(d) Very Small Firm

Figure 4: Actual Bids vs. Best-Response Bids for Different Sized Firms

12

correspond closely to the best-response to actual rival bids. As shown by the marginal cost
function, the firm has the capacity to increase production relative to its day-ahead schedule
by about 1800 MW. The firm has a contract position of about 600 MW upon entering the
balancing market, so it has incentives to bid prices above marginal cost for quantities above
600 MW.11 But it will be a net buyer for quantities below 600 MW, so it has incentives to
bid below marginal cost in order to drive down the market price. As seen by comparing the
‘Best-Response bid’ and ‘Actual Bid Curve’, the firm is bidding in a manner that very closely
resembles best-response bidding.
However, other firms deviate from best-response bidding, and the magnitude of the deviation varies in the size of the firm. The top-right panel of Figure 4 displays a bid function
for another firm with substantial generation capacity. This firm has a contract position of
about 500 MW upon entering the balancing market, so best-response bids are above (below)
marginal cost for quantities greater (less) than the contract position. The firm’s actual bid
function deviates from the best-response bid. For quantities below the contract position
of about 500MW, the firm submits bids at prices of approximately $35 which is below the
marginal cost of $43. However, the best-response to actual rivals bids is around $40. For
quantities above the contract position of 500MW, the firm submits bids at prices higher
than the best-response bid prices. Loosely speaking the firm submits a bid function that
is ‘too steep’ relative to the best-response bid. The firm’s actual bid would correspond to
best-responding only if the firm faced a residual demand function that is less elastic than
the realized residual demand function. Thus, the bid function is consistent with the firm
believing that its residual demand is less elastic that it actually is.
The bottom two panels of Figure 4 show bids for small and very small firms. For each
firm, the contract position is zero. As shown by the best-response bids, each firm has some
market power despite being small, so it is optimal to bid prices several dollars above marginal
cost. However, the firm in the bottom-left panel submits high-priced bids and only offers a
small quantity into the market – the firm has nearly 400 MW of available capacity yet it only
offers 35 MW at relatively high prices. The firm in the bottom-right panel bids in a similar
fashion – only small quantities are offered into the market even though the firm has available
capacity from powerplants that are already operating.
Firms that submit bids that are ‘too steep’ relative to best-response bids have two important consequences for the market. From the perspective of the firm, the bids effectively
price the firm out of the market which reduces producer surplus relative to best-response
bidding. But, importantly, the bidding behavior reduces the efficiency of the market. In
some auctions, the firms exhibiting this type of bidding behavior have low cost powerplants
11

In section 5, we show how we measure the contract position in our data.

13

available to supply additional power to the balancing market, yet the generators are not
called to produce because bid prices are higher that market-clearing prices. This creates
productive inefficiency because higher cost generators must be called to produce instead. As
we document below, this productive inefficiency can be sizable.
Constructing similar figures for other firms in our sample generates systematic patterns.
In particular, a few firms bid very close to ‘vertical bids’ where very little generation capacity
is offered into the market. Other firms offer substantial generation quantities into the market
but offer that capacity at prices that are above the best-response prices. Also, for any given
firm, the shapes of bids relative to best-response bids are very persistent across auctions; firms
do not go back-and-forth between bidding ‘too steep’ and bidding ‘too flat’. Importantly,
these deviations from best-response reduce profits, despite the fact that a simple trading rule
based on publicly observable information could increase profits, as we show below.
These patterns in bid behavior create a puzzle – why do firms exhibit heterogeneity in
bidding behavior relative to a benchmark of best-response bidding? Firms systematically
submit bids that span a wide range – from close to the best-response benchmark to bids
that are ‘too steep’ to bids that are nearly vertical. These patterns motivate our model of
boundedly rational bidding within a Cognitive Hierarchy structure. In our model below, we
allow firms with different characteristics to differ in level of strategic sophistication.

3.2

Ruling Out Alternative Explanations

Before describing our model, we explore possible alternative factors that could explain the
observed behavior. After discussing these and arguing that none of them can rationalize our
data, we turn to the Cognitive Hierarchy model.
First, we ask whether the potential profits in the balancing market are enough to justify
setting up a bidding operation. We use observed bids to compute realized profits for each
firm in each auction. Then, as in HP, we calculate profits under two scenarios: (1) bestresponse bidding and (2) bidding vertically at the contract position (which is effectively
not participating in the balancing market except to meet contract obligations). With these
numbers in hand, we compute the fraction of potential profits that were achieved by actual
bidding relative to non-participation. The results are summarized in Table B.1 in Online
Appendix B and show that, with the exception of the largest firm Reliant, none of the other
firms achieved more than one half of potential profits. One can calculate the profit increases
of best-responding relative to bidding vertically at the contract position. If one conducts
a back-of-the-envelope calculation to extrapolate these profits to every hour of a year, the
increase in profits relative to bidding vertically ranges across the firms from $4.3 million/year
to $37.4 million/year, which appears high enough to justify the labor and capital costs of a
14

bidding operation.
Second, we show descriptive evidence that the phenomenon of offering small quantities
into the market by submitting bids that are ‘too steep’ is equally prevalent in the first
and second year of the market. Specifically, for each firm-auction, we calculate the amount
of generation capacity that the firm offers relative to the contract position at the marketclearing price, and we test whether firms offer additional generation into the market in the
second year. The results, reported in Table C.1 in Online Appendix C, show that firms offer
essentially the same capacity in the second year as they did in the first one.
Third, having shown that profits ‘left-on-the-table’ are significant and that the behavior
is persistent, one might expect that some firms that are foregoing profits will eventually exit
the market or be acquired. While we cannot rule out such evolution of ownership in the longrun, evidence suggests that any such dynamics are slow in this market. Among the firms that
we analyze, only one firm was sold by 2005.12 Thus, while we cannot rule out longer-term
market responses to the foregone profits, it is clear that the firms that are deviating from
best-response continue to be market players after four years of market operations.13
Next we explore possible explanations based upon technical features of electricity market
operations. First, we do not believe that there are unmeasured variable costs that we fail to
incorporate. Recall that our marginal cost function incorporates generating units that are
‘on and operating’ and that the measure of capacity is declared by the firm each day. We
incorporate fuel, operating and maintenance, and emission costs which comprise all of the
major sources of variable costs. It is worth noting that even if one of these variable costs is
biased up to a level shift, this would not affect our finding that firms deviate in the slope
of their bid functions. One might be concerned that there are unobserved costs to adjust
production in the balancing market. Based on our discussions with industry officials, there
are no meaningful costs to increasing or decreasing production on short notice. Firms have
invested in hardware and software that automatically adjust production when the balancing
market clears. For example, the sample bid in the top-right panel of Figure 4 is not consistent
with there being unmeasured adjustment costs. The firm is bidding prices too low for positive
balancing quantities below its contract position. If there were unmeasured adjustment costs
to changing production from the day-ahead position, one would expect prices above the
best-response benchmark for quantities just above zero.
The primary means through which adjustment impacts output are constraints on the
rate at which generating units can increase production – called ‘ramprates’. In the vast
majority of intervals in our sample, the marginal units to adjust output are natural gas-fired
12

Central Power & Light was acquired by Sempra Energy and a private equity group in March 2004.
We are unable to acquire additional years of data to analyze bidding behavior in later years. Therefore,
we cannot assess whether the under-performing firms made changes in internal bidding operations.
13

15

units which generally are flexible and have ‘fast’ ramprates. Ramprates are unlikely to drive
the cross-firm heterogeneity in bidding behavior because many of the firms have generating
units with similar ramprates. For example, the ramprates of the generating units of the
top-left and bottom-left firms in Figure 4 are very similar, yet the firms bid quite differently.
More formally, we measure the correlation between firm size and the firm ramprate per
unit of capacity. If ramping constraints were a driver of our main findings, we expect to
find a strong positive correlation between ramping capability and size. We find no strong
correlation; in fact, the correlation is -0.205, suggesting that if anything, larger firms have
slightly less ramping capability.
Second, one might be concerned that bidding rules prevent firms from submitting bids
that correspond to the best-response bids. The best-response benchmark in the descriptive
evidence assumes that uncertainty shifts rather than pivots residual demand. As a result,
the set of best-response bids will be monotonic which is a requirement of the bidding rules.
In general, it is possible that uncertainty results in pivots in residual demand. The published version of HP includes tests for this possibility, and the NBER working paper version
(Hortacsu and Puller [2005]) includes moment-based tests for expected profit maximization.
We find strong evidence that the form of uncertainty and bidding rules do not bias our
best-response bids as a benchmark for expected profit-maximizing behavior.
The most straightforward evidence is that a simple trading rule would have systematically
raised profits for all but the largest firm. This trading rule uses only information available
at the time that bids are submitted and it respects all auction rules about the shapes of
bid functions. The trading rule exploits an institutional feature of the Texas market – the
grid operator publicly released the aggregate bid schedule with a 2 day lag. Thus, firms can
learn recent information about their rivals’ aggregate bid behavior. Suppose a firm were to
use the lagged aggregate bid data to create best-response bid functions to rivals’ bids from 3
days prior to each auction, and submit these bids to the current auction. We compute these
lagged best-response bids and use the bids to clear the market with the actual (step function)
residual demand for the current auction. We find that this simple trading rule significantly
outperforms the actual realized profits for all but the largest firm. The results of this test
are reported in Figure D.1 of Online Appendix D.
Third, the possibility of congested transmission lines does not explain why actual bids
differ from best-response. We exclude auctions where transmission lines are congested between zones in Texas, but the possibility of congestion could impact bids even if congestion
is not realized. However, this does not explain the deviations from best-response bids that
we observe. First, expected congestion might explain bids that are ‘too steep’ in importconstrained zones, but some firms are in export-constrained zones and nevertheless submit

16

bids that are ‘too steep’. Second and more formally, Hortacsu and Puller [2005] finds that
firm profitability is not strongly related to the frequency of transmission congestion.
Fourth, we show in Online Appendix E that the observed deviations from best-response
bidding are not driven by mis-measurement of firm capacity. Moreover, additional markets
for ancillary services such as ‘regulation up’ cannot explain all of the observed deviations
from best-response because the total amount of ancillary services procured is significantly
lower than the joint quantity of excess capacity that firms have available when submitting
balancing market bids.14
Finally, it seems implausible that collusion explains the deviations from best-response.
Many of the firms - especially the small firms – that deviate from best-response submit bids
that are vertical at the contract position. As a result, revenues are zero. Thus, a collusive
regime would require side payments from the few large firms to numerous small firms.

4

Empirical Strategy to Estimate a Cognitive Hierarchy Model of Bidding

4.1

Background on Cognitive Hierarchy

The theoretical literature has developed a rich set of models of boundedly rational strategic behavior that can explain deviations from Nash Equilibrium play. Generally speaking,
bounded rationality models relax one of the two conditions of Nash Equilibrium: (1) players maximize expected payoffs given beliefs about their rivals’ actions and (2) player beliefs
about rivals’ actions are consistent. Hierarchy models (such as Cognitive Hierarchy and levelk) maintain the assumption of best-response but relax the assumption of consistent beliefs.15
These models conceptualize players as having a hierarchical structure of strategic, or levelk, thinking. Seminal work on level-k models include Costa-Gomes, Crawford, and Broseta
[2001], Camerer, Ho, and Chong [2004], and Crawford and Iriberri [2007].
Cognitive Hierarchy (CH) developed by Camerer, Ho, and Chong [2004] conceptualizes
players as engaging in different levels of strategic thinking ordered in a hierarchy. The least
sophisticated players – 0-step players – engage in no strategic thinking, while higher types
assume that all other players are distributed between 0-step and k-1-step players according
14

Also, prices in the ancillary services markets were relatively low – prices were below $20/MW in 95% of
the intervals during the first 1.5 years of the market (Baldick and Nui [2005]).
15
Another model used in the bounded rationality literature – Quantal Response Equilibrium (McKelvey and
Palfrey [1995]) – does not appear to be suitable in our particular setting. QRE has the property that players
play more profitable strategies with higher probability. However, small players in our setting systematically
play low-profit strategies as shown in the sample bid functions above. Thus, it does not appear that our
bidders estimate expected payoffs in an unbiased way, a key feature of the QRE model.

17

to a Poisson distribution.16 Importantly, a player’s belief about rivals need not be correct;
hence, the beliefs are not mutually consistent. However, each player rationally best-responds
given its (perhaps incorrect) beliefs, meaning that CH maintains the rationality assumption
of Nash Equilibrium but relaxes the assumption of mutually consistent beliefs.17

4.2

Big Picture of Modeling and Estimation Strategy

The recursive nature of decision rules under CH facilitates a computationally tractable empirical strategy. Consider firm i that is type k. Under the CH model, firm i believes its rivals
are distributed between type-0 and type-(k-1), according to a normalized Poisson distribution with parameter τ . Given its marginal cost and beliefs about rivals’ types, firm i chooses
bids to maximize expected profits.
One critical feature of estimating a CH model is how to define level-0 behavior. In the
theoretical literature, a convenient assumption is that level-0 players uniformly randomize
across all possible strategies, however Camerer et al. note that this is a placeholder assumption that can be modified to specific settings.18 One conceptualization of a behavior that falls
into level-0 is taking a very salient action that requires “low mental effort”. In the context
of the Texas electricity auctions, there is a natural assumption about non-strategic thinkers:
bidding “vertically” at the contract positions for the range of plausible prices. (That is, the
firms submit bids similar to the bottom-right panel of Figure 4). Our level-0 firms realize
that they need to “true up” their contract position, so they bid so as to satisfy their contract
position (a factor that they know). However, such firms do not view the balancing auction as
a profit-making opportunity worthy of “strategic energy” to develop a sophisticated bidding
strategy. A vertical bid at the contract position essentially indicates that even at very high
prices, the firm does not want to sell power into the balancing market. Vertical bidding at the
contract position is also empirically motivated in this setting because the firms that submit
nearly vertical bids earn the lowest fraction of potential profits. Thus, “vertical bidding at
the contract position” is a natural candidate for level-0 bidding behavior in this setting.
16

The model does not require the distribution be Poisson. However, Camerer et al. [2004] note that the
Poisson has the property that as k rises, fewer players perform the next step of thinking, which is consistent
with increasing working memory being required for an additional step of iterative calculation. This cognitive
hierarchy structure is conceptually appealing because it captures behavior in which firms have limits to the
level of strategic thinking and/or firms are overconfident about their own abilities. Note that it might seem
peculiar that a firm believes that all rivals are strictly lower types rather than equal types. However, if a
firm believed that its rivals were playing the same level strategy, that firm would best respond which would
make it a higher than k-level player.
17
The level-k model is a specific form of the CH model where a level-k player assumes that all other players
are level-(k-1). In other words, rather than rivals coming from a distribution of types (k-1) and below, in the
level-k model, rival firms are type (k-1).
18
For example, Goldfarb and Xiao’s level-0 firms assume that no other firms enter the market.

18

Our modeling choice about level-0 behavior is important because it anchors the bidding
of higher types that respond to level-0 firms. While other types of bidding behavior are
candidates for level-0 behavior, in section 6.1.1 we discuss the implications of such bidding
patterns. Alternative level-0 assumptions are not consistent with the observed behavior in
this market, as we show in section 6.1.1. Moreover, in section 7, we provide additional
empirical evidence supporting the vertical bidding assumption.
One advantage of using this level-0 assumption is that we do not need to make strong
assumptions about the form of the bid functions. Instead, as we show below, the assumption
of level-0 firms bidding vertically at their contract positions together with the recursive
solution method of the CH model allow us to completely characterize the bidding functions
without further assumptions about how private information enters the bidding decision.
Finally, we assume that only a subset of firms enter into the Cognitive Hierarchy, while
the rest form part of an unmodeled fringe. We do this because allowing for more firms makes
the problem computationally challenging as each firm needs to compute its rivals bidding
functions for all possible types, for all auctions. Furthermore, we do not have marginal cost
data for all firms for all auctions, which imposes a constraint on the number of firms that we
can include in the CH. For this reason, we select 12 firms to model with CH – these firms
vary in firm characteristics and size, and jointly represent 66 percent of industry capacity.
Once level-0 bidding is defined, we can use our data on each firm’s marginal cost to calculate the bidding behavior for a firm of any type k > 0. Firms observe characteristics of their
rivals X−i (e.g. size) and form beliefs about their rivals’ type distributions. Specifically, the
type distribution is given by P oisson(τi (Xi , β)) where τi (·) captures how firm characteristics
map into type.19 For any mapping from firm characteristics to type, we use an iterative
procedure to calculate each player’s optimal theoretical bids under various sophistication
levels. Given level-0 players’ bids, we calculate level-1 best-response bids for each firm. For
each firm, level-1 bids are calculated as the best-response to level-0 bids by all the other CH
firms and the bids by the unmodeled fringe. Then given our calculated level-0 and level-1
best-response bids, we calculate the level-2 best-response bids for each firm, and continue
this recursive process up to the highest type K.
We then compare these calculated bids to the firm’s actual bidding behavior. The estimation process finds the parameters of τi (Xi , β) – how firm characteristics such as size affect
strategic sophistication – that minimize the distance between actual bids and the bids predicted under CH. That is, in estimation, we use observed bids and realized marginal costs to
recover the type of each firm. For this reason, it is critical that we observe marginal costs;
19
This implies that firms with the same characteristics can be a different type; τi (·) determines the distribution from which type is drawn. However, rivals with the same observable characteristics generate the same
(distribution of) beliefs.

19

in the absence of cost data, one would not be able to identify types from bid data without
additional assumptions regarding the cost function.20 In other words, instead of using data
on observed bids and a Bayesian Nash equilibrium model of behavior to recover costs, we use
data on costs and bids to recover the type that rationalizes observed behavior.

5

Formal Cognitive Hierarchy Model of Bidding

This section formulates best-response bidding in a setting where firms have beliefs about
rivals as characterized by the Cognitive Hierarchy model. We incorporate a model of bidding
into share auctions (Wilson [1979] and Hortacsu and Puller [2008]) into the Poisson Cognitive
Hierarchy model (Camerer, Ho, and Chong [2004]).
Demand for power in each spot auction is given by D̃t (pt ) = Dt (pt ) + εt which is the sum
of a deterministic and stochastic component. The auctions occur in a private values setting
where the private value is the firm’s variable cost of providing power to the grid. Firm i has
costs to supply power in period t given by Cit (q). Prior to the auction, each firm has signed
contracts to deliver certain quantities of power each hour QCit at price P Cit , and we take these
contracts to be pre-determined. Cit (q) is modeled as public information because, as discussed
above, in this industry powerplant characteristics are public information and firms know when
major generating units are on-line. In contrast, QCit is private information because firms do
not publicly disclose the terms of their forward contracts. As far as strategic ability, each
firm is a k-step thinker. Firm i has private information on its own type ki , but it only knows
the distribution from which rival types are drawn. In each auction, firms simultaneously
submit supply schedules Sitk (p, QCit ) to produce different quantities at different prices. Let
l
the bid function by rival j of type l be denoted Sjt
(·).
All N sellers are paid the market-clearing price (pct ), which is determined by:
N
X

Sit (pct , QCit ) = Dt (pct ) + εt

(1)

i=1

From the perspective of firm i with private information on ki , QCit , and submitting bid
Ŝit (p), the uncertainty can be characterized by defining the following function H(·) which
defines the probability that the market-clearing price pct is below any price level p:
Hit (p, Ŝit (p); ki , QCit ) ≡ P r(pct ≤ p|Ŝit (p), ki , QCit )
20

(2)

Specifically, without any assumption on the form of the cost function, it is always possible to recover a
cost function that rationalizes observed bids.

20

There are three sources of uncertainty – (1) the shock to demand (εt ), (2) each rival’s type
of k-step thinking, and (3) each rival’s contract position QCjt which affects the rival’s bids.
The event that the market-clearing price pct is less than any given price p is the event that
there is excess supply at that p. Plugging the market-clearing condition (Equation 1) into
(Equation 2):
X

Hit (p, Ŝit (p); ki , QCit ) = P r(

l
(p, QCjt ; ki ) + Ŝit (p) ≥ Dt (p) + εt |Ŝit (p), ki , QCit )
Sjt

j6=i

=

Z

X

1(

QC−it ×l−i ×εt

l
(p, QCjt ; ki )+
Sjt

j6=i

Ŝit (p) ≥ Dt (p) + εt )dF (QC−it , l−i , εt |Ŝit (p), ki , QCit )

(3)

where F (QC−it , l−i , εt |Ŝit (p), ki , QCit ) is the joint density of each source of uncertainty from
the perspective of firm i.
A firm’s realized profit in this setting (after the realization of uncertainty) is given by:




p · Ŝit (p) − Cit Ŝit (p) − (p − P Cit )QCit

(4)

This profit is spot market revenues minus costs plus the payoff from its contract position.
We model the bidder’s expected utility maximization problem, where we allow for bidders
to potentially be risk averse. We denote the utility enjoyed by the bidder earning π dollars
of profit as U (π). Under the CH model, best-response k−step thinking bidders solve:
Max
Ŝit (p)

Z
p

p









U p · Ŝit (p) − Cit Ŝit (p) − (p − P Cit )QCit





dHit p, Ŝit (p); ki , QCit



One can show that the Euler-Lagrange necessary condition for the (pointwise) optimality
of the supply schedule is given by:
p − Cit0 (Sit∗ (p)) = (Sit∗ (p) − QCit )

Hs (p, Sit∗ (p); ki , QCit )
Hp (p, Sit∗ (p); ki , QCit )

(5)

where Hs and Hp are given by derivatives of Equation 3.
There is a simple intuition behind this condition. To see this, for the moment ignore the
S
term H
(it will be positive). The left side is the difference between bid prices and marginal
Hp
cost. Suppose that the firm is a net seller into the market because it is supplying more than
its contract position (i.e. S(·) > QCit ). Then the firm will have an incentive to bid above
marginal cost, i.e. p > Cit0 , in order to “exercise market power”. The amount of market power
S
is determined by the term H
. The denominator of this term is simply the density of the
Hp

21

market clearing price. The numerator is the “market power term” – how much the firm can
change the (distribution of) the market price by changing its supply bid.
The goal is to find Sit∗ (p) for firm i in auction t if the firm is type k – the best-response
bid function for each firm given its type. In our empirical exercise, we will compare the firm’s
actual bid to each of these best-response functions to make inferences about what type of
k-step thinker the bidder is.
We use data and three identifying assumptions to “measure” each component of Equation 5, which allows us to calculate the best-response function for each firm i in auction t
for each type k. The first assumption defines the bidding behavior for type-0 bidders. The
assumption has both the properties that it is natural in our setting and that it facilitates
computation of CH outcomes by allowing us to solve the problem recursively. This recursive
property yields an additive separability condition that makes it computationally straightforward to solve the firm’s expected profit maximization problem, as we show below. The second
and third assumptions define the distribution of types of the CH model and the distribution
of the remaining sources of uncertainty.
Type-0 Bidding:
Assumption 1. Type-0 bidders submit perfectly inelastic bids at their contract positions.
That is,
Sit0 (p, QCit ) = QCit ∀p ∈ [p, p], ∀i ∈ l0 ,
where l0 represents the set of bidders type 0.
This formalizes our observation in Section 3.1 that the least sophisticated bidders use the
balancing market to meet any remaining contract obligations but otherwise do not participate
in the market – they bid vertically at their contract positions.
Type-1 Bidding: Given the assumption about type-0 bidding, we can characterize bids for
type-1 firms. For a bidder type-1, all rivals are believed to be type-0. Thus, we can write
H(·) (Equation 3) for a type-1 firm submitting bid Ŝit1 (p):
Hit (p, Ŝit1 (p); ki

= 1, QCit ) =

Z

X

1(

QC−it ×l−i ×εt

0
Sjt
(p, QCjt ) + Ŝit1 (p) ≥

j6=i

Dt (p) + εt )dF (QC−it , l−i , εt |Ŝit1 (p), ki = 1, QCit )
=

Z
QC−it ×l−i ×εt

X

1(

QCjt − εt ≥

j6=i

Dt (p) − Ŝit1 (p))dF (QC−it , l−i , εt |Ŝit1 (p), ki = 1, QCit )
=

Z
QC−it ×l−i ×εt

1(θit ≥ Dt (p) − Ŝit1 (p))dF (QC−it , l−i , εt |Ŝit1 (p), ki = 1, QCit )
22

where the second equality follows from Assumption 1 and the third equality from defining
P
θit ≡ j6=i QCjt − εt .
This tells us that, because a bidder type-1 believes all its rivals are type-0, she expects
all her rivals to submit perfectly inelastic bids determined by her rivals contract positions
(which are private information). Furthermore, conditional on rivals’ types, uncertainty in
rivals’ QCjt and the aggregate demand shock act as shifters in residual demand (but not
pivots). Thus, all that matters with respect to uncertainty is the distribution of θit .
Let Γ(·) denote the conditional distribution of θit (conditional on the realization of all
N − 1 draws from the joint distribution of rival types) and let ∆(l−i ) denote the marginal
distribution of the vector of rival firm types. Then H(·) for a type-1 bidder becomes:
Hit (p, Ŝit1 (p); ki = 1, QCit ) =

Z
l−i

h



i

1 − Γ Dt (p) − Ŝit1 (p)

· ∆(l−i )

Taking derivatives of H(·) to find HS and Hp and plugging into to solve for
Hs (p, Sit∗ (p); ki , QCit )
Hp (p, Sit∗ (p); ki , QCit )

R

=

−

R



HS
:
Hp



1
l−i γ Dt (p) − Ŝit (p) · ∆(l−i )





1
0
l−i γ Dt (p) − Ŝit (p) Dt (p)∆(l−i )

.

The implication is that if type-0 bidders submit perfectly inelastic bids at their contract positions, then the bids of type-1 bidders are additively separable functions of price
and private information on their contract positions. Bid functions will take the form:
Sit1 (p, QCit ) = αit1 (p) + βit1 (QCit ), as shown in Online Appendix G. This additive separability property is valuable because it implies that type-0 rivals’ private information about
their contract positions does not affect a firm’s residual demand slope, as we show below.
Unlike type-0 bidders who bid vertically, type-1 bidders submit bids that offer some quantity
into the market.
Type-k Bidding for k > 1:
For a type-2 bidder, the procedure to derive optimal bids is exactly the same, with one
difference. Rival firms j are now either type-0 or type-1 with additively separable bids. That

23

is, for a firm bidding Ŝit2 (p)
Hit (p, Ŝit2 (p); ki = 2, QCit ) =

Z

1(

QC−it ×l−i ×εt

X

l

Sjtj (p, QCjt ) + Ŝit2 (p) ≥

j6=i

Dt (p) + εt )dF (QC−it , l−i , εt |Ŝit2 (p), ki = 2, QCit )
=

Z

1(

QC−it ×l−i ×εt

X

QCjt +

j6=i

X

l

αjtj (p) + Ŝit2 (p) ≥

j6=i

Dt (p) + εt )dF (QC−it , l−i , εt |Ŝit2 (p), ki = 2, QCit )
=

Z
QC−it ×l−i ×εt

1(θit ≥ Dt (p) −

X

l

αjtj (p) − Ŝit2 (p))

(6)

j6=i

dF (QC−it , l−i , εt |Ŝit2 (p), ki = 2, QCit )
where, as before, θit ≡

P

j6=i

QCjt − εt , but lj ∈ {0, 1}.

In this way, we can write Hit just as before but taking into account that θit corresponds
to the difference between the sum of contract position by rivals and εt .
S
Taking derivatives of H(·) to find HS and Hp and plugging into to solve for H
:
Hp


l



j
2
Hs (p, Sit∗ (p); ki , QCit )
j6=i αjt (p) − Ŝit (p) · ∆(l−i )
l−i γ Dt (p) −


.
= R
P
l
Hp (p, Sit∗ (p); ki , QCit )
− l−i γ Dt (p) − j6=i αjtj (p) − Ŝit2 (p) Dt0 (p)∆(l−i )

R

P

Therefore, when solving for any type-k bidder for k > 0, we use this iterative procedure
that relies on the assumption that type-0 bidders submit perfectly inelastic bid functions.
Next, we make assumptions about ∆i (·) and Γi (·). For the distribution of types, ∆i (·),
we follow the literature and assume that the distribution is Poisson. This distribution has
a single parameter that characterizes firm types and has several intuitively appealing game
theoretic properties, as described in Camerer, Ho, and Chong [2004]. Specifically, we assume:
Assumption 2. ∆(·) is an independent multivariate Poisson distribution truncated at k − 1,
as given by the Poisson Cognitive Hierarchy model.
Finally, we assume Γi to be a uniform distribution. We make this assumption primarily for
computational convenience. Although other distributions could be used, this would increase
computational cost significantly.21 Thus, we assume:
l

21

The researcher needs to solve the first-order condition looking for a fixed point in Sitj (p) for every bidder
i of type l in auction t at point p. This is computationally very expensive in a setting with 12 firms. For
this reason, instead of reducing the number of firms included in the CH and estimating the model using a
different distribution Γi , we examine the extent to which our assumption may impact our results in a different
way. Specifically, we use the estimated parameters that we report in section 6.3 and predict bidding behavior
assuming that Γi is uniform and that Γi is Normal and compare the distribution of predicted bids. The
results, available from the authors, show that the differences are minimal.

24

Assumption 3. Γi (·) is a uniform distribution.
We are now prepared to characterize bid functions for each firm type in a manner so that
we can use realized data from each auction to characterize ex ante bids submitted by each
firm-type under the CH model.
For a type-1 bidder, under these assumptions, the first order-condition can be written as:


p − Cit0 Ŝitk (p)



h
i
1
∗ Ŝitk (p) − QCit
0
−Dt (p)
h
i
1
k
=
∗
Ŝ
(p)
−
QC
it
it
−RDt0 (p)

=

where the second equality follows from the fact that for RD(p) = D(p) + ε − j6=i Sjt (p) =
P
D(p) + ε − j6=i QCjt . Hence, RD0 (p) = D0 (p) for all p.
It is computationally straightforward to calculate the Ŝitk (p) that solves the above equa

tion. For each firm-auction, we observe the bid function’s price, marginal cost (Cit0 Ŝitk (p) ),
and the slope of residual demand (−RDt0 (p)). And we can measure the firm’s contract position in the balancing market (QCit ) by calculating the quantity at which the bid function
intersects the marginal cost function. The rationale for this method to measure the contract
position is as follows: For type k > 0, the first-order condition above says that the firm bids
a price above (below) marginal cost for quantities greater (less) than the contract position,
and the markup (markdown) depends on beliefs about the shape of residual demand which
is driven by beliefs about rival behavior.22 For type-0 firms, we identify the contract position
by assuming that type-0 firms use the balancing market to true-up any residual contract position not satisfied with the day-ahead schedule. Note that this assumption is consistent with
non-strategic behavior; it says that the firm’s action in the auction plays the role of fulfilling
the contract position but does not depend on any beliefs about how rival firms behave.
This yields a straightforward method to calculate firm i’s best-response bid function
for any type k. To see this, note that the equation above is just the familiar “inverse
elasticity pricing rule”. Firm markups of bid over marginal cost are inversely proportional
to their residual demand elasticity. Each component of the residual demand function can be
iteratively solved for, using our data and Assumptions 1-3.
In our implementation of the model, 12 firms are included in the Cognitive Hierarchy and
the remaining firms are included as an unmodeled fringe, as we discuss above. Thus, the
D(p) in the theoretical model corresponds to balancing demand (which is perfectly inelastic)
net of (elastic) supply by the unmodeled firms. In this context, our model would imply that
there is no uncertainty about the slope of the supply of the unmodeled firms. While it may
P

22

This method of identifying the firm’s contract position is shown formally in Proposition 1 of HP.

25

not be literally true that there is no uncertainty, to a first-order, there is not economically
significant slope uncertainty, as we show in Online Appendix H.

6
6.1

Estimation and Results
Identification

Firms’ beliefs about rival types determine bidding strategies. For this reason, it is important
to discuss the process of how beliefs are formed before we turn to estimation. At the same
time, because discussing how beliefs are formed is equivalent to discussing identification of the
parameters of interest, this section informally discusses how our data identify the relationship
between firm characteristics and strategic type.
Under CH, all firms best-respond given their beliefs about their rivals’ bidding behavior.
If a firm is deviating from (realized) best-response in an auction, the model provides beliefs
about rival behavior that rationalize the observed bid as a best-response to those beliefs.
Rivals’ characteristics are informative about the distribution of rivals’ types, so beliefs about
rivals’ types are modeled as a function of rivals’ observable characteristics. CH models this
relationship as a truncated Poisson distribution with a parameter τ , which is a parameterized
function of firms’ characteristics Xi (i.e., τi = exp(Xi0 γ)).
Consider a given parameterized relationship between type and a firm characteristic such
as size. A firm observes each rival’s size and forms beliefs about the rival’s type distribution
based on that relationship. The firm can calculate each rival’s bid function under those
beliefs. For example, a firm that is type-5 can use the relationship between size and type
to compute how rivals will bid; this yields a residual demand function to which the type-5
firm best-responds. As analysts, we can perform the same calculation and compute the bestresponse, not only for a type-5 firm but for any type from k = 0...K. Then we can compare
the firm’s actual bid to each of the type-k bids. This calculation is based on a particular
parameterized relationship between size and type. Our estimation strategy is to search for
the parameter relating size to type that minimizes a metric of distance between observed and
CH-computed bids, as we describe in detail in Section 6.2.
The identification of the parameters of firm type is intuitive. For example, consider the
case with a single firm attribute Xi , so that the index of the τ (·) function is exp(γ0 + γ1 X).
First, consider the variation in the data that identifies γ1 when we hold γ0 constant. Suppose
that Xi is firm size so that γ1 > 0 implies that larger firms are higher types and γ1 < 0
implies that larger firms are lower types. Bids by firm i help identify γ1 in the following
manner. Under CH the observed bids are best-responses given beliefs about the residual

26

P
SBR

QC

A

M Ci

B

Note: Profits increase in the direction of the arrows

Q

Figure 5: Best-Response Bidding in Spot Auction
demand function that firm i faces. For simplicity, suppose firm i faces a large and a small
firm. If γ1 > 0, the large rival firm offers substantial capacity into the market – both because
γ1 > 0 implies the firm is a higher type and thus offers more of its capacity into the market
and because the large firm has more capacity to begin with. This will cause firm i to believe
it faces a relatively elastic residual demand. In contrast, if γ1 < 0, firm i believes that the
large rival will not offer much capacity into the market, but rather that the small rival will
do so. Hence, the residual demand faced by firm i in this case is less elastic than the one it
faces when γ1 > 0, because the only rival firm with substantial capacity is a low type and
low type firms offer less capacity. Our bid data identify γ1 by estimating whether firm i’s
bid is more consistent with best responding to the relatively elastic (γ1 > 0) or relatively
inelastic residual demand (γ1 < 0). Because we have bid data for 12 firms that differ in their
observable characteristics Xi , our data provide rich variation to identify the relationship
between firm characteristics and the level of strategic thinking.
Consider now the identification of γ0 . This parameter is identified as long as not all firms
bid as level-0 firms do. To see this, assume that firms can be classified into two groups.
One group bids vertically (e.g. level-0), while another group bids in some capacity into the
auction. Then, holding γ1 constant, γ0 allows the model to explain the fraction of firms that
follow level-0 behavior. Therefore, if a firm that was classified in the vertical bidding group
were to bid some capacity into the market (i.e., it is reclassified into the second group), this
will be reflected by increasing γ0 to rationalize the lower fraction of type-0 firms.

27

6.1.1

Implications of the Level-0 Assumption

As discussed in Section 4.2, our assumption about the bidding behavior of level-0 players
is supported by the behavior that is observed in the data. Nonetheless, it is important to
discuss how alternative assumptions would impact our results. To organize our discussion, we
divide alternative assumptions for level-0 behavior in two groups. Consider Figure 5 which
depicts a simplified version of best response bidding. One category of level-0 behavior yields
low types bidding vertically and higher types submitting flatter bids, or loosely put, higher
types approaching best-response bidding “from the left”. Another category yields low types
bidding relatively flat (e.g. marginal cost) and higher types submitting steeper bids, or higher
types approaching best-response bidding “from the right”. As we discuss in Appendix F, our
data refute marginal cost bidding, though we still discuss the implications of this assumption.
First, consider assumptions in which as firm type increases, bids get flatter and approach
best-response bids from the left (area A in Figure 5). In this case, profits increase as firms
bid flatter. Our assumption about level-0 behavior is one of these. An alternative, also
non-strategic, is to assume that level-0 behavior is that of a monopoly. In this case, level-0
players best respond to the residual demand function that results from subtracting fringe
supply from balancing demand. Higher type bidders would simply best-respond to level-0
players that assume they are monopolies. This assumption is similar to the one that we make,
but it assumes that level-0 players bid with positive slope even for relatively low prices and
small quantities, while our assumption is that they bid vertically on their contract positions.
Because in our data level-0 bidders are effectively not providing power to the grid, and bid
vertically for most prices, we believe our assumption reflects what we observe in a better way.
This also implies that if we were to assume that level-0 bidders behave as monopolists, the
model would fit the data worse than under the assumption that these bidders bid vertically.
Next, consider alternatives in which as type increases, bids approach best-responses from
the right (area B in Figure 5). Some of these alternatives include level-0 players that bid
their marginal cost, or that bid a constant or proportional markup over marginal costs (i.e., a
rule of thumb). These assumptions are also non-strategic but they result in higher-type rivals
bidding steeper than level-0 players and both bids approaching best-responses from the right
and profits increasing as firms bid steeper. Because these alternatives result in predicted
bids far from those we observe in the data, any assumption that leads to bids approaching
best-responses from the right will result in our model performing worse. Because bids would
converge to best-responses from the right, the model would never predict bids that are in the
neighborhood of those that we observe (i.e., bids would never be steeper than best responses).
In summary, although one could make alternative assumptions about level-0 behavior,
our assumption is driven by what we observe in the data and our knowledge of how these
28

firms determine their bidding strategies.

6.2

Details on Estimation

Estimation follows a minimum-distance approach. τi is a scalar that provides information
about firm i’s type. We assume that τi = exp(Xi0 γ) and, because Xi is public information,
so is τi . Each firm i observes τ−i , the vector of τ ’s of its rivals. Also, each firm i has private
information about its own type. Assume firm i is type k ∈ {0, . . . , K} and the type does not
change over time. If k = 0, then, by Assumption 1 above, firm i would submit a vertical bid
at its own contract position, regardless of its rivals. For all k > 0, firms have beliefs about
its rivals’ types. Specifically, by Assumption 2, these beliefs are assumed to follow a Poisson
distribution truncated at k, meaning that firm i believes all its rivals to be type k − 1 or less.
The probability associated with each type varies according to each rivals’ τ .
Then, we use the model to compute, for each firm i and auction t, the optimal bid function
given i’s type and its beliefs over its rivals’ types. Note, however, that in a specific auction,
even if two bidders are of the same type, differences in marginal costs will generate differences
in predicted bids.
Once firm i has computed what it expects its rivals to do for each possible type, it
maximizes expected profits according to its beliefs about its rivals’ types. This results in a
bid function, conditional on i’s type. Therefore, we compute i’s bid for all possible types
that firm i can be. Because i’s actual type is unknown to the econometrician, we proceed in
several steps.
First, we compute bid functions over a grid of price points that are centered at the realized
market clearing price. Second, for each auction t and bidder i, we compute the difference
between the realized bid (data) and the bid predicted by the model, at each price point p,
for each type k that firm i can be. However, because firms differ in capacity, we scale these
differences by the quantity-difference between the predicted bid for each firm for types K
and 0. Third, to compute the total difference between a predicted bid function and the bid
data, we sum the quantity differences across all the price points in the grid, for bidder i in
auction t, when i is type k. Because we are primarily concerned about differences that take
place in the neighborhood of the market-clearing price, we weight price points by a triangular
distribution centered at the market-clearing price.
Fourth, after we have computed the weighted quantity differences between the predicted
bids for firm i (for each of its possible types k) and the bid data, we weight each of these
differences by the probability that the firm is each type k. This probability is modeled as
a Poisson distribution truncated at the number of possible types considered in estimation
(level-0 and 20 levels of strategic sophistication). We use each firms’ τ to compute this
29

probability. Finally, we add over firms and auctions.
In this context, our estimate γ̂ is



γ̂ = argmin
γ

XX

XX


i

t

k

p

model
bdata
(p|k)
it (p) − bit
model
model
bit (p|K) − bit (p|0)

2





× P(p) Pi (k| |K|, γ̂),

where P(p) corresponds to the probability of observing a price point p as given by the triangular distribution and Pi (k| |K|, γ̂) corresponds to the probability of bidder i being type
k, conditional on there being |K| possible types and γ̂ being the estimated parameters. In
estimation, we use a large grid of initial points to explore the reliability of our estimation
routine in converging to the global minimum. Finally, we compute standard errors using 250
Bootstrap samples.

6.3

Results: Estimated Parameters

Results are reported in Table 1. We estimate seven specifications that differ in the observable
characteristics (Xi ) of the firms that affect firm τi . In our baseline specification column, type
is determined by firm size. As a metric of size in the balancing market, we seek a metric of
the firm’s potential stakes in the balancing market that is exogenous to its realized bidding
behavior. We compute the quantity of sales if the firm were to best-respond, averaged across
all auctions. This is positively correlated with installed generation capacity.
As shown in column (1), we find that larger firms are higher types.23 In order to interpret
the positive coefficient on Size, we calculate the implied distribution of firm type for each of
the 12 firms that we include in the Cognitive Hierarchy model. Figure 6 plots the estimated
type distribution for each firm. Consider the smallest firm with a size that is 11% of the size
of the largest firm – the pdf farthest to the left in the figure. We estimate that the smallest
firm has about a 50% chance of being type-0, about a 35% chance of being type-1, about a
10% chance of being type-2, and is higher than type-2 with very low probability. Each of the
other pdfs in the figure show the estimated type distribution for the other firms, with the
larger firms having probability distributions further to the right. Overall, we find that larger
firms are likely to be higher type, and importantly, there is substantial heterogeneity across
these firms in the estimated types. This means that only the largest firms actually engage in
behavior that is similar to what a Bayesian Nash model would predict.
23

We expect the constant to be negative in order to rationalize level-0 players because a positive constant
would decrease the probability of observing a level-0 player significantly. Note, however, that this is not
required by the CH model as one need not observe level-0 behavior in the data. However, as we have
specified level-0 behavior according to what we observe in our data, a negative constant shows that the type

30

Figure 6: Estimated Distributions of Types for the 12 Firms (Size Specification)

We illustrate the model’s fit for the same firms that we use to illustrate bidding in section 3.1. Figure 7 displays actual bid functions as well as bid functions for different type-k
models, as predicted by the Size specification of our model. We plot the predicted CH bids
for type-0 through type-5. The vertical CH bid is, by Assumption 1, submitting a perfectly
inelastic bid at the contract position. The remaining bids depict predicted bids for type-1
through type-5, with higher types uniformly flatter. The largest differences between bid
functions are for the lowest type; in this example, bids for type-4 and type-5 are very similar.
Higher type bids converge rather quickly and we do not see any “cycles” in bids as types
increase. Intuitively, because higher types believe their rivals will bid more capacity into the
market, the best-response bid to those beliefs is to bid more capacity in the market.
We also explore other specifications of how firm characteristics relate to type. The second
specification in Table 1 allows for non-linearity in how size affects τi by adding size squared.
The implied distribution of types is qualitatively very similar to our linear specification.
Next we explore if the organizational structure of the firm is associated with higher type.
As discussed in Section 2, some firms are merchant firms that have never been part of a
regulated utility while other firms are either municipal utilities or generation firms that were
formerly integrated into an investor-owned utility. It is possible that organizational structure
of level-0 behavior that we have assumed is not uncommon.

31

(a) Large Firm

(b) Medium Firm

(c) Small Firm

(d) Very Small Firm

Figure 7: Actual Bids vs. Cognitive Hierarchy Bids for Different Sized Firms

32

could impact the nature of the trading operations that a firm establishes. In column (3) of
Table 1, we test whether merchant firms tend to be higher types. However, we find that if
anything, merchants are lower types than former utilities and municipal utilities. However,
the role of organizational structure is substantially smaller than the role of firm size.
In specifications (4)–(6), we investigate whether the personnel hired to run firm bidding
operations is related to firm type. In order to assess the role of personnel, we use LinkedIn
and other publicly available online data sources to make the best guess of the manager(s)
who were responsible for each firm’s power marketing operations at the time. In some cases,
job titles were sufficiently clear to identify the power marketing manager, and in other cases
we were only able to identify personnel who were involved in firm wholesale power operations.
Therefore, the data used for this specification may not be as precise as the data on bids and
costs. Nevertheless, this provides suggestive evidence on the role of power trading personnel.
For each firm manager whom we identify, we collect information on job title and education.
For each firm, we create an AAU U niversity dummy variable to indicate whether any of
the firm’s power marketing personnel have a degree from a university that belongs to the
American Association of Universities (AAU).24 Five of the twelve firms have personnel who
graduated from an AAU university. We also create a dummy variable for whether any
personnel have a degree in either Economics, Business, or Finance. Seven of the twelve firms
have personnel with a degree in economics, finance, or an MBA while the most popular other
type of degree is in engineering. We estimate our benchmark specification using Size and
add dummy variables for university type or degree type.
Our specifications with personnel are reported in columns (4)-(6). We find that when we
include AAU in addition to firm size in column (4), the AAU coefficient is positive and the
coefficient of size is slightly lower. We find similar patterns when we include a dummy for
degree in Economics, Finance or Business – the coefficient is positive and the coefficient of
size falls significantly. These results suggest one mechanism through which size may affect
the level of strategic sophistication. Discussions with industry personnel suggest that the
dollar stakes of each firm are likely sufficient to cover the costs of establishing a basic trading
operation. But only larger firms may have sufficient dollar stakes to hire high quality and
well-trained traders and to build sophisticated trading operations. This is consistent with
our finding that once we control for whether personnel are trained in economics, finance or
have an MBA, that the relationship between size and type is weaker.
Finally, we explore the possibility that firms may learn over time. To do so, we specify τ
as a function of firm size and a linear time trend. The results are reported in the last column
of Table 1 and show that the estimated coefficients for the constant and size are remarkably
24

The AAU includes 62 private and public research universities in the U.S. and Canada.

33

similar to those in column (1). Nonetheless, we find a positive and significant coefficient on
the time trend, which suggests that firm types do change over time. However, the amount
of learning is economically very small. To see this, Figure 8 plots the estimated probability
distributions over types for both the smallest and largest firm in the market. The distribution
plotted in solid yellow depicts the type distribution in the first week of our sample, i.e. the
first week of the second year of the market. The distribution plotted with green markers
depicts the distribution six months later in the last week of the sample. For each firm, the
distributions are nearly identical which suggests that in practice learning is minimal and has
no meaningful impact on the estimated probability distributions over types.

(a) Smallest Firm

(b) Largest Firm

Figure 8: Estimated Distributions of Types and Learning

6.4

Model Fit

In this section we show that the cognitive hierarchy model – with our parameterization of
size determining beliefs – fits the actual bidding behavior quite well. To assess the model fit,
we use the specification where Size determines firm type and subsequent bidding behavior
(column (1) of Table 1). It is important to note that this specification is very parsimonious;
we are using only one characteristic – size – to fully characterize a firm and to predict bids.
We compare the fit of the CH model to a model in which firms best-respond to their rivals’
actual bid data; this best-response model is essentially a model in which firms individually
best-respond and have consistent beliefs about their rivals’ behavior. Table 2 reports results
from a regression at the firm-auction level that predicts realized profits under actual bidding
with profits under either the CH model (column 1) or best-response model (column 2). The
CH model fits the actual data better than the best-response model. The coefficient of modeled
profits is much closer to unity for the CH model (β̂ CH = .803 vs. β̂ BR = .428) and the CH
2
2
model explains more of the variation in firm profits (RCH
= 0.67 vs. RBR
= 0.49). When we
34

Table 1: Structural Model: Estimated Parameters of Type Function

Constant

Size

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.726

-0.196

-3.395

-0.749

-3.493

-0.691

-0.675

(0.031)

(0.037)

(0.269)

(0.049)

(0.796)

(0.041)

(0.072)

14.594

-1.163

25.789

13.619

3.090

11.933

13.776

(0.301)

(0.464)

(3.385)

(0.603)

(0.847)

(0.546)

(0.629)

Size2

86.191
(4.035)

Merchant

-1.562
(0.295)

AAU University

0.376
(0.059)

Degree in Economics,

5.626

Business or Finance

(0.764)

Economics degree

1.633
(0.115)

Time Trend

0.051
(0.016)

Obj. Fn. / #Auctions

208.512

208.354

208.526

208.485

206.386

208.308

208.520

Note: This table reports estimated parameters of our Cognitive Hierarchy model that are estimated using the
minimum distance estimator described in section 6.2. Each column reports estimates for different parameterizations of τi (Xi ). Bootstrapped standard errors are calculated using 250 samples.

35

include profits under both models of behavior in column (3), we find that once we include
CH profits, the best-response profits do not help predict actual profits in an economically
meaningful way. Moreover, we view the fit of the CH model as strong given that we are using
only a single covariate – firm size – to explain the heterogeneity in behavior across firms.
Table 2: Model Fit: Comparison of Cognitive Hierarchy Model
to Unilateral Best-Response Model
(1) CH

(2) BR

(3) Both

Dependent Variable: Profits from Actual Bids

Profits under Cognitive Hierarchy

0.803

0.642

(0.069)

(0.127)

Profits under Best-Response

0.428

0.137

(0.044)

(0.062)

-328.17

-241.74

-374.17

(141.98)

(120.72)

(125.79)

Observations

1058

1058

1058

R2

0.67

0.49

0.69

Constant

Note: This table reports results from a regression of observed profits from actual bidding
behavior on firm profits as predicted by the Cognitive Hierarchy model (column 1), firm
profits that would be achieved from a model of unilateral best-response to actual rival
bids (column 2), and both (column 3). An observation is a firm-auction. Standard errors
clustered at the firm-level are reported in parentheses.

6.5

Interpretation of Model in Context of Management Practices

In the context of the Texas electricity market, we interpret the CH framework as an “as-if”
model capturing the real-world management practices of the market players. Our perspective
into management practices of these firms is shaped by interviews we conducted with some of
the firms in 2004. Unfortunately, we did not plan a systematic survey, so the information we
gathered from these site visits are anecdotal in nature. However, one salient impression is that
larger firms had many more resources devoted to trading operations, which included large
trading floors, several employees with a PhD, and specially developed software applications
36

to gather market information and compute bids. In contrast, trading operations at smaller
firms appeared much more thinly staffed, with employees who appeared to specialize in
operational/engineering details of the plant rather than in trading. In the smaller firms, the
employees whom we spoke with had less time to devote to balancing market bidding and did
not appear to conceptualize the market in terms of “residual demand”.
The interviews suggest that the nature of scale/size effects is that larger firms have enough
resources to hire technically sophisticated trading staff who have the latitude to reflect upon
and optimize bidding operations to improve profits. As we discuss above, because most of
the generation volume is sold in forward contracts, the balancing market volume comprises a
small share of the quantity of electricity traded. While this does not mean that the balancing market is unimportant in terms of overall profits, the profit potential from this market
may appear unimportant to smaller firms, who, in turn, may not devote many resources
to “thinking strategically” about this market. This may rationalize strategies like vertical
bidding, which essentially means that the firm is avoiding the balancing market altogether.
Although there is no direct mapping from type to business practice, one could conceptualize the correspondence in the following way: Level-0 firms may misunderstand opportunity
costs and fail to recognize the profit opportunities of selling excess capacity to the balancing
market. Low-level types may understand the potential profitability but not invest great effort in back-end software and rather use rule-of-thumb heuristics. And high-level types may
invest person-power to estimating residual demand, perhaps using the lagged bid data that
the market operator posted. And, finally, because there was persistence in the personnel that
ran bidding operations over our sample period, minimal evidence of learning may be present.

7

A “Reduced Form” Test of Strategic vs. Non-strategic
behavior: Evidence from a Nuclear Plant Outage

In this section, we show additional data-driven support for the CH model and our results. In
general, in the CH model, level-0 behavior captures non-strategic agents. One type of nonstrategic behavior is an agent who does not respond to changes in the (common knowledge)
cost structure of its competitors, but may respond to changes in its own costs. Note that this
definition of non-strategic behavior encompasses a large array of behavioral patterns that
have been considered as level-0 behavior in the literature. Patterns such as vertical bidding,
which is our definition of level-0 behavior, bidding marginal cost (or bidding truthfully, as
in Crawford and Iriberri [2007], Gillen [2010], An [2017]), bidding a random number that is
independent of competitors’ costs (again, as in Crawford and Iriberri [2007], Gillen [2010], An

37

[2017]), or behaving as if one is a monopolist regardless of one’s competitors (as in Goldfarb
and Xiao [2011]) are consistent with this definition of non-strategic behavior.
We use a two month outage at a nuclear plant to test whether firms change bids in
response to competitor cost shocks. In the middle of our sample period, one large nuclear
generator went off-line for about two months. This event reduced nuclear output by about
2300 megawatts as shown in Figure 9. As a result, total demand for power intersected
aggregate system marginal cost at a steeper point on the marginal cost function. Firms
that behave strategically will recognize that this publicly observable cost shock is likely to
make their residual demand in the balancing market less elastic. Therefore, all else equal,
we expect strategic firms to respond to the nuclear outage by submitting steeper bids.

Figure 9: Nuclear Production During Fall 2002 Outage
We test this hypothesis and find that large firms respond to both competitor costs and
own costs, but that small firms only respond to own costs. To do so, we analyze the slope
of firms’ bid functions in the months surrounding the nuclear outage and test whether bids
are “steeper” during the outage. We create a panel of firm bids across each auction in our
it
sample. The dependent variable is the (inverse) slope ( ∂S
) of firm i’s bid in auction t.25
∂p
Outaget is an indicator equal to one if the auction occurred during the outage period of
October 2, 2002 to November 27, 2002 and equal to zero if the auction occurred prior to the
outage. Firms strategically responding to the outage face less elastic residual demand and
thus will submit bids with smaller inverse bid slope.
Results are shown in Table 3. We estimate the effect of the outage separately for the
largest three and smallest three firms. In the first two columns, we estimate the slope of
25

We measure slope as the bid linearized plus and minus $10 around the auction’s market-clearing price
($10 is the standard deviation of the market-clearing price in our sample).

38

bids only as a function of the outage. The largest three firms submit bid functions that are
it
‘steeper’ (i.e. ∂S
is smaller) during the outage, but the smallest three firms do not change
∂p
the slope of their bids during the outage.
In the next two columns, we control for changes in own costs by including a measure of
∂qit
the firm’s own marginal cost function – the (inverse) slope of the firm’s MC ( ∂M
). Both
C
small and large firms submit steeper bids in response to changes in their own marginal costs;
∂qit
it
is larger), the firm submits a flatter bid function (i.e. ∂S
when marginal cost is flatter ( ∂M
C
∂p
is larger). However, only the large firms respond to the outage by submitting steeper bids.
And in the final two columns, we add bidder fixed effects to allow for firms to face different
shaped residual demand functions in general. We find robust evidence that all firms respond
to their own cost shocks, but only large firms respond to the large rival cost shock induced
by the nuclear outage. We find similar results when we analyze all 12 firms and define Large
(Small) as all firms above (below) the median size firm.
Table 3: Evidence of Non-Strategic Bidding: Bidding Response to Nuclear Outage
it
Dependent variable: Slope of each firm’s inverse bid function in auction t ( ∂S
)
∂p

Largest Smallest

Outage

Largest

Smallest

Largest

Smallest

Three

Three

Three

Three

Three

Three

-47.81

-0.02

-31.13

0.17

-19.42

0.36

(7.50)

(0.18)

(8.30)

(0.19)

(5.19)

(0.18)

0.15

0.04

0.26

0.09

(0.05)

(0.01)

(0.04)

(0.01)

∂qit
Own MC ( ∂M
)
C

Constant

73.42

1.32

38.08

0.65

-8.61

0.63

(7.18)

(0.12)

(12.37)

(0.18)

(8.84)

(0.19)

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

N

189

189

189

189

189

189

R2

0.21

0.00

0.25

0.17

0.59

0.25

Bidder
Fixed Effects

Note: Each column reports estimates from a separate regression of the slope of a firm’s
bid function on an indicator variable that the auction occurred during the fall 2002 nuclear outage. An observation is a firm-auction. The dependent variable is the slope
it
( ∂S
) of firm i’s (inverse) bid function in auction t where the slope is linearized plus and
∂p
minus $10 around the market-clearing price. OwnM C is the slope of the firm’s own (inverse) marginal cost function linearized plus and minus $10 around the market-clearing
price. White standard errors are reported in parentheses.

39

8

Out-of-Sample Prediction

We find that the CH model is better at predicting bidding behavior out-of-sample than a
best-response model. To do so, we re-estimate the CH model using a subsample of auctions
that excludes the outage period described in the previous section. Then, we use the estimated
parameters from this restricted sample to predict equilibrium outcomes during the outage.
Using the baseline CH model where type is parameterized to firm size, we predict each firm’s
profit in every auction for the auctions that occurred during the nuclear outage. Then we
use a regression-based approach to measure whether profits achieved from the firms’ actual
bidding behavior is better explained by the CH model or a model of unilateral best-response.
Results are shown in Table 4. Column (1) shows that actual profits are only weakly
correlated with profits predicted by a best-response model, while column (2) shows a much
stronger correlation between actual profits and profits predicted by the CH model. Column
(3) shows a “horse race” between the two models and suggests that our CH model outperforms
a model of unilateral best-response.
Table 4: Explaining variation in realized profits during the outage period
Dependent variable: Realized profits
(1)
Profits under Cognitive Hierarchy

Profits under Best-Response

Constant

(2)

(3)

0.703

0.642

(0.136)

(0.211)

0.263

0.061

(0.052)

(0.091)

-64.484

-248.599

-264.619

(156.308)

(101.941)

(97.348)

Observations

426

426

426

R2

0.25

0.56

0.57

Note: This table reports regression results from studying the auctions during the nuclear
outage. An observation is a firm-auction. The dependent variable is profits from the firms’
actual bids. The covariates are firm profits as predicted by the Cognitive Hierarchy model
(column 1), firm profits that would be achieved from a model of unilateral best-response to
actual rival bids (column 2), and both (column 3). Predicted profits under CH are based
on a sample of auctions that excludes the period of the nuclear outage. Standard errors
clustered at the firm-level are reported in parentheses.

40

9

Counterfactuals: Increasing Strategic Sophistication

Having estimated our model of bidding behavior that allows for heterogeneity in strategic
sophistication, we now turn to a key question of this paper: How does the lack of strategic
sophistication affect market efficiency? We address this question in two steps.
First, we consider how increasing firms’ sophistication, without changing market structure, affects market efficiency. Several events could cause firms to become more strategically
sophisticated. For example, a firm could hire more qualified managers, perhaps with backgrounds associated with higher types (e.g. training in economics/business/finance or educated at an AAU institution). Alternatively, a firm could hire a consulting company to take
over its bidding operations rather than use in-house personnel. Or perhaps the grid operator
(which is a non-profit entity with public interests) could distribute “teaching material” about
how bidding vertically sacrifices profit-making opportunities. Under these counterfactuals,
market efficiency will increase if more sophisticated bidding leads to more elastic bids and
causes a firm’s low-cost generation to be offered into the market.
Second, we estimate the impact on efficiency of increases in sophistication that are caused
by large high-type firms merging with smaller lower-type firms. Suppose that when the two
firms merge, the trading operation of the larger firm takes over all bidding operations, so the
merged firm enjoys the sophistication level of the large firm. The effect of such mergers is
ex-ante ambiguous. On one hand, more sophisticated bidding of the small firm’s generation
assets is likely to cause lower-cost plants to be dispatched. On the other hand, mergers
increase concentration and increase market power. We estimate which effect dominates for
mergers between firms of different sizes.26
Mechanically we compute counterfactuals by using the firm-specific estimated probability
distribution over types (presented in Figure 6) to take 1,000 draws with replacement of the
type of each firm in the CH. We then solve for the equilibrium for each auction and average
generating costs over the 1,000 replications. It is important to note that only a subset of
firms in the market are included in the cognitive hierarchy; the remaining firms are part of
a unmodeled fringe. For this reason, we compute inefficiencies as the difference between the
generating cost implied by the estimated model and our efficient benchmark in which all
firms included in the CH bid marginal costs, while the rest of the firms bid according to their
bids in the data. We present the counterfactuals for our benchmark specification where firm
type is a function of size.
26
It is important to note that the merger counterfactual could also represent a less extreme contractual
relationship between two firms. Specifically, the merger counterfactual also would apply to a setting in which
the low-type firm contracts out bidding operations to the high-type firm. We thank a referee for pointing
this out.

41

9.1

Increasing sophistication without changing market structure

Increases in sophistication that do not impact market structure, such as hiring a consulting
firm to take over bidding operations or hiring better managers, will impact efficiency through
two channels. First, if firms are induced to be higher-type thinkers, the bid functions will
become “flatter” because beliefs that rivals are higher types imply that the firms believe their
residual demand to be more elastic. As a result, more low-cost generation capacity will be
offered into the balancing market and production costs will fall. This is the direct effect of
increasing sophistication.
However, there is also a second indirect impact on efficiency. Suppose that the increase
in sophistication is publicly observable (e.g. rivals observe that the firm hires a bidding
consultant). Then rival firms recognize the increase in sophistication (even though their
beliefs will continue to be wrong) and also submit more elastic bids.
We simulate the effects of increasing the strategic sophistication of firms of different
sizes. It is a priori ambiguous which types of firms would most improve market efficiency by
increasing sophistication. Small firms have smaller amounts of generation capacity to offer
into the market, but it is the small firms that we find are bidding with the least sophistication
(i.e. “too steep”).
Table 5 presents results using the Size parameterization of τi .27 The first row reports
estimated changes in total market production costs when the smallest six firms are given
the sophistication level of the median-sized firm. When the increase in sophistication is
publicly observed so that own-firm and rival firm bids adjust, production costs fall by 6.95
percent during periods of positive balancing demand. Most of the impact occurs through
the channel of changing the firm’s own bids – the production costs fall by 6.22 percent when
rivals do not react to the change in sophistication. In the second row, we model the impact
of increasing the sophistication of all firms that are larger than the median-sized firm to
the sophistication level of the largest firm. Production costs fall by 2.71 percent which is
less than half of the efficiency improvement of increasing sophistication of the smaller firms.
Finally, in the third row we focus on the three smallest firms and find that much of the room
for efficiency improvements lies in increasing sophistication of very small firms. Although
the small firms have less generation capacity to add to the market, the largest scope for
efficiency improvement lies in the small firms that withhold so much capacity due to low
sophistication. Finally, the two last columns of Table 5 show that during hours with negative
balancing demand (DEC hours), the efficiency effects are even larger.
Finally, we estimate that there are diminishing marginal private returns to increases in
sophistication. As shown in Online Appendix I, when firms exogenously increase sophistica27

Estimates using the Size2 parameterization are quite similar.

42

Table 5: Exogenous increase in sophistication: Change in Production Costs
INC side

DEC side

Counterfactual

Public

Private

Public

Private

Small firms to median

-6.95%

-6.22%

-18.4%

-17.6%

Above median firms to highest

-2.71%

-1.96%

-13.42%

-12.46%

Three smallest to median

-4.67%

-3.75%

-14.24%

-13.64%

This table reports the changes in total production costs when different subsets of
firms are modeled to increase sophistication (τi ). These counterfactual calculations
use parameter estimates from the first specification in Table 1. Small firms to median
simulates production when the smallest six firms are given the sophistication level of
the median firm. Above median firms to highest simulates production when all firms
above the median-sized firm are given the sophistication of the largest firm. Three
smallest to median simulates production when the three smallest firms are given the
sophistication level of the median firm. Counterfactuals are calculated separately for
auctions with positive balancing demand (INC side) and negative balancing demand
(DEC side). Public indicates that the change in sophistication is observed by rival
firms so that rival bids change due to increase in sophistication. Private indicates
that the change in sophistication is not observed by rivals so that only the bids of the
treated firm change.

tion to the level of larger firms (but maintain their existing production capacity), the average
increases in profits diminish with size.

9.2

Mergers

We now turn to studying how mergers affect efficiency. As mentioned above, we focus on potential mergers that do not generate cost synergies but do increase concentration. Specifically
we imagine a merger that changes the bidding into the balancing market but does not change
any other decisions of the merging firms, such as forward contracting decisions or day-ahead
schedules. In reality, a complete merger of power marketing operations – including forward
contracting – could change the positions at which bidders find themselves when balancing
market bidding takes place. We are not in a position to simulate counterfactuals for full
power marketing integration.28 However, we can simulate the effect of a merger of balancing
28

There are at least two factors that prevent us from modeling the impact of mergers on both the forward
contract market and the balancing market simultaneously. First, contracted quantities correspond to a
mixture of long and medium-term contracts, that are signed in advance of any balancing auction, and often
refer to blocks of hours over periods involving days or weeks. This means that contract positions are unlikely
to be chosen in order to enter a specific balancing auction with a strategically chosen contracted position.
Second, from a practical perspective, forward contracts are bilateral contracts and are proprietary data to
which we do not have access. On the other hand, firms often treat the two markets as separate, as they have
separate trading desks (and traders) for long-term and balancing operations. This suggests that though it is

43

market bidding operations in order to illustrate the impact of increasing sophistication on the
balancing market. In our merger simulations, the merging firm takes on the sophistication
level of the most sophisticated firm (i.e. the larger firm) of the merging insiders.29
In this context, mergers have countervailing effects on efficiency. Mergers that increase
sophistication of one of the merging firms increase efficiency through the same channels as
the counterfactuals studied above. This reallocates production from high-cost, high-type
firms to low-cost, low-type firms that have previously priced themselves out of the market.
However, mergers create a countervailing effect – increasing market concentration will create
additional market power that leads to higher production costs.
Our simulations show that mergers that increase sophistication can increase efficiency as
long as the merging firms are not too large. The first row of Table 6 shows that a merger
between the smallest and largest firms reduces production costs, despite the increase in
concentration. However, for mergers involving medium-sized and larger firms, the market
power effect dominates and mergers increase production costs.
Table 6: Increasing Sophistication via Mergers: Change in Production Costs
Merging Firms

INC side

DEC side

Smallest and largest firms

-2.62%

-6.49%

Median and largest firms

+10.29%

+10.37%

Two largest firms

+18.38%

+48.72%

This table reports the changes in total production costs when
different pairs of firms merge. These counterfactual calculations use parameter estimates from the first specification in
Table 1. Counterfactuals are calculated separately for auctions with positive balancing demand (INC side) and negative balancing demand (DEC side).

possible for mergers to impact forward contracting, we do not believe this would have a strategic impact on
the balancing market. Finally, considering the two markets as related necessarily means that the game to be
modeled involves trading over long and short term contracts for power across multiple hours (recall that our
model corresponds to one in which firms bid for a specific hour and not for multiple ones). Modeling this
broader “super game” is beyond the scope of this paper.
29
One could also assign the merging insiders the sophistication associated with the larger, merged firm.
However, the two assignment rules lead to very similar beliefs as long as one of the merging firms is small.

44

10

Conclusions

Models of strategic equilibrium form the foundation of many studies in Industrial Organization that investigate market efficiency in oligopoly settings. However, there is some evidence
suggesting that the application of such strategic equilibrium models to all settings has to be
done with caution – in some settings observed behavior may depart significantly and persistently from what equilibrium models predict. These departures from Nash equilibrium
behavior may have significant implications for efficiency.
In this paper we study bidding in the Texas electricity market, a market in which bidding by some firms departs significantly from what Nash-type models predict, while bidding
by other firms closely resembles these predictions. We use this setting, as well as a unique
dataset containing information on bids and marginal costs, to embed a Cognitive Hierarchy
model into a structural model of bidding behavior. Our unique dataset, in addition to our
model, allow us to identify and estimate heterogeneity in levels of strategic sophistication
across power generation firms. Our results show that while small firms behave as if they
are boundedly rational in a Cognitive Hierarchy sense, large firms behave closely to what a
Bayesian Nash model would predict. We then use the estimated levels of strategic sophistication to study how increasing the sophistication of low-type firms, either exogenously or
through mergers with higher-type firms, may affect efficiency. Our results show that not only
can exogenously increasing sophistication increase efficiency significantly, but that mergers
that do not generate cost synergies but increase concentration may also increase efficiency.

45

References
Yonghong An. Identification of First-Price Auctions with Non-Equilibrium Beliefs: A Measurement Error Approach. Journal of Econometrics, 200(2):326–343, October 2017.
Ayala Arad and Ariel Rubinstein. The 11-20 money request game: Evaluating the upper
bound of k-level reasoning. American Economic Review, 102(7):3561–3573, 2012.
Ross Baldick and Hui Nui. Lessons learned: the Texas experience. In James M. Griffin and
Steven L. Puller, editors, Electricity Deregulation: Choices and Challenges. University of
Chicago Press, 2005.
Nicholas Bloom and John Van Reenen. Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across Firms and Countries. Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXXII(4):1351–1408,
November 2007.
Severin Borenstein, James B. Bushnell, and Frank A. Wolak. Measuring Market Inefficiencies
in California’s Restructured Wholesale Electricity Market. American Economic Review,
92(5):1376–1405, December 2002.
James Bushnell, Erin Mansur, and Celeste Saravia. Vertical Arrangements, Market Structure, and Competition: An Analysis of Restructured U.S. Electricity Markets. American
Economic Review, 98(1):237–266, 2008.
Colin F. Camerer. Behavioral Game Theory: Experiments in Strategic Interaction. Princeton
University Press, 2003.
Colin F. Camerer, Teck-Hua Ho, and Juin-Kuan Chong. A Cognitive Hierarchy Model of
Games. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(3):861–898, 2004.
Sungjin Cho and John Rust. The flat-rental puzzle. Review of Economic Studies, 77(2):
560–594, April 2010.
Miguel A. Costa-Gomes, Vincent P. Crawford, and Bruno Broseta. Cognition and Behavior
in Normal-form Fames: an Experimental Study. Econometrica, 69(5):1193–1235, 2001.
Vincent P. Crawford and Nagore Iriberri. Fatal attraction: Salience, Naivete, and Sophistication in Experimental “Hide-and-Seek” Games. American Economic Review, 97(5):
1731–1750, December 2007.

46

Vincent P. Crawford, Uri Gneezy, and Yuval Rottenstreich. The Power of Focal Points Is Limited: Even Minute Payoff Asymmetry May Yield Large Coordination Failures. American
Economic Review, 98(4):1443–1458, September 2008.
Stefano DellaVigna. Structural behavioral economics. Mimeo, 2017.
Stefano DellaVigna and Matthew Gentzkow. Uniform pricing in U.S. retail chains. Mimeo,
2017.
Ulrich Doraszelski, Gregory Lewis, and Ariel Pakes. Just starting out: Learning and equilibrium in a new market. American Economic Review, 108(3):565–615, 2018.
Sara Fisher Ellison, Christopher M. Snyder, and Hongkai Zhang. Costs of managerial attention and activity as a source of sticky prices: Structural estimates from an online market.
Mimeo, 2016.
Natalia Fabra and Mar Reguant. Pass-Through of Emission Costs in Electricity Markets.
American Economic Review, 104(9):2872–2899, 2014.
Drew Fudenberg, David G. Rand, and Anna Dreber. Slow to Anger and Fast to Forgive:
Cooperation in an Uncertain World. American Economic Review, 102(2):720–49, April
2012. doi: 10.1257/aer.102.2.720. URL http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/
aer.102.2.720.
Ben Gillen. Identification and Estimation of Level-k Auctions. California Institute of Technology working paper, August 2010.
Avi Goldfarb and Mo Xiao. Who Thinks about the Competition: Managerial Ability and
Strategic Entry in US Local Telephone Markets. American Economic Review, 101(7):
3130–3161, 2011.
Ali Hortacsu and Steven L Puller. Understanding Strategic Bidding in Restructured Electricity Markets: a Case Study of ERCOT. NBER Working Paper 11123, February 2005.
Ali Hortacsu and Steven L. Puller. Understanding Strategic Bidding in Multi-Unit Auctions:
A Case Study of the Texas Electricity Spot Market. RAND Journal of Economics, 39(1):
86–114, Spring 2008.
Chang-Tai Hsieh and Peter J. Klenow. Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
India. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4):1403–48, 2009.

47

John H Kagel and Alvin E Roth. The Handbook of Experimental Economics. Princeton
university press Princeton, NJ, 1995.
Cade Massey and Richard H. Thaler. The loser’s curse: Decision making and market efficiency
in the National Football League draft. Management Science, 59(7):1479–1495, July 2013.
Richard D. McKelvey and Thomas R. Palfrey. Quantal Response Equilibria for Normal Form
Games. Games and Economic Behavior, 10(1):6–38, July 1995.
Rosemary Nagel. Unraveling in Guessing Games: An Experimental Study. American Economic Review, 85(5):1313–1326, December 1995.
Dale O Stahl and Paul W Wilson. On players’ models of other players: Theory and experimental evidence. Games and Economic Behavior, 10(1):218–254, 1995.
Chad Syverson. Product Substitutability and Productivity Dispersion. Review of Economics
and Statistics, 86(2):534–50, 2004.
Robert Wilson. Auctions of Shares. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 93(4):675–689, 1979.
Frank A. Wolak. Measuring Unilateral Market Power in Wholesale Electricity Markets: The
California Market, 1998-2000. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 93(2):
425–430, May 2003.
Catherine D. Wolfram. Strategic Bidding in a Multiunit Auction: An Empirical Analysis of
Bids to Supply Electricity in England and Wales. RAND Journal of Economics, 29(4):
703–725, 1998.

48

Online Appendix: Not For Publication
Does Strategic Ability Affect Efficiency?
Evidence from Electricity Markets

Ali Hortaçsu

Fernando Luco

Steven L. Puller

Dongni Zhu

A

Data Details (reproduced from Hortaçsu and Puller
[2008])

Hourly bid schedules by each bidder, or qualified scheduling entity (QSE), are from ERCOT.
QSEs occasionally bid for more than one firm. For example, in the South zone in 2001, the
QSE named Reliant bid for both Reliant and the City of San Antonio. We match the bid
functions to all units for which the QSE bids. So for all units owned by both Reliant and the
City of San Antonio in the South in 2001, we match the bid function to the generation data.
However, interpretation of the results becomes problematic when an observed bid function
represents the bids by more than one firm. Because the results are some combination of two
firms’ behavior, we will not interpret results in such situations. We only interpret our results
as firm-level behavior when at least 90% of all electricity generated by owners using that
QSE can be attributed to a single owner. We make one exception to this 90% rule – TXU
Generation which comprises 87% of the generation for TXU the QSE in North 2002.
We measure the variable costs of output using data on each unit’s fuel costs and the rate
at which the unit converts the fuel to electricity. For each 15-minute interval, we have data
from ERCOT on whether a generating unit is operating, its day-ahead scheduled generation,
and its hourly available generating capacity. We measure the marginal cost of units that
burn natural gas and coal. For each unit, we have data on the fuel efficiency (i.e. average
heat rate). Each unit is assumed to have constant marginal cost up to its hourly operating
capacity, an assumption that is common in the literature. The ERCOT system is largely
separated from other electricity grids in the country so there are virtually no imports.
Daily gas spot prices measure the opportunity cost of fuel for natural gas units. We
use prices at the Agua Dulce, Katy, Waha, and Carthage hubs for units in the South,
Houston, West, and North zones, respectively. We assume a gas distribution charge of
$0.10/mmBtu. Coal prices are monthly weighted average spot price of purchases of bituminous, sub-Bituminous, and lignite in Texas, reported in Form FERC-423. Coal-fired plants
in Texas are required to possess federal emission permits for each ton of SO2 emissions.
In order to measure average emission rates, we merge hourly net metered generation data
from ERCOT with hourly emission data from EPA’s CEMS to calculate each unit’s average
pounds of SO2 emissions per net MWh of electricity output. The emissions each hour are
priced at the monthly average EPA permit price reported on the EPA website.
In order to deal with complications posed by transmission congestion, we restrict our
sample to daily intervals 6:00-6:15pm during which there is no interzonal transmission congestion during the 6-7pm bidding hour. We believe intrazonal (or local) congestion is also
likely to be rare during these intervals.
50

We do not incorporate the possibility that some of the available capacity to INC in our
data may be sold as reserves. However, the amount of operating reserves procured are small
as a fraction of total demand.
We measure the marginal cost of INCing or DECing from the day-ahead schedule of
output. We account for the fact that units cannot DEC down to zero output without incurring
costs of startup and facing constraints on minimum downtime. It is unlikely that revenue
from the balancing market would be sufficiently lucrative to compensate a unit for shutting
down. Therefore, we assume that each operating unit cannot DEC to a level below 20% of
its maximum generating capacity.

51

B

Profitability of Actual Bids

In this appendix, we report metrics of ‘money left-on-the-table’ across firms during the first
1.5 years of the market, as in Hortacsu and Puller [2008]. Given our data on costs and bids,
for each firm in each auction we calculate producer surplus under two scenarios: (1) bestresponse bidding and (2) bidding vertically at the contract position which is essentially not
participating in the balancing market except to meet contract obligations. Then we calculate
realized producer surplus under actual bidding, and we compute the fraction of potential
profits relative to non-participation that were achieved by actual bidding. Table B.1 reports
the average percent of potential profits realized by different firms across the first 1.5 years of
the market.30 A large firm Reliant – which is the large firm depicted in panel (a) of Figure 4
– realized 79% of realized profits. However, all of the other firms realized less than one half
of potential profits. The firm-level profits ‘on-the-table’ average between $1000 and $4000
each hour.

30

In this table we report profitability only for the 12 firms that we will model in section 6.

52

Table B.1: Firm-Level Profitability in First 1.5 Years of Market
Percent of Potential
Firm

Profits Achieved

Reliant

79%

City of Bryan

45%

Tenaska Gateway Partners

41%

TXU

39%

Calpine Corp

37%

Cogen Lyondell Inc

16%

Lamar Power Partners

15%

City of Garland

13%

West Texas Utilities

8%

Central Power and Light

8%

Guadalupe Power Partners

6%

Tenaska Frontier Partners

5%

This reports the percent of potential profits that are achieved with
actual bids relative to a benchmark where firms do not participate in
the balancing market, i.e. bid vertically at the contract position. The
figures represent the firm-level profitability averaged over auctions in
the first 1.5 years of the market. Source: Hortacsu and Puller [2008].

53

C

Additional Evidence on Learning

In this appendix, we show descriptive evidence that firm patterns of offering small quantities
into the balancing market via bids that are ‘too steep’ is a phenomenon equally prevalent
in the first and second year of the market. We test whether firms offer more generation
capacity into the market in the second versus the first year of the market, or whether bidding
that is ‘too steep’ is equally present in both years. Specifically, for each firm-auction, we
calculate the amount of generation capacity that the firm offers relative to the contract
position at the market-clearing price. We call this variable Participation Quantity. We
define Participation Quantityit =|(Sit (pmcp
) − QCit )|, using absolute value to capture bidding
t
behavior for quantities above and below the contract position. A firm bidding vertically
at the contract position is measured as Participation Quantity=0, but firms bidding with
more elasticity have positive measures of Participation Quantity. We test whether firms offer
additional generation into the market in the second year. Results are shown in Table C.1.
In all specifications we include firm fixed effects so that we can test if firms participate more
in the second year of the market relative to their participation in the first year. Column
(1) shows that firms offer less generation in the second year, however the point estimate of
Year 2 (-35 MW) is neither economically nor statistically significant. Column (2) conditions
on whether balancing demand is positive, and the point estimate is even smaller and not
statistically different from zero. Column (3) conditions on the day of week and yields nearly
an identical estimate. Finally, column (4) estimates the relationship for only the small firms
and finds that these firms offer a very small amount of additional capacity in the second
year – 1.52 MW – and this is not statistically different from zero. This persistence of small
quantities offered into the market suggests that learning is slow in this market. Formal tests
of learning are reported in section 6.3.

54

Table C.1: Offered Quantities into Market in Year 2 vs Year 1
All Firms

All Firms

All Firms

Small Firms

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-34.76

-15.85

-16.15

1.52

(42.42)

(34.24)

(34.70)

(2.90)

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

INC Fixed Effects

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Day of Week Fixed Effects

No

No

Yes

Yes

Observations

2264

2264

2264

1029

R2

0.01

0.03

0.04

0.09

Year 2

p<0.05; ∗ p<0.01 The dependent variable Participation Quantityit is the megawatt quantity of output
bid at the market-clearing price relative to the firm’s contract position in auction t, i.e. |Sit (pmcp ) −
QCit |. The sample period is the first 1.5 years of the market and Year 2 is a dummy variable for the
second year. Standard errors clustered at the firm-level are reported in parentheses.

+

55

D

Evidence that Bidding Rules Do Not Bias Best-Response
Bids as a Benchmark for Expected Profit Maximization

In this appendix, we test if firms would increase profits by following a simple trading rule
that follows all bidding rules and places no restrictions on how uncertainty affects residual
demand. The trading rule takes advantage of an institutional feature of the Texas market –
the grid operator publicly released the aggregate bid schedule with a 2 day lag; therefore firms
can learn their rivals’ aggregate bid function with a 2 day lag. Suppose firms were to use the
lagged bid data to create best-response bid functions to rivals’ bids from 3 days prior to each
auction, and submit these bids to the current auction. We compute lagged best-response
bids and call these “naive best response” bids. Then we use the naive best-response bids and
clear the market with the actual (step function) residual demand for the current auction. We
find that this simple trading rule firm significantly outperforms the actual realized profits for
all but the largest firm.
The results of this test are shown in Figure D.1. For example, TXU’s actual bids yield
39.3% of the profits that would have been realized under our best-response benchmark.
However, if TXU had used the simple trading rule, it would have earned (96.7%) of bestresponse profits, which indicates that there is strong persistence in the shape of residual
demand across auctions. Similarly, all firms except Reliant would have significantly increased
profits by following this simple trading rule.

56

(a) Realized profits

(b) Profits best-responding to lagged bids

Figure D.1: Realized profits and predicted profits best-responding to lagged bids, as
percentage of potential profits

57

E

Evidence that Firms Do Not Misrepresent Capacity

We rule out the possibility that our measure of capacity – the firm’s self-declared capacity
for each day – overstates the actual capacity. We compare each firm’s stated capacity to
the highest amount of production that we observe during our sample. All firms are observed
to use at least 75% of stated capacity and on average to use 90% of stated capacity (see
Table E.1). This suggests that our finding that firms do not bid significant capacity into the
balancing market is not driven by overstating capacity. Moreover, the concern of overstated
capacity does not apply to periods when firms decrease production, or ‘dec’, and we observe
deviations from best-response in ‘dec’ intervals as well.
Table E.1: Capacity utilization relative to self-declared capacity
Firm

Maximum capacity utilization (%)

Reliant

81.72

City of Bryan

76.59

Tenaska Gateway Partners

125.88

TXU

97.13

Calpine Corp

83.84

Cogen Lyondell Inc

81.12

Lamar Power Partners

76.19

City of Garland

93.57

West Texas Utilities

92.92

Central Power and Light

98.82

Guadalupe Power Partners

74.69

Tenaska Frontier Partners

93.40

Note: The table reports maximum capacity utilization relative to self-declared
capacity for each day, for the firms that we consider in the Cognitive Hierarchy.

58

F

Evidence that Firms Do Not Bid Marginal Cost

In this appendix, we provide evidence that firms do not bid marginal cost. If firms submit
bids that deviate from best response in the direction of marginal cost bidding, then the
actual quantity sold into the auction should be greater than predicted sales under bestresponse bidding. However, this is not the case in our setting – Table F.1 shows that firms
systematically sell less output that the best-response level of output, which supports our
assumption that firms deviate by submitting bids that are steeper than best-response.
Table F.1: Comparison of Actual Output to Best-Response Output
Firm

Actual Output

Best-Response Output

Reliant

431

507

TXU

133

441

Calpine

102

408

Guadalupe

12

396

Central Power & Light

35

352

Lamar Power Partners

30

272

Cogen Lyondell

34

269

West Texas Utilities

11

224

Tenaska Gateway

72

182

Tenaska Frontier

7

144

Garland

5

115

30

56

Bryan Texas Utilities

Note: This table reports average output under actual bids and best-response
bids from the opening of the market until January 31, 2003. The numbers
are the average of the absolute value of sales so that output during both INC
and DEC intervals has the property that marginal cost bidding will yield actual output greater than best-response output and that bidding steeper than
best-response will yield actual output less than best-response output. Source:
Hortacsu and Puller (2008).

59

G

Proof that CH Bids for Level-1 Players are Additively Separable in Price and Contract Position

In this appendix, we show that bids for level-1 players are additively separable in price and
private information on contract quantity, so bid functions take the form: Sit1 (p, QCit ) =
αit1 (p) + βit1 (QCit ).
To see this, note that bids of bidders type-1, Sit1 (p), can be calculated from equation (5),
which can be rewritten as
Sit1 (p)

h

= (p −

Cit0



i H (p, S 1 (p); k , QC )
p
i
it
it

Sit1 (p)

Hs (p, Sit1 (p); ki , QCit )



i

= (p − Cit0 Sit1 (p)

+ QCit


1
l−i γ Dt (p) − Ŝit (p) · ∆(l−i )

R
h



−



R
l−i



γ Dt (p) − Ŝit1 (p) Dt0 (p)∆(l−i )

+ QCit

= αit1 (p) + QCit
R

because the argument [(p −

Cit0

(Sit1 (p))] − R

l−i

l−i

1 (p) ·∆(l )
γ (Dt (p)−Ŝit
) −i

1 (p) D 0 (p)∆(l )
γ (Dt (p)−Ŝit
) t
−i

is a function of price p.

Therefore, bids of type-1 bidders are additively separable
and can be represented by Sit1 (p) =
R
1 (p) ·∆(l )
γ (Dt (p)−Ŝit
) −i
l
αit1 (p) + QCit , where αit1 (p) = [(p − Cit0 (Sit1 (p))] − R −iγ D (p)−Ŝ 1 (p) D0 (p)∆(l ) .
) t
( t
−i
it
l−i

60

H

Evidence There is Not Economically Significant Uncertainty in the Slope of Supply by Unmodeled Firms

In this appendix, we show that the slope of supply by the firms that are not included in
the Cognitive Hierarchy is not economically significant from the perspective of introducing
uncertainty to residual demand slope by the modeled firms.
Recall that in our implementation, the D(p) in the theoretical model corresponds to
balancing demand (which is perfectly inelastic) net of (elastic) supply by the unmodeled
firms. In this context, our model would imply that there is no uncertainty about the slope
of the supply of the unmodeled firms.
While it is not literally true that there is no uncertainty, to a first-order, there is not
economically significant slope uncertainty. Across the 99 auctions, there is variation in the
slope of unmodeled firm supply, but some of this is predictable by the 12 firms, from, say
changes in fuel costs or other seasonal factors. It is therefore necessary to assess if there is
economically meaningful variation in the uncertainty of slope. In order to do so, we run a
regression with 99 observations where the dependent variable is the slope of the aggregate
dq
where we linearize using the
supply bids by the unmodeled firms (specifically, it is the dp
aggregate bid quantity plus and minus $10 around the mean market-clearing price). We
regress this slope on known cost factors – daily gas prices, total system load, and day-ofweek and week-of-year fixed effects. Then we take the residuals, interpreting the residuals as
the slope uncertainty that cannot be predicted. When we do this, we find that the standard
deviation of the residuals is 7.10 (i.e. the quantity sensitivity to a one dollar change in price
has a standard deviation of 7.10 MW).
The scale of this uncertainty is economically very small. To demonstrate this, we illustrate
the impact of this uncertainty on the largest firm, which is the one for which uncertainty
is most important because it is a high-type firm. (The low-type firms will be less sensitive
to slope uncertainty.) Specifically, we calculate how much profits would change if the large
firm were “incorrect” in the slope of residual demand by 2 standard deviations of this level
of uncertainty. We calculate the largest firm’s profits of submitting two different bids: (1)
the best-response to the actual residual demand slope when that slope is realized, and (2)
the best-response when the firm thought residual demand had a slope that was bigger by two
dq
that was 2 ∗ 7 = 14 MW larger) but
standard deviations of this uncertainty (i.e. had a dp
the actual residual demand is realized. The profits are essentially identical — across the 99
auctions, the median difference in profit is zero.
We conclude that the amount uncertainty in residual demand slope in our 12 firm implementation of our model is very small, thus justifying our modeling assumption.
61

I

Diminishing Returns to Increasing Sophistication

In this appendix, we investigate whether the private returns to increasing sophistication are
decreasing or increasing. We do this for two firms, a small one (the one with the highest
probability of being type 0) and a medium-size one. Because types are parameterized by
size, we sequentially increase firm size until the firm reaches the same capacity as the largest
firm in the market. As before, we do this for auctions that clear on the INC and DEC side
separately. The results are reported in Figure I.1, that reports incremental returns relative
to the status quo of each firm. The figure confirms that there are decreasing marginal returns
to increasing sophistication.

(a) INC side

(b) DEC side

Figure I.1: Marginal returns to increasing sophistication

62

