NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WOMEN AND STEM
Shulamit Kahn
Donna Ginther
Working Paper 23525
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23525

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017

Prepared for inclusion in the Oxford Handbook on the Economics of Women, ed. Susan L.
Averett, Laura M. Argys, and Saul D. Hoffman (New York: Oxford University Press.
Forthcoming, 2018). We thank the editors for helpful suggestions and Carlos Zambrana for
excellent research assistance. This research was funded by NSF grant SES-1538797. The views
expressed are those of the authors and do not reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Shulamit Kahn and Donna Ginther. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Women and STEM
Shulamit Kahn and Donna Ginther
NBER Working Paper No. 23525
June 2017
JEL No. I24,J16,J24,J3
ABSTRACT
Researchers from economics, sociology, psychology, and other disciplines have studied the
persistent under-representation of women in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM). This chapter summarizes this research. We argue that women’s under-representation is
concentrated in the math-intensive science fields of geosciences, engineering, economics, math/
computer science and physical science. Our analysis concentrates on the environmental factors
that influence ability, preferences, and the rewards for those choices. We examine how gendered
stereotypes, culture, role models, competition, risk aversion, and interests contribute to gender
STEM gap, starting at childhood, solidifying by middle school, and affecting women and men as
they progress through school, higher education, and into the labor market. Our results are
consistent with preferences and psychological explanations for the under-representation of
women in math-intensive STEM fields.

Shulamit Kahn
Boston University
School of Management
595 Commonwealth Ave.
Boston, MA 02215
skahn@bu.edu
Donna Ginther
Department of Economics
University of Kansas
333 Snow Hall
1460 Jayhawk Boulevard
Lawrence, KS 66045
and NBER
dginther@ku.edu

Table of Contents
Introduction .................................................................................................................................................. 2
STEM-Related Differences during School Years............................................................................................ 3
The early years through middle school..................................................................................................... 3
Middle School to Secondary School.......................................................................................................... 4
The Association between STEM Measured Ability and STEM Educational Choices ................................. 7
The Impact of Stereotypes, Ability Beliefs and Preferences on Educational Choices ................................ 10
Stereotypes in the Early Years ................................................................................................................ 10
Family’s Contributions to Math Gender Stereotypes ............................................................................. 11
Teachers’ Contributions to Math Gender Stereotypes........................................................................... 13
Culture and Math Gender Stereotypes................................................................................................... 13
Role models and Math Gender Stereotypes........................................................................................... 14
Competition and Math Gender Stereotypes .......................................................................................... 16
Gender differences in STEM Preferences and Interest........................................................................... 17
Women in STEM Occupations..................................................................................................................... 19
Gender and Earnings in STEM Jobs ......................................................................................................... 20
Avoiding or Leaving STEM Occupations: The role of family, hours, and preferences ........................... 22
Conclusion ................................................................................................................................................... 25
References .................................................................................................................................................. 26
Tables and Figures ...................................................................................................................................... 37

1

Introduction
The list of math and science greats throughout history is a list of men – Pythagoras,
Hippocrates, Aristotle, Euclid, Copernicus, Galileo, Kepler, Fermat, Newton, Gauss, Faraday,
Darwin, Mendel, Einstein—with a few women entering this pantheon starting in the late 19th and
early 20th centuries, such as Curie and Mead (Rogers 2010). Even newer fields such as computer
science and information technology as well as genomics are dominated by men—from Jobs and
Gates to Sanger, Watson, and Collins. Thus, it is no surprise that people associate science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) with men (Harvard Implicit Project, Banaji
and Greenwald 2013) and conclude that since the most successful scientists are men, perhaps
only men can successfully pursue science.
The lack of women in STEM disciplines and occupations can have real-world
implications for women and society. First, science and innovation that fails to take women into
account can have long-lasting impacts. For example, women were excluded from NIH-funded
clinical trials prior to 1993 and subsequent inclusion led to the discovery that women respond
differently to many medications (Clayton and Collins 2014, US General Accounting Office
2001). Findings like these have given rise to a call to take sex and gender into account in science
and innovation.1 Second, STEM fields such as engineering pay higher salaries than non-STEM
fields, and the lack of women in STEM may contribute to the gender salary gap (Beede et al.
2011). Finally, Hong and Page (2004) have argued that a diverse group of problem-solvers can
outperform a group of the best problem-solvers. Thus, increasing gender diversity in STEM may
give rise to new and improved innovations.
Over the past three decades, researchers from economics, sociology, psychology, and
other disciplines have tried to understand why women are under-represented in STEM, even as
this under-representation shrank. This chapter summarizes this research, focusing mostly on the
US context. One key finding is that STEM fields differ: each features a different set of skills and
a different labor market along with different gender representation. Increasingly, women’s
under-representation is limited to the math-intensive science fields—geosciences, engineering,
economics, math/computer science, and physical science—which we refer to as the GEMP fields
(as we did in Ceci et al. 2014). We denote other STEM fields as LPS—life sciences, psychology,

1

For examples, see Gendered Innovations: https://genderedinnovations.stanford.edu/what-is-genderedinnovations.html.

2

and social sciences (excluding economics). Thus, STEM is an overly broad categorization of
science and engineering fields, and here we focus on the challenges to women’s progress in LPS
and GEMP fields separately.
To best summarize the research on women in STEM, we start at childhood and then
follow girls and boys as they progress through middle and high school, college and additional
higher education, and then into the job market. At each stage, we describe overall gender
differences before delving into their possible causes. We squarely address the possibility of
biological differences, but concentrate on the environmental factors that have been shown to
greatly affect measured ability, choices at every life stage, and the rewards and incentives for
those choices. The factors include stereotyping by family, teachers, and peers; cultural roles; role
models; competition and risk aversion; interests; and beliefs not directly linked to gender. The
work in this area convinces us that the roots of women’s STEM underrepresentation starts in
childhood and, as a result, much of this chapter is devoted to these years.

STEM-Related Differences during School Years
It is generally believed that math ability and skills are necessary for STEM careers. Are
girls’ math abilities and skills sufficient for them to pursue those fields? If not, when do
differences arise and are they affected by environmental factors?

The early years through middle school
It is extremely difficult to untangle biological ability differences from cultural effects. In
Ceci et al. (2014), we summarized the literature on pre-school gender differences in spatial
ability and found that infant and toddler boys perform better than girls on some spatial-rotation
tests in most studies. However, even at these early ages, subtle environmental or developmental
factors may influence this, such as early crawling and object manipulation.
Once children enter school, more direct measurements of math ability are available.
Scores on standardized math tests such as the US National Assessment of Educational Progress
(NAEP) or the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) international
math test show that on average, young girls do not consistently perform worse in math tests than
young boys and that differences in averages were very small. For instance, Hyde et al. (2008)
found that in the mid-2000s in the US, boys had higher standardized average NAEP math scores
3

in grades 2 and 3 but that girls had the advantage between in grades 4 through 9. However, no
gap was larger than .06 standard deviations. Two articles find that male advantages are not
present at school entry. Both Fryer and Levitt (2010) and Penner and Paret (2008) studied a
nationally representative cohort of American children who entered kindergarten in 1998, and
found that boys and girls enter kindergarten with similar average math test scores, but a male
advantage appears by spring of first grade that increases to .15–.20 standard deviations (.23 with
controls) by the end of 5th grade (covering 1998–2004). These two articles are based on very
different data than Hyde et al. (2008), which was cross-sectional data based on a different test, so
it is not surprising that results are not identical. Together, they point to three important
qualitative facts: boys do not start school with a math-test advantage; a male advantage appears
sometime during the first four grades; and average gender differences are a small fraction of a
standard deviation.
There are also differences between countries during early years. For instance in 1994–95,
Mullis et al. (2000), using a different test, found that 4th grade boys and girls in the US and other
countries including Hong Kong, Scotland, Greece, and Canada did equally well, but in Korea
and Japan girls did significantly worse.
Boys, however, have a higher variance in math scores than girls throughout early grades.
This leads to more boys in both tails of the math distribution. If those who enter math-intensive
STEM jobs are primarily taken from the right tail in the math ability distribution, boys’ higher
variance would lead to more boys than girls in STEM jobs. The higher variance is present at
kindergarten entrance. For instance, Fryer and Levitt (2010) find that in the US, the ratio of boys
to girls in the top 1% is 1.59 entering kindergarten, but rises to 2.34 by 5th grade. Other evidence
suggests that the major gender differences in math scores in the US are concentrated only at the
very top of the distribution, since boys and girls were approximately equally represented in the
top quarter of math performers, although there were fewer girls than boys in the top quarter in
other countries including Japan, Korea, and the Netherlands (Mullis et al. 2000).

Middle School to Secondary School
For whatever reason, the die seems cast by the end of middle school. Gender differences
in average math scores stabilize somewhere around puberty/middle school, and do not later
reverse. We note here some of the many studies on this topic. Hyde et al. (2008) finds that US
boys’ average advantage starts in grade 10 and is around .05 standard deviations. Pope and
4

Snydor (2010) found a similar male advantage in the same test given in a later year, but this
advantage arose earlier in 8th grade. Friedman-Sokuler and Justman (2016) also find average
differences of .05 standard deviations for Israeli 8th graders (using a different test). Using a
different test, Stoet and Geary (2013) analyzed 1.5 million 15 year olds in 33 countries and found
differences at the median of .11 standard deviations. Even the largest of these average math score
differences are objectively small, and are smaller than those observed in earlier decades.2 With
such large samples, statistical significance is a given; however, there is little economic
significance to these small differences.
However, the average gender gap in tests varies across countries, US states, and
ethnicities. Cross-nationally, Stoet and Geary (2013) find the math difference in average scores
among 15 year olds range from .25 standard deviations in South Korea and .21 in Greece to a
female advantage of .17 in Iceland and .05 in Thailand, with the US having a .07 male advantage.
Mullis et al. (2000) found that in Advanced Math Achievement, boys in the last year of high
school did better than girls in all countries, but in some countries this difference was small and
insignificant (on the order of 2% in Australia and Greece to 6% in the US to 16–18% in Austria
and the Czech Republic).
As was true in earlier grades, substantial gender differences in math tests do exist at the
top tail as children get older. The ratio of male-to-female math scores among those in the top 1%
was 2.09:1 for white US 11th graders (Hyde et al. 2008), 1.17:1 for 8th graders (Pope and Snydor
2010), 2.3:1 internationally for 15 year olds (Stoet and Geary 2013) and 1.1:1 for Israeli 8th
graders (Friedman-Sokuler and Justman 2016). Providing a time trend but using a different test
than Hyde and Pope and Snydor, Wai et al. (2010) found that the 7th grade male-female ratio in
the top 1% fell from 13.5:1 in the early 1980s to 3.9:1 in the early 1990s, but has remained fairly
stable after that point.
High school is typically the first time that children have control over the subjects that
they study, and on average girls are less likely to take more-advanced math and science courses.
Xie and Shaumann (2003) found that in the US, girls were less likely to participate in science
and engineering courses in high school. Additional evidence for this is based on the gender
composition of US Advanced Placement (AP) test-takers in STEM disciplines, since taking the

2

For example, there was .25 standard deviation gender gap in the 1972 National Longitudinal Survey (Goldin, Katz,
and Kuziemko 2006).

5

AP test in a subject is almost always associated with taking the corresponding AP-level courses.
As Table 1 shows, considerably fewer girls than boys take AP courses in math, computer
science, and math-intensive sciences. More girls than boys take AP courses in biology and
environmental science, two STEM disciplines that do not rely on strong mathematical skills.
Table 1 also indicates that girls who take STEM AP tests score lower than boys on average in all
of these STEM subjects, including biology and environmental science, and fewer girls than boys
score the maximum of 5 in every subject area.
In higher education, the key outcome studied is the choice of major field. Figure 1 shows
the percent female from 1994–2014 in the US among all high school degrees granted, all
bachelors’ degrees granted, and separated STEM bachelors granted into majors in math-intensive
STEM fields (geosciences, engineering, economics, math and computer science, and physical
science) compared with less-math-intensive STEM fields (life sciences, psychology, and social
sciences excluding economics). We refer throughout to the first group as GEMP and the second
as LPS. The distinction is important in understand gender gaps in STEM.
Figure 1 indicates that in the 2010s, around 50% of US high school degrees were granted
to women, as well as 57% of all US bachelors’ degrees. If we had graphed all STEM majors
together, we would have seen that women also earned 57% of STEM bachelors’ degrees.
Instead, Figure 1 divides STEM majors into GEMP and LPS, revealing substantial differences
across STEM fields. In 2014, women received only 27% of bachelors’ degrees in the mathintensive GEMP fields, but 69% of bachelors’ degrees in LPS fields.
If we were to follow the time trend for individual STEM fields further back in time than
shown in Figure 1, we would see that the women’s representation in each separate STEM field
increased rapidly in the 1970s. Women’s representation among psychology and life sciences
majors continued to grow in the 1980s and 1990s before it stabilized, both ending above 70%. In
contrast, female representation among economics majors stagnated as early as 1984 and then fell
in the 2000s, while female representation in computer science fell drastically after 1984. Until
the last decade when computer science replaced it, engineering had the lowest female
representation, although women’s representation in engineering, geosciences, and physical
sciences grew considerably through around 2000. All of these patterns were very different from
humanities majors, which throughout the period 1980–2014 remained between 54% and 60%
female.
6

Fewer than 10% of US STEM undergraduate majors later graduate from a PhD program
in STEM, with more men doing so than women. Figure 2 shows that the percentage of GEMP
majors continuing to PhDs over the past decades grew and the gender gap in this percentage
virtually disappeared. In contrast, the percentage of LPS majors continuing to PhDs fell for both
genders, while its gender gap hardly changed. In light of the huge growth in LPS majors over
this period (more than doubling) and limited sizes of university PhD programs, it is not
surprising that the overall percent of LPS majors proceeding to a PhD has fallen. However, given
the exploding number of women majors, it is surprising that there remains a stable female
disadvantage in proceeding to a PhD. This may be due to preferences and interests, which we
discuss in a separate section. Or it may be due to lower female rates of post-PhD career success,
also addressed in later sections. Finally, women may choose shorter education periods that do not
preclude the possibility of devoting time to children. After all, total education time, postbachelors’ degree, is shorter for those choosing masters or professional degrees like business,
law, or medicine; for instance, in biomedicine, a PhD plus postdoc takes longer than an MD plus
residency (Kahn and Ginther 2017).
Figure 3 shows the female representation among US-granted STEM PhDs from 1970 to
2014, divided into more narrow STEM fields. Female representation in all STEM fields showed
continual growth across from 1970 until the mid-2000s, in contrast to GEMP undergraduate
majors’ stagnation throughout the 1990s and 2000s (Figure 1), and in contrast to humanities
PhDs, which also stagnated in the 1990s and 2000s (Figure 3). The growth in female
representation among psychology, life sciences, and other social sciences PhDs has been
particularly large (each growing by more than 40 percentage points) although percentage-wise,
the female representation grew most in engineering which started at less than 1% and rose to
23%. Female representation in all PhD fields stagnated from the Great Recession and on.
International evidence mostly shows similar patterns of female representation. This
includes Barone (2011), who described majors across eight countries in 1999–2000. However,
in China, women are far under-represented in most STEM majors, although they are overrepresented in math and chemistry (Guo et al. 2010).

The Association between STEM Measured Ability and STEM Educational Choices
A number of factors can explain an association between math and science (STEM) test
scores, STEM course-taking, and STEM college major: (a) students may choose (or be tracked
7

into) courses and majors in the areas where they excel; (b) previous course-taking may increase
math/science test scores; or (c) third factors such as inherent preferences could simultaneously
lead to different courses taken different majors, and different test scores. Identifying which of
these causal stories is key to this association is difficult. However, if one factor—such as
preferences, test scores, course-taking—can be shown to pre-date others, this suggests a causal
story. We also report on the few natural experiments that make causal interpretations more
credible.
Many articles find that previous grades or test scores are correlated with subsequent
choices concerning STEM course-taking and majors, but the correlation explains little of the
overall gender differences in these outcomes. Moreover, whether boys or girls are most affected
by past performance seems to depend on the subject. For instance, Friedman-Sokuler and
Justman (2016) studied Israeli high school STEM elective course choices, controlling for 8th
grade standardized test scores. Grades had a relatively small effect on the probability of choosing
these STEM courses. Girls were more sensitive to grades in biology and chemistry, but boys
were more sensitive in computer science and physics.
Studying different periods (1980s to the early 2000s), Xie and Shaumann (2003) and
Riegle-Crumb et al. (2012) both found that US high school STEM test scores and grades were
correlated with high school graduates’ expectations of majoring in STEM fields in college,
although this explained only a small fraction of the gender difference in STEM majors.
Interestingly, Xie and Shaumann (2003) found that most STEM majors had intended in high
school to major in non-science fields but switched to STEM during college. In addition, they
found that female students were more likely to choose STEM majors during college.
Most other studies use data from a single university. Ost (2010) found that grades in
introductory STEM courses in a large US university had a lasting effect on majoring in that
subject. Grades in these courses affected women’s majors more than men’s in life sciences, but
affected men’s majors more than women’s in physical sciences (similar to Friedman-Sokuler and
Justman’s finding); however these gender differences were not statistically significant. Rask
(2010) examined data from a US liberal arts college. There, women’s major choices were more
sensitive to introductory course grades than men’s in biology and psychology, while men’s major
choices were more sensitive to grades in computer science, geology, math, and physics.
Stinebrinkner and Stinebrinkner (2011) combined all sciences and found that while both men and
8

women responded to low science grades by changing their expected major from science, this
change was more pronounced for men because they had gone into college overly-optimistic
about their science ability.
Using data from different universities, Owen (2010) and Main and Ost (2014) both
investigated introductory economics grades’ impact on majoring in economics using a
regression-discontinuity method at letter-grade cutoffs to more accurately identify causality.3
Controlling for numeric grades, Owen (2010) found that girls’, but not boys’, major choices were
affected while Main and Ost (2014) found no impact of grades for either men or women. The
difference in results could be because the university Owen studied used only full letter grades, so
cutoffs make a larger difference than in the university Main and Ost studied where
plusses/minuses were used.
Rather than investigating whether high STEM scores affected later STEM course-taking
or majors, others have investigated whether high school math-intensive STEM course-taking
alone predicted later STEM college majors. In the US, Morgan et al. (2013) found it did not.
However, De Phillippis (2016) exploited a natural experiment of rollouts of a UK program that
increased the number of advanced science courses available to high-ability 14 year olds and
found that taking more science in high school led to a higher probability that boys would later
major in STEM; he found no comparable effect for girls. This might accord with Gottfried and
Bozick (2016), who found that students who take courses in applied STEM areas in high school
(mostly boys) were more likely to choose an applied STEM major.
If grades or scores in STEM encourage or discourage students to major or take courses in
STEM, it stands to reason that these students are comparing their performance in STEM to their
performance in non-STEM courses. Therefore, what matters may not be STEM ability, but
STEM ability relative to other abilities. Several researchers have directly tested this. Wang et
al. (2013) followed people from high school until age 33 and found that individuals with both
high math and verbal ability (usually, women) were less likely to be in STEM occupations than
individuals with high math but moderate verbal scores. Riegle-Crumb et al. (2013) found that
the comparative advantage in STEM ability compared to verbal abilities explained more of the
choice of college major than STEM ability alone. On the other hand, Friedman-Sokuler and

3

The idea is that students with grades just above and below letter-grade cutoffs should be fairly similar in abilities,
even though their grades differ more.

9

Justman (2016) found that Israelis who do very well in both math and verbal skills in 8th grade
tests were more likely to choose STEM electives than those only who only did very well in math.
They themselves note the contradiction with the previous studies and conjecture that it might be
due to “different stages of education, variation over time, or cultural differences.” Addressing a
slightly different measure of comparative advantage, Ost (2010) found that men (only) decreased
their likelihood of persisting in a physical science major if they performed better in introductory
life sciences.

The Impact of Stereotypes, Ability Beliefs and Preferences on
Educational Choices
Beliefs about ones’ own mathematics ability rather than ability itself may influence the
STEM choices we observe. Evidence of the importance of students’ beliefs date back at least to
1986, when Eccles and Jacobs (1986) identified the importance of attitudes and beliefs on math
performance. Notably, they found that children’s estimates of their own math ability and their
belief that math is valuable affects their future math performance, even after controlling for
actual past performance. Eccles and Wang (2016) showed that twelfth graders self-concepts
about their math ability (controlling for measures of actual math and verbal ability) increased the
likelihood that 10 years later they were in a STEM career. Here we examine how gendered
stereotypes about STEM throughout the life course influence STEM majors and careers.

Stereotypes in the Early Years
Boys and girls seem to learn stereotype bias in school. For instance, Cvencek, Meltzoff,
and Greenwald (2011) reported that by second grade, both boys and girls had implicit and
explicit stereotypes associating math with the category “males.” Interestingly, by that age boys
also associated themselves with math and girls associated themselves with reading.
Some evidence in the psychological literature shows that the belief that math ability is
malleable and can be developed is itself self-fulfilling. This is called “growth mindset” or
incremental theory. Bian et al. (2017) provides the only evidence of gender differences in growth
mindsets in the early grades. Girls aged 5–7 were introduced to games in different ways, one
being for “children who are really, really smart” and one for “children who try really, really
hard.” Boys and girls aged 5 made similar choices among these games, but by ages 6–7, girls
were less interested than boys in the games for really smart children. There is more evidence
that in high school, boys are much more likely to have a math growth mindset than girls. For
10

instance, controlling for scores on standardized math tests, by 10th grade boys are .2 standard
deviations more likely (p<.001) than girls to believe that math can be learned (Nix et al. 2015).
Researchers have found a correlation between a math growth mindset and math
performance, math interest, and math course-taking in middle school and high school (e.g.,
Blackwell et al. 2007, Nix et al. 2015, Good et al. 2012). Many researchers found that this
relationship appears around puberty/middle school and is particularly evident in challenging and
difficult mathematics topics. As an example, Blackwell et al. (2007) found a correlation of
growth mindset with standardized math grades in 7th grade, but not in 6th grade. In some cases,
the link between growth mindset and math scores exists for girls but not boys, or is larger for
girls (e.g., Nix et al. 2015, Dweck 2006).
Yet simple interventions have been shown to make a difference on growth mindsets, at
least in the short run. Two very similar experiments were performed on middle school students,
where the treatment was tutoring that emphasized a math growth mindset compared to tutoring
without this emphasis (Blackwell et al. 2007; Good, Aronson, and Inzlicht 2003.) In both studies,
girls who learned with a growth mindset performed equally well (or insignificantly better) than
boys with the same treatment, compared to the control group, where boys did much better than
girls. Even minor interventions had short-run effects. An experiment found that when a high
schooler (whom the authors argue was seen as a role-model) told 6th graders before a math test
that students’ success was due to effort exerted, scores increased for girls but not boys: girls with
this intervention scored 5% higher than boys, but without this intervention scored 20% lower
(Bages et al. 2016).

Family’s Contributions to Math Gender Stereotypes
Gender differences in math achievement may be transmitted across generations. Eccles
and Jacob (1986) and Eccles, Jacob, and Harold (1990) found that mothers’ gendered stereotypes
about math ability influenced their perceptions of their children’s abilities. If mothers held
gendered stereotypes, their rating of their daughter’s ability was lower than would have been
predicted by the teacher’s evaluation of ability. In particular, Eccles and Jacob (1986) found that
mother’s beliefs had a greater influence on children taking additional math courses than their
children’s actual performance. They conclude that, “These data suggest that parents’ gendered
stereotype beliefs are a key cause of sex differences in students’ attitudes toward mathematics.”
(Eccles and Jacob 1986, 375).
11

Results in Xie and Shaumann (2003) suggest that parental expectations contribute to the
gender gap in math tests. They compared the estimated effect of gender in two regressions of
high (top 5%) 12th grade math achievement, one including only individual characteristics as
explanatory variables and the other adding in controls for parental expectations of a student’s
educational attainment, parental education, family income and the family computer-ownership.
Since average family characteristics besides expectations are similar for boys and girls, any
change in the gender effect was likely due to differences in expectations. They found that family
expectations were responsible for a .05 difference in the female/male high math achievement
ratio. However, parental expectations had no influence on gender differences in the probability
of selecting a STEM college major. Overall, they concluded that family only explains a small
part of the gender gap in STEM achievement.
Parents’ math anxiety predicts children’s lower math achievement when these parents
helped their children with homework (Maloney et al. 2015). Moreover, Eccles and Jacob (1986)
found that mothers felt that math was more difficult for their daughters than for their sons, and
that mothers' beliefs about their children's difficulty in math was strongly related to their
children’s math anxiety.
Fryer and Levitt (2010), who identified a gender math gap increasing between
kindergarten and 5th grade, found this increase was greatest among those whose mothers had a
bachelor’s degree or higher.4 Parents had lower math expectations for girls than boys, but—
similar to Xie and Shaumann—they found that controlling for parental expectations hardly
changes the gender math gap.
The growth mindset of parents is also associated with children’s performance in
mathematics and STEM. Cheng, Koptic, and Zamorro (2017) found that parents’ math growthmindset increased children’s growth mindset with the effect on girls twice as large as on boys.
Having a parent employed in a STEM occupation increased a child’s probability of majoring in
and working in STEM, and the effect was larger for girls (between 10–17 percentage points). In
addition, girls with mothers employed in STEM were 7 percentage points more likely to be
employed in the “hard sciences” (GEMP). They concluded that maternal role-modeling and
growth mindsets can help close the gender gap.

4

Whether the mother was in a math occupation or whether she had more education than the father did not affect the
gender math gap.

12

Teachers’ Contributions to Math Gender Stereotypes
Do teachers’ math gender stereotypes affect girls’ beliefs and math performance? In the
1970s, numerous case studies found that teachers spent more time teaching boys math—both
formally and informally—than they spent on girls in the early grades (e.g., Leinhardt et al. 1979,
Astin 1974). This alone can have profound permanent changes in children, given the recent
literature on how sophisticated mathematical education for young children that emphasizes “fluid
cognitive skills” permanently changes the neurobiology of the prefrontal cortex (Blair et al.
2005).
More recent literature has directly related teachers’ math stereotypes to outcomes.
Beilock et al. (2009) found that US first- and second-grade girls who had female teachers with
math anxiety were more likely than girls with female teachers without math anxiety to believe at
year’s end that “boys are good at math and girls good at reading” and to have lower math
achievement. Using a differences-in-differences methodology, Lavy and Sand (2015) measured
teacher gender bias in early grades in Israel by comparing scores on tests graded by teachers and
machine-graded standardized tests, in both math and English. They found that girls with
elementary and middle school teachers who were biased against girls in math ultimately took
fewer high school math courses and were less likely to major in STEM fields and have STEM
occupations. Cornwell, Mustard, and Van Parys (2013) applied this approach to US data and
found that bias against boys could be explained by boys’ behavior and non-cognitive skills: boys
with better behavior received higher grades. Nevertheless, it appears that stereotypes have
solidified into adolescent girls’ poor assessment of their math abilities relative to boys,
controlling for one’s standardized math scores.
Interestingly, in a similar case of teacher-graded compared with standardized test scores
at the high school matriculation level (with teacher random assignment) Lavy (2008) found
evidence of bias against boys in Israel in all subjects. According to Lavy and Sand (2015), this
reverse bias occurred too late to make a difference in math course-taking during high school.

Culture and Math Gender Stereotypes
Cultural differences stereotypes may also affect math stereotypes and hence achievement.
Guiso et al. (2008) analyzed the association between math scores and gender-equality indices for
students in 40 countries. They found that the gender gap in mathematics disappears in genderequal countries, while girls’ advantage in reading scores widens, the more gender-equal the
13

country. Using results on a standardized test from 9 different countries, Nollenberger,
Rodriguez-Planas, and Sevilla (2016) examined math scores of second-generation immigrants
who may be influenced by the cultural attitudes of their parents, as measured by their home
countries’ gender-equality measures, and/or the institutions of their new homes. They find that
two-thirds of the gender math gap can be explained by parents’ cultural attitudes. Nosek et al.
(2009) collected data on the implicit association test (IAT) of gendered stereotypes about science
from nearly 300,000 individuals from 34 countries in 2003. They discovered that the gender gap
in math and science in the 8th grade increased with the country’s level of gendered sciencestereotyping. This result remained even after controlling for the country’s gender-equality
measures.
Pope and Sydnor (2010) found related results for the US. They showed that states with
more boys among the highest achievers in math and science tests also had more girls among
highest achievers in reading. Further, interstate differences in stereotypical attitudes about
women working outside the home and in children’s agreement with the statement “math is for
boys” are highly correlated with gender differences in math-science compared to reading scores.
These facts suggest the role of culture.
One study—Fryer and Levitt (2010)—arrived at the opposite conclusion. In pooled 4th
and 8th grade exams, they find that a countries’ gender equality index does not affect the gender
gap in test scores, although Islamic countries have less of a gender gap, perhaps because they
have single-sex classrooms. Given the wide variety of tests showing the opposite for older
children, we suspect that this contrary result may be dominated by the younger group.
Taken together, this literature shows that the more equal the society or the less prevalent
a gendered stereotype for math and science, the better girls’ STEM achievement.

Role models and Math Gender Stereotypes
In the US, the lack of role models at all levels of STEM education reinforces the dearth of
women in STEM. Economists have examined the association and used the random assignment
of teachers to examine the effect of instructor gender on student math outcomes and choices,
with differing results. Antecol et al. (2015) found that primary school girls randomly assigned to
teachers got better math scores if taught by women rather than men, but only when the women
teachers had strong math backgrounds; girls got lower scores if taught by women teachers with
weak math backgrounds. Ehrenberg, Goldhaber, and Brewer (1995) found no same-gender
14

teacher effects on improvement in math and science test scores. However, in responses to survey
questions, they found that female teachers gave better subjective evaluations to female students
than male teachers gave to female students. In contrast, Dee (2005, 2007) found that samegender teachers enhanced the achievement of both male and female 8th graders in all subjects.
Finally, Winters et al. (2013) found that same-sex teachers did not improve achievement of either
gender in elementary school. However, in middle and high school, both genders benefited more
from a female teacher, although there was less of an impact for boys in math classes. These three
studies’ differing results may depend on context. Moreover, in none of these last three studies
could the researchers be certain that teacher assignment was random (although generally they
assumed it was), which may have contributed to different findings.
All studies at the college level of same-gender teachers have found positive effects on
women. Most inferred the direction of causation from the random assignment of instructors. For
instance, Bottia et al. (2015) showed that exposure to female STEM teachers in high school
(where random assignment to teachers is more likely) increased the probability that female
students major in STEM in college, especially for girls with high math ability, but did not have
an effect on male students’ majors. Several other studies only examine the correlation between
instructor gender and STEM majors. These found that once in college, female students are more
likely to pursue STEM majors if they have had female faculty (Canes and Rosen 2005, Rask and
Bailey 2002). Qian and Zafar (2009) calculated that exposure to female faculty increased the
number of female students later majoring in engineering but not other STEM fields. Griffith
(2010) found that women were less likely to major in STEM fields at research-intensive
institutions, but this effect was moderated if there were more female graduate students.
Three other studies identified the causal effect of instructor gender by examining
outcomes from first-year courses where assignment to faculty was random. Hoffman and
Oreopoulos (2009) found that students taught by a same-sex instructor had better grades, but this
was driven by males performing worse when they had a female instructor. They also found that
having a same-sex instructor decreased the probability of dropping a course. Carrell, Page, and
West (2010) found that the highest-ability women were more likely to pursue a STEM major and
achieved better grades if assigned to a female STEM instructor. Griffith (2014) found that female
instructors increased female students’ grades in courses in male-dominated disciplines such as
STEM, but found no effect of on women’s decisions to pursue a major in those fields.
15

Finally, two articles used instruments to identify causal effects of instructor gender.
Bettinger and Long (2005) used the fraction of courses in a field taught by female instructors at
the university as an instrument for the potentially endogenous female-instructor variable,5 and
found that exposure to female faculty increased the likelihood of majoring in mathematics and
geology. However, Price (2010) constructed an instrument from the aggregate STEM/non-STEM
percentage of female faculty and found that female students were less likely to persist in STEM
courses if they were taught by a female instructor.

Competition and Math Gender Stereotypes
Elsewhere in this Handbook, we learn that girls and women perform less well than boys
and men in competitive environments and that this is particularly true when it comes to
competing against boys and men (Shurchkov and Eckel). Here we review the literature as it
relates to STEM courses and majors as well as single-sex schools. Cotton, McIntyre, and Price
(2013) conducted a series of math competitions in elementary schools. They found that boys
outperformed girls in the first test, but girls outperformed boys on subsequent tests. In addition,
girls performed just as well as boys on the first test when time pressure was removed. Niederle
and Vesterlund (2010) have suggested that girls’ lower math test scores may be a response to
competition. In particular, they argue that math test scores are biased downwards for girls
relative to their mathematical skills because of the competitive nature of math test-taking. Also,
girls are sensitive to the gender of their competitors, and since more boys pursue mathematics,
this lowers girls’ math scores. In addition, Niederle and Yestrumkas (2008) found that female
Stanford undergraduates shy away from difficult tasks, compared to men. To the extent that
STEM courses are considered “difficult,” this gender difference may also be driving choices of
major. Finally, in France, Landaud, Ly, and Maurin (2016) found that girls in more-competitive
high schools were less likely to study math and science. Orrenius and Zavodny (2015) found
that share of college-aged immigrants in a state reduced the percentage of women majoring in
science and engineering. They attribute this to cohort crowding in these majors. Taken together,
these results suggest that competitive pressure seems to adversely influence girls’ performance in
mathematics.

5

The number of courses taught by female instructors depends upon the number of female instructors in the field
employed by the university, which is correlated with having a female instructor but exogenous to the decision to
major in STEM.

16

Risk-aversion is related to competition, and Baldiga (2013) found that women answered
significantly fewer questions than men when the wrong answer was penalized, but not when
there was no penalty. Although these test questions were not related to math and science,
Baldiga’s results suggest that risk-aversion may also be contributing to the gender gap in test
scores.
Confidence may contribute to the observed gender gap in choosing to compete. Kamas
and Preston (2012) show that gender differences in the probability of college students entering a
winner-take-all math tournament was completely explained by the students’ expected ranking in
the competition, which the authors call confidence. However, there were no gender differences in
the choice to enter the tournament for students majoring in STEM disciplines even before
controlling for confidence. This suggests that women in STEM majors in their sample do not
shy away from competition.
Do same-sex schools affect girls’ performance, in light of the observation that girls do
not like to compete against boys? Doris et al. (2013) studied this issue in Irish primary schools
where single-gender public schools are common, arguing that this is close to a natural
experiment: schools being single-sex was due to “historical accident” and most children attended
the closest school. They found a significant gender gap in math achievement in favor of boys,
but no evidence that single-sex schools reduced the gap and weak evidence that, instead, there
are larger gender differentials for children educated in single-sex schools. Park, Behrman, and
Choi (2012) exploit random assignment of students into single-sex schools in Seoul, South
Korea. They found large effects of single-sex schools for boys’ math test scores, interest in
STEM, and subsequent pursuit of STEM majors. However, while single-sex schools increased
girls’ college entrance math exam scores, they did not affect girls’ interest in STEM majors.
Thus, single-sex schools do not appear to influence girls’ participation in STEM.

Gender differences in STEM Preferences and Interest
Even at early ages, boys and girls show different preferences and interests towards
different subjects, including different subjects within STEM. These preferences have been found
to be extremely important in determining educational and occupational choices (e.g., Eccles and
Jacobs 1986). In fact, a survey by Zafar (2013) found that the single largest factor determining
college majors for both genders was whether they enjoyed the coursework; the second largest
factor for women was whether they believed that they will enjoy working at the jobs available
17

with that major. Wiswall and Zafar (2015) added an experimental component to this analysis by
randomly providing some students information about the earnings and employment of people
who chose that major. They continued to find that preferences are the dominant factor in major
choice, although they also find that the naïve analyses correlating beliefs and gender
overestimated the impact of preferences because preferences are correlated with expected
earnings. Xie and Shaumann (2003) attribute the large gender gap in STEM representation that
they cannot explain to preferences. But what is the source of different preferences?
Xie and Shaumann argue that preferences are influenced by gendered norms. Others take
a different approach by examining the psychology of gendered job preferences. In our earlier
survey (Ceci et al. 2014), we summarized some of the psychology literature on gender
preferences. This literature finds that on average women are more people-oriented and men more
thing-oriented, and that this dichotomy explains both vocational preferences and college majors
(e.g., Lippa 1998, 2001, 2010; Su, Rounds, and Armstrong 2009; Baronne 2011). More recently,
Eccles and Wang (2016) found that gender differences between entering GEMP or LPS
occupations were best predicted by women’s greater preferences for work that was altruistic and
that was people-oriented, compared with men’s preferences for thing-oriented work. Women’s
people-oriented preferences may explain why women prefer biological and psychological
science, and relative to men are more likely to choose medicine instead of a doctorate in biology.
A recent addition to the topic of gender differentiation of job preferences in the
economics literature emphasizes skills. Lordan and Pischke (2016) divided job attributes into
people, brains and brawn (identified through factor analysis) and measured how job satisfaction
by gender reflects these attributes. Along a similar vein, Baker and Cornelson (2016) divided job
skills into sensory (vision, hearing, touch), motor and spatial, and then measure how
occupational choices reflect these skills.6 Interestingly, Lordan and Pischke (2016) found women
like both their brain-oriented and people-oriented jobs. Weinberg (2000) and Beaudry and Lewis
(2014) found that one reason for falling female-male wage differentials is due to women being
good at jobs requiring brains (rather than brawn).
Taken together, this research suggests that preferences may be an important reason for
some of the under-representation of women in STEM and for their different choices within
STEM.
6

However, sensory skills are quite different from the people-oriented dimension in the psychology literature.

18

Women in STEM Occupations
Occupational choice is also reviewed elsewhere in this Handbook (Pan and Cortes). In
this section, we describe gender differences between the kind of occupations held by women and
men who received bachelors’ degrees in STEM.7 We use the NSF’s 2013 National Survey of
College Graduates (NSCG) and its definitions of STEM disciplines and jobs. In the NSCG, only
36% of women with a bachelor’s degree or higher in a STEM field actually worked full-time in
STEM jobs or in management jobs directly supervising scientists. An additional 14% worked in
health-related jobs and 5.7% worked in K-12 education, which is likely to be science-related.
This totals 56%, but even this may undercount those involved in science; some may be higherlevel managers of science enterprises, science journalists, etc.8
Table 2 shows the broad occupations of those with STEM bachelor’s degrees who are
working full-time, by major field and gender.9 In all of these STEM majors, women are more
likely than men to work in education and in health-related jobs. Men are more likely than women
to work in computer, technology, and engineering jobs and in management and business jobs.
Engineering majors have the greatest gender similarity in distributions across
occupations. In fact, the ratio of the proportion of women to men in engineering occupations is
quite close to 1 (.87) for engineering majors, but much smaller for other majors (.14). In other
words, those women who chose engineering majors look in many ways like men who chose
engineering. Male and female economics majors also have a quite similar distribution across
occupations. However, men and women with physical science and computer science majors
hold quite different types of jobs (p<.001), as Table 2 shows.
In our work on engineering (Ginther and Kahn forthcoming) we have found that
occupational categories can be a poor proxy for whether an individual is using their STEM
degree in their work. Instead, we rely on the NSCG survey that asks “how related is your job to
your highest degree?” Using this question, we find that, overall, 82.2% of men and 80.5% of
women (P<.001) with highest degrees in STEM indicate that their job is closely or somewhat
related to their highest degree, a much higher percentage than are working in the narrow
occupation “science.” Figure 4 breaks this down by field of highest degree. Men and women are
7

We choose to do this rather than by focusing only on women with STEM doctorates, or even more specifically on
those in academia (see Ceci et al. (2014) for a comprehensive review). Less than 10% of STEM majors proceed to
PhDs and a mere 1.2% of all STEM majors are in academic jobs in colleges and universities.
8
NSF separates out direct supervisors of scientists, but not higher-level management.
9
We discuss part-time workers below.

19

practically identical in the probability their jobs are related to their STEM major fields. With the
exception of computer science, none of the gender differences are significant. Ginther and
Rosenbloom (2015) show that women were less likely than men to start in computer science jobs
after completing their degree and significantly more likely to leave those jobs.

Gender and Earnings in STEM Jobs
According to Blau and Kahn (2016), in the overall labor market in the mid-2010s, the
female-to-male ratio of average hourly earnings for US full-time workers was 79% to 82%
(depending on the data set)—an improvement compared to 62%–63% in 1980. However, the
ratio for elite women and men—defined as those in the 90th salary percentile—currently stands at
74%. A significant portion of the gender salary gap disappears after control for occupation (and
the corresponding time flexibility), work hours, and other characteristics of the jobs. Does a
similar wage/salary gender gap exist for STEM jobs?
The literature on salary gaps in STEM is relatively thin, and much of it refers to specific
fields or to academia only. The US Commerce Department analyzed gender differences in STEM
employment and earnings. They defined STEM as excluding psychology or any social sciences.
They found that the gender salary gap was narrower in STEM than in non-STEM occupations
(14% v. 21%), which also implies that the STEM-non-STEM salary gap is larger for women than
men (62% v. 48%) (Beede et al. 2011). Graham and Smith (2005) looked at 1993 earnings in
STEM jobs held by bachelor’s degree or more-educated workers and found an overall gender
earnings gap of 16%. They explained two-thirds of that gap, with the most important
explanatory variables being job sector (government, industry, self-employed, etc.), whether the
person was a supervisor, the level of degree, and years of experience. People educated in mathintensive (GEMP) fields particularly earned more, as demonstrated for 1985 college graduates by
Weinberger (1999), and more recently by Beede et al. (2011).
The literature on academia is larger, but still not extensive. Kelly and Grant (2012) found
an earnings gap among faculty of 20% in both STEM and non-STEM faculty salaries. The
annual report of the American Association of University Professors repeatedly identifies gender
salary gaps, but does not control for variables such as age or field that give rise to these gaps.10
Other work finds female salary disadvantages in academia within specific disciplines.

10

For the latest survey, see https://www.aaup.org/our-programs/research/faculty-compensation-survey/2016-2017faculty-compensation-survey.

20

Ceci et al. (2014) calculates 2010 STEM gender salary gaps by academic rank. Most fields and
the lower academic ranks had no significant salary gaps, but there were significant salary gaps of
about 13.5% among assistant professors in both life sciences and in economics. Among full
professors, economics had the largest gender salary gap (26%), while full professors in other
GEMP fields except math had gaps between 11–17%. In life sciences research-oriented jobs,
Dunning (2012) found no, or a small, significant gender gap among many academic jobs, but
larger ones among others, including lab managers, assistant professors, and research associates.
Earnings gaps in academic medicine is the topic of Freund et al. (2016) and several earlier
studies referenced there, all of whom found gender gaps. In Freund et al. (2016), the gap was
7.6%, controlling for experience, academic rank, department, work activities, family status, and
past leaves.
To add to this literature, for this article we analyzed gender wage gaps among a much
larger group—all persons with a bachelor’s degree or higher, whose highest degree is in STEM
or STEM-related fields. Our data come from the 2013 NSCG and our findings. Our sample
includes only employees working more than 35 hours per week and making more than minimum
wage. With no controls, there was a 28% overall gender salary gap. This is larger than the
overall gap identified earlier by Graham and Smith (2005), although it is similar to the gap Blau
and Kahn (2016) found among the elite men and women noted above.
By controlling for field, age, race, level of highest degree, Carnegie-rating of first
bachelor’s degree (a measure of university quality), marital status, and presence of children, we
halved this gap to 14.6%. Field of study was an important control, particularly because of the
paucity of women with engineering and computer science degrees, the highest-paying STEM
fields. In a second regression, we included all of these controls but allowed family variables
(marriage, children) to affect men and women differently. We found that among those nevermarried without children, the unexplained gender gap falls to 5.3% ceteris paribus but is still
highly significant. However, among those currently married with children, even with all
background controls, the gap is 28.2%. In other words, family characteristics have a huge effect
on the gender earnings gap.
In a third regression, in addition to the background controls and gender-specific family
variables, we also added in variables about the person’s current job and work-time, including
weekly hours, weeks worked annually, employment sector, years worked at current job, and
21

whether the person was working 3 years previously. In this specification, never-married women
without children actually made more than never-married men without children (5.4% more,
p<.01). We conclude that for childless, never-married men and women in identical fields and
sectors and with controls for other relevant characteristics, women seem to even earn more than
similar men.
In this third regression, the earnings gap for married men and women with children also
falls when job characteristics are added, to 12.4%—less than half of the 28.2% it had been
without job variables. Thus job sector and job characteristics are a major reason for the earnings
difference between married men and women with children. Of the job variables, employment
sector has the most explanatory power: substantially fewer women are in the highest-paying nonacademic private sector and substantially more are in the lower-paying education sector.
In Kahn and Ginther (2017b), we performed a similar gender salary gap analysis limited
to STEM PhD-holders. There, we found a smaller overall salary gap of 17%. However, some of
the patterns are similar to our results described above for the STEM bachelors’ degree or above
population, particularly the key importance of job sector and field. To a lesser extent, age was
also important for PhDs, since men with STEM PhDs tend to be older than women, because
women are more recent additions to the stock of STEM PhDs.
In our analysis, as well as Graham and Smith’s (2005), considerable gender pay
differences resulted from STEM women and men being in different fields and different
employment sectors. Family also creates a wedge in salaries: married men receive a large
marriage premium while married women with children experience a penalty (as in the general
labor market, Juhn and McCue 2017).11 Of course, one’s plans for family can also affect one’s
choice of field and particularly job sector, possibly magnifying the effects of having a family.

Avoiding or Leaving STEM Occupations: The role of family, hours, and preferences
The labor force participation of US women peaked in 2000 at 60%, stabilized around
59% through 2009, and has since dropped to 57% percent. This decrease has given rise to the
narrative of “opting out” in the popular press (Belkin 2003). The opting-out narrative highlights
the conflicts between work and family confronted by professional women who are often

11

A male marriage premium of about 30 log points compared to single men is observed in the overall labor market
and this has been roughly constant over time. The female marriage penalty is much more of a motherhood penalty
that has fallen to between 1.3 and 4.1 log points (Juhn and McCue 2017).

22

partnered with professional men. Here we show that this narrative applies to many women in
STEM careers.
We frame this discussion using Coser’s concept of “greedy institutions”: those
organizations that demand one’s full attention and reduce time spent on competing activities
(Coser 1974). Goldin and her coauthors have argued that many professional occupations such as
MBAs and lawyers are “greedy occupations” that demand significant face time, and in the case
of law, billable hours (Goldin 2014; Goldin and Katz 2011; Bertrand, Goldin, and Katz 2010).
Cortes and Pan (2016) found that women were less likely to choose occupations with high work
hours. Goldin (2014) and Goldin and Katz (2016) found that women were attracted to
occupations such as veterinary medicine and pharmacy, where hours were predictable.
Long work hours also come into conflict with the demands of raising a family, which is
considered another of Coser’s greedy institutions. In the case of MBAs, the gender earnings gap
grew over time and was associated with presence of children and limited flexibility in hours of
work. MBAs who were mothers worked fewer hours, shifted to less demanding jobs, or left the
labor force entirely (Bertrand, Goldin, and Katz 2010). If women do leave the labor force after
the birth of their first child, Hotchkiss, Pitts, and Walker (2014) found that they experience an
earnings penalty of about 51% and that penalty is higher for women with a college education.
Thus, the hours demanded by “greedy occupations” and the conflict between work and family
are associated with leaving the labor market or substantial earnings penalties. Is this also the
case with STEM occupations?
A small literature addresses these issues as it relates to gender and science careers. Xie
and Shaumann (2003) found that married women with children are less likely to complete their
STEM degree, to pursue a STEM career, to participate in the labor force, to be promoted in a
STEM job, and to move to better jobs. Preston (1994, 2004) found that in the 1980s and 1990s,
women were more likely to leave science because of work-life balance issues and lack of
mentoring. Glass et al. (2013) compared women in STEM careers to those in non-STEM
professions. Although they found few differences between women in STEM and non-STEM
professions in terms of hours, job satisfaction and job flexibility, women in STEM do not persist
in these jobs and instead move into non-STEM and non-management jobs. They argue that the
“climate” in STEM occupations explains women’s propensity to leave. Our own work has
captured family’s impact on women leaving engineering and computer science occupations.
23

Kahn and Ginther (2015) found that a lack of part-time work available in engineering was
associated with women leaving engineering occupations. For those with bachelors’ degrees in
engineering, we found that the gender retention gap is due to women leaving the labor market
entirely, and it is highly correlated with child-bearing. Moreover, the likelihood of women
leaving the labor market is lower in engineering than in other majors, and lower for single
childless women than for men.
Ginther and Rosenbloom (2015) examined gender differences in leaving computer
science occupations. Conditional on having a computer science degree, women are significantly
less likely than men to work in computer science occupations. This gap was associated with the
presence of young children, that is, once women had children, they were significantly more
likely to leave these occupations. Once they control for the share of immigrants in the computer
science major, they found that women were less likely to work in computer science occupations.
This result was also found by Orrenius and Zavodny (2015) for all science and engineering
fields.
There is also some evidence of chilly climates—uncomfortable work environments for
women—due to the under-representation of women in STEM. For instance, Hunt (2016) found
that women are more likely to leave jobs that are heavily male and that this by itself explains the
difference in exit rates of women from STEM and non-STEM. Hunt’s results dovetail with
Lordan and Pischke’s (2016) finding that women are less satisfied in occupations with lower
shares of females, although controlling for the attributes of the occupation lowers the size of this
relationship by more than a third. Moreover, this results persists if they control for the share of
males in the firm, suggesting that work environments with more men are indeed “chilly
climates.” These are attributes of all male-dominated jobs, not just STEM jobs. Finally, Kahn
and Ginther (2015) find that the higher propensity to leave engineering is limited to those with
children or about to have children, suggesting the chilly climate may be manifest in less time
flexibility or similar child-friendly workplace accommodations.
Taken together, the time commitments demanded by work and raising a family affect
women’s probability of pursuing STEM careers and their persistence in those careers. In
addition, the “climate” in STEM occupations, proxied by the share of men in those occupations,
decreases women’s job satisfaction and is correlated with the likelihood that they leave.

24

Conclusion
Why are there fewer women in STEM disciplines and what can be done about it? We
started this essay by grappling with the very notion of STEM as it relates to gender, arguing that
it is a very general catch-all that masks important gender differences in science and engineering
fields. We prefer the taxonomy of LPS (life science, psychology, and social sciences excluding
economics) and GEMP (geoscience, economics, engineering, math and computer science, and
physical science), where LPS and GEMP are differentiated by mathematical requirements.
We traced the contentious literature on gender differences in mathematical ability and
performance. Arguments for early biological differences are not conclusive and do not affect
ability at kindergarten entrance. The literature is converging on a consensus that there are only
small gender differences in mathematics tests scores at early ages, but the gender gap widens by
middle and high school. In addition, more boys perform in both tails of the mathematics
distribution with significantly more in the right tail than girls. To the extent that those who study
STEM are drawn from the right tail of the math ability distribution, this may give rise to some of
the gender differences we observe in STEM.
Nevertheless, a growing body of literature in economics and other social sciences has
found that gender differences in mathematics test scores are mutable and can be influenced by
family, teachers, culture, stereotypes, and role models throughout the schooling process.
Teachers and to a lesser extent family are important contributors to gendered stereotypes and can
have a negative influence on girls’ mathematics performance. Role models and gender equality
in a given culture can decrease the gender gap in mathematics performance. The competitive
nature of test-taking may understate girls’ true mathematical abilities. Changing the “growth
mindset” belief that success in mathematics requires effort can improve girls’ performance.
Women’s lower representation in STEM can first be observed in high school. Girls take
more STEM courses and Advanced Placement exams, but these are mostly in less math-intensive
areas. Once in college, women’s representation among both LPS and GEMP majors grew until
the 2000s but then stopped growing, and for GEMP has fallen since. Similarly, women as a
percentage of doctorates awarded in LPS plateaued in 2006 and in GEMP in 2010. This is not a
picture of women’s continual progress in STEM disciplines.
Our results are consistent with preferences and psychological explanations. Women
prefer people-centered, altruistic, non-competitive jobs with women colleagues. This not only
25

affects the decision to major in STEM, but also to pick LPS fields, as well as jobs such as
medical doctor instead of research scientist.
Family considerations are also important since they affect the decision of job sector (e.g.,
fewer STEM women working in industry, more in health and education), whether to work in a
job related to one’s STEM degree, or even whether to work at all. STEM fields influence
earnings, with salaries in GEMP being higher than those in LPS. We demonstrate that
controlling for field, job sector, hours and weeks worked, job tenure, whether the person was
employed in the previous three years, and employment sector erases the entire salary gap
between men and women with children.
Women are less likely to pursue and more likely to leave jobs where long hours leave less
time for family considerations. In addition, recent literature shows that a “chilly climate”
measured by the share of men working in that occupation is associated with less job satisfaction
and an increased likelihood of leaving STEM fields such as engineering. To the extent that
STEM and especially GEMP fields are male-dominated, this may lead to a self-fulfilling
prophecy of few women in these fields and give rise to the stagnation of women’s share in
STEM majors and careers that we have observed.

References
Antecol, Heather, Ozkan Eren, and Serkan Ozbeklik. 2015. “The Effect of Teacher Gender on
Student Achievement in Primary School.” Journal of Labor Economics 33(1):63–89.
Astin, Helene. "Sex Differences in Mathematical and Scientific Precocity. 1974. " In
Mathematical Talent: Discovery, Description, and Development, edited by Julian Stanley,
Daniel Keating, and Lynn Fox, 70–86, esp. 70. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Bagès, Céline, Catharine Verniers, and Delphine Martinot. 2016. “Virtues of a Hardworking
Role Model to Improve Girls Mathematics Performance.” Psychology of Women Quarterly
40(1).
Baker, Michael, and Kirsten Cornelson. 2016. “Gender Based Occupational Segregation and
Sex Differences in Sensory, Motor and Spatial Aptitudes.” National Bureau of Economic
Research, NBER Working Paper No. 22248. Available at:
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22248.pdf.

26

Baldiga, Katherine. 2013. “Gender Differences in Willingness to Guess.” Management Science
60(2):434–448. doi:10.1287/mnsc.2013.1776.
Banaji, Mahzarin R., and Anthony G. Greenwald. 2013. Blindspot: Hidden Biases of Good
People. New York: Delacourte Press.
Barone, Carlo. 2011. “Some things never change: gender segregation in higher education across
eight nations and three decades.” Sociology of Education 84(2):157–176.
doi:10.1177/0038040711402099.
Beaudry, Paul, and Ethan Lewis. 2014. “Do Male-Female Wage Differentials Reflect
Differences in the Return to Skill? Cross-City Evidence from 1980–2000.” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6(2):178–194. doi:10.1257/app.6.2.178.
Beede, David, Tiffany Julian, David Langdon, George McKittrick, Beethika Khan, and Mark
Doms. 2011. “Women in STEM: A Gender Gap to Innovation.” U.S. Department of
Commerce Economics and Statistics Administration Issue Brief, #04-11. Available at:
http://www.esa.doc.gov/sites/default/files/womeninstemagaptoinnovation8311.pdf.
Beilock, Sian L., Elizabeth A. Gunderson, Gerardo Ramirez, and Susan C. Levine. 2009.
“Female teachers’ math anxiety affects girls’ math achievement.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 107(5):1860–1863. doi:10.1073/pnas.0910967107.
Belkin, Lisa. 2003. “The Opt-Out Revolution.” New York Times, October 26.
http://www.nytimes.com/2003/10/26/magazine/the-opt-out-revolution.html.
Bertrand, Marianne, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2010. “Dynamics of the Gender Gap
for Young Professionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors.” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 2:228–255.
Bettinger, Eric P., and Bridget Terry Long. 2005. “Do Faculty Serve as Role Models? The
Impact of Instructor Gender on Female Students.” American Economic Review 95(2):152–
157.
Bian, Lian, Sarah-Jane Leslie, and Andrei Cimpian. 2017. “Gender Stereotypes about Intellectual
Ability Emerge Early and Influence Children’s Interests.” Science 355:389–391.
doi:10.1126/science.aah6524.
Blackwell, Lisa S., Kali H. Tresnewski, and Carl S. Dweck. 2007. “Implicit Theories of
Intelligence Predict Achievement Across an Adolescent.” Child Development, 78(1):246–
263.
Blair, Clancy, and David Gamson, Steven Thorne, and David Baker. 2005. “Rising mean IQ:
Cognitive demand of mathematics education for young children, population exposure to
formal schooling, and the neurobiology of the prefrontal cortex.” Intelligence 33:93–106.
doi:10.1016/j.intell.2004.07.008.
27

Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2016. “The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends, and
Explanations.” National Bureau of Economic Research, NBER Working Paper 21913.
Available at: http://www.nber.org/papers/w21913.
Bottia, Martha Cecilia, Elizabeth Stearns, Roslyn Arlin Mickelson, Stephanie Moller, and Lauren
Valentino. 2015. "Growing the roots of STEM majors: Female math and science high school
faculty and the participation of students in STEM." Economics of Education Review 45:14–
27. doi:10.1016/j.econedurev.2015.01.002.
Buffington, Catherine, Benjamin Cerf, Christina Jones, and Bruce A. Weinberg. 2016. “STEM
Training and Early Career Outcomes of Female and Male Graduate Students: Evidence from
UMETRICS Data Linked to the 2010 Census.” American Economic Review, Papers and
Proceedings 106(5):333–338. doi:10.1257/aer.p20161124.
Canes, Brandice, and Harvey Rosen. 2005. “Following in her Footsteps? Faculty Gender
Composition and Women’s Choice of College Majors.” Industrial and Labor Relations
Review 48(3):486–504.
Carrell, Scott E., Marianne E. Page, and James E. West. 2010. “Sex And Science: How Professor
Gender Perpetuates The Gender Gap.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(3):1101–
1144.
Ceci, Stephen J., Donna K. Ginther, Shulamit Kahn, and Wendy M. Williams. 2014. “Women in
Academic Science: A Changing Landscape.” Psychological Science in the Public Interest
15(3):75–141.
Cheng, Albert, Katherine Koptic, and Gema Zamorro. 2017. “Can Parents’ Growth Mindset and
Role Modelling Address STEM Gender Gaps?” Department of Education Reform,
University of Arkansas, EDRE Working Paper 2017-07.
Clayton, Janine A., and Francis S. Collins. 2014. “Policy: NIH to balance sex in cell and animal
studies.” Nature 509:282–283.
Cornwell, Christopher, David B. Mustard, and Jessica Van Parys. 2013. "Non-cognitive Skills
and Gender Disparities in Test Scores and Teacher Assessments: Evidence from Primary
School." Journal of Human Resources 48(1):236–264.
Cortes, Patricia, and Jessica Pan. 2016. “Prevalence of Long Hours and Skilled Women’s
Occupational Choices.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 10225. Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2846316.
Coser, Lewis A. 1974. Greedy Institutions; Patterns of Undivided Commitment. New York: Free
Press.

28

Cotton, Christopher, Frank McIntyre, and Joseph Price. 2013. “Gender differences in repeated
competition: Evidence from school math contests.” Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization 86:52.
Cvencek, Dario, Andrew N. Meltzoff, and Anthony G. Greenwald. 2011. “Math—Gender
Stereotypes in Elementary School Children.” Child Development 82:766–779.
Dee, Thomas. 2005. “A Teacher Like Me: Does Race, Ethnicity, or Gender Matter?” American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 95(2):158–165.
Dee, Thomas. 2007. “Teachers and the Gender Gaps in Student Achievement.” The Journal of
Human Resources 42(3):528–554.
De Philippis, Marta. 2016. “STEM Graduates and Secondary School Curriculum: Does Early
Exposure to Science Matter?” Centre for Economic Performance, London School of
Economics, CEP Discussion Paper No. 1443.
Doris, Aedin, Donal O'Neill, and Olive Sweetman. 2013. "Gender, Single-Sex Schooling and
Maths Achievement." Economics of Education Review 35:104–19.
doi:10.1016/j.econedurev.2013.04.001.
Dunning, Hayley. 2012. “Life Sciences Salary Survey 2012.” The Scientist, November 1.
Available at http://www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/32918/title/Life-SciencesSalary-Survey-2012/.
Dweck, Carol S. 2006. Mindset: The New Psychology of Success. New York: Ballantine Books.
Dweck, Carol S. 2007. “Is Math a Gift? Beliefs that Put Females at Risk.” In Why Aren't More
Women in Science? Top Researchers Debate the Evidence, edited by Stephen J. Ceci and
Wendy M. Williams, 47–55. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.
Eccles, Jacquelynne S., and Janis E. Jacobs. 1986. “Social Forces Shape Math Attitudes and
Performance.” Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 11(2):367–380.
doi:10.1086/494229.
Eccles, Jacquelynne S., Janis E. Jacobs, and Rena D. Harold. 1990. “Gender Role Stereotypes,
Expectancy Effects, and Parents’ Socialization of Gender Differences.” Journal of Social
Issues 46(2):183–201. doi:10.1111/j.1540-4560.1990.tb01929.x.
Eccles, Jacquelynne S., and Ming-Te Wang. 2016. “What motivates females and males to pursue
careers in mathematics and science?” International Journal of Behavioral Development
40(2):100–106. doi:10.1177/0165025415616201.
Ehrenberg, Ronald G., Daniel D. Goldhaber, and Dominic J. Brewer. 1995. “Do Teachers’ Race,
Gender, and Ethnicity Matter? Evidence from the National Educational Longitudinal Study
of 1988.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 48(3):547–561.
29

Fox, Lynn, and Sanford Cohn. 1980. "Sex Differences in the Development of Precocious
Mathematical Talent." In Women and the Mathematical Mystique, edited by Lynn Fox, Linda
A. Brody, and Dianne Tobin, 94–112, esp. 94. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Freund, Karen M., Anita Raj, Samantha E. Kaplan, Norma Terrin, Janis L. Breeze, Tracy H.
Urech, and Phyllis L. Carr. 2016. “Inequities in Academic Compensation by Gender: A
Follow-Up to the National Faculty Survey Cohort Study.” Academic Medicine 91(8):1063–
73. doi:10.1097/ACM.0000000000001250.
Friedman-Sokuler, Naomi, and Moshe Justman. 2016. "Gender Streaming and Prior
Achievement in High School Science and Mathematics." Economics of Education Review
53:230–53. doi:10.1016/j.econedurev.2016.04.004.
Fryer, Roland G. Jr., and Steven D. Levitt. 2010. "An Empirical Analysis of the Gender Gap in
Mathematics." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(2):210–240.
Ginther, Donna K., and Shulamit Kahn. Forthcoming. “Women’s Careers in Academic Social
Science: Progress, Pitfalls, and Plateaus.” In The Economics of Economists, edited by
Alessandro Lanteri and Jack Vromen. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ginther, Donna K., and Shulamit Kahn. 2009. “Does Science Promote Women? Evidence from
Academia 1973–2001.” In Science and Engineering Careers in the United States, edited by
Richard B. Freeman and Daniel F. Goroff. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER.
Ginther, Donna K., and Shulamit Kahn. 2015. “Comment on Expectations of brilliance underlie
gender distributions across academic disciplines.” Science 349(6246):391.
Ginther, Donna K., and Joshua L. Rosenbloom. 2015. “Why Do Women Leave IT? Examining
the Factors Associated with the Gender Gap in Information Technology Occupations.”
Mimeo, University of Kansas.
Glass, Jennifer L., Sharon Sassler, Yael Levitte, and Katherine M. Michelmore. 2013. “What’s
so special about STEM? A comparison of women’s retention in STEM and professional
occupations.” Social Forces 92(2):723–756. doi:10.1093/sf/sot092.
Goldin, Claudia. 2014. “A grand gender convergence: It’s last chapter.” American Economic
Association Presidential Address, Philadelphia, PA.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2016. “The Most Egalitarian of All Professions:
Pharmacy and the Evolution of a Family-Friendly Occupation.” Journal of Labor Economics
34:705–45.
Good, Catherine, Joshua Aronson, and Michael Inzlicht. 2003. “Improving adolescents’
standardized test performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat.”
Applied Developmental Psychology 24:645–662. doi:10.1016/j.appdev.2003.09.002.
30

Good, Catherine, Aneeta Rattan, and Carol S. Dweck. 2012. “Why Do Women Opt Out? Sense
of Belonging and Women’s Representation in Mathematics.” Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 102(4):700–717. doi:10.1037/a0026659.
Gottfried, Michael A., and Robert Bozick. 2016. “Supporting the STEM Pipeline: Linking
Applied STEM Course-Taking in High School to Declaring a STEM Major in College.”
Education Finance and Policy 11(2):177–202.
Goulden, Marc, Karie Frasch, and Mary Ann Mason. 2009. “Staying competitive: Patching
America’s leaky pipeline in the sciences.” Center for American Progress. Retrieved from:
http://www.americanprogress.org/issues/2009/11/women_and_sciences.html.
Graham, John W., and Steven A. Smith. 2005. "Gender Differences in Employment and
Earnings in Science and Engineering in the US." Economics of Education Review 24(3):341–
54. doi:10.1016/j.econedurev.2004.06.005.
Griffith, Amanda L. 2010. "Persistence of women and minorities in STEM field majors: Is it the
school that matters?" Economics of Education Review 29:911–922.
doi:10.1016/j.econedurev.2010.06.010.
Griffith, Amanda L. 2014. "Faculty Gender in the College Classroom: Does It Matter for
Achievement and Major Choice?" Southern Economic Journal 81(1):211–231.
doi:10.4284/0038-4038-2012.100.
Guiso, Luigi, Fernando Monte, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2008. “Culture, Gender, and
Math.” Science 320:1164–1165.
Guo, Congbin, Mun C. Tsang and Xiaohao Ding. 2010. “Gender disparities in science and
engineering in Chinese universities.” Economics of Education Review 29(2):225–235.
Harvard Project Implicit, https://implicit.harvard.edu/implicit/.
Hoffman, Florian, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2009. “A Professor Like Me: The Influence of
Instructor Gender on College Achievement.” Journal of Human Resources 44(2).
doi:10.3386/w13182.
Hong, Lu, and Scott E. Page. 2004. “Groups of diverse problem solvers can outperform groups
of high-ability problem solvers.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
101(46):16385–16389. doi:10.1073/pnas.0403723101.
Hotchkiss, Julie L., M. Melinda Pitts, and Mary Beth Walker. 2014. “Impact of First-Birth
Career Interruption on Earnings: Evidence from Administrative Data.” Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta, Working Paper 2014–23.

31

Hunt, Jennifer. 2016. “Why Do Women Leave Science and Engineering?” ILR Review
69(1):199–226. doi:10.1177/0019793915594597.
Hyde, Janet S., Elizabeth Fennema, and Susan J. Lamon. 1990. “Gender differences in
mathematics performance: A meta-analysis.” Psychological Bulletin 107(2):139–155.
Hyde, Janet S., Sara M. Lindberg, Marcia C. Linn, Amy B. Ellis, and Caroline C. Williams.
2008. “Gender similarities characterize math performance.” Science 321:494–495.
Juhn, Chinhui, and Kristin McCue. 2017. “Specialization Then and Now: Marriage, Children,
and the Gender Earnings Gap across Cohorts.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives
31(1):183–204. doi:10.1257/jep.31.1.183.
Kahn, Shulamit, and Donna K. Ginther. 2017. “The impact of postdoctoral training on early
careers in Biomedicine.” Nature Biotechnology 35(1):90–94.
Kahn, Shulamit, and Donna K. Ginther. 2015. “Are recent cohorts of women with engineering
bachelors less likely to stay in engineering?” Frontiers in Psychology 6, Article 1144.
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01144.
Kahn, Shulamit, and Donna K. Ginther. 2017b. “Accounting for the Gender Pay Gap in STEM
Salaries.” Working Paper, Mimeo, Boston University.
Kamas, Linda, and Anne Preston. 2012. “The importance of being confident; gender, career
choice, and willingness to compete.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization
8(1):82–97. doi:10.1016/j.jebo.2011.06.013.
Kelly, Kimberly, and Linda Grant. 2012. “Penalties and premiums: The impact of gender,
marriage, and parenthood, on faculty salaries in STEM and non-STEM Fields.” Social
Studies of Science 42(6):872–899.
Landaud, Fanny, Son-Thierry Ly, and Eric Maurin. 2016. “Competitive Schools and the Gender
Gap in the Choice of Field of Study.” Centre for Economic Policy Research, CEPR
Discussion Paper No. DP11411. SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2814086.
Lavy, Victor. 2008. “Do gender stereotypes reduce girls’ or boys’ human capital outcomes?
Evidence from a natural experiment.” Journal of Public Economics 92(10–11):2083–2105.
doi:10.1016/j.jpubeco.2008.02.009.
Lavy, Victor, and Edith Sand. 2015. “On the Origins of Gender Human Capital Gaps: Short and
Long Term Consequences of Teachers’ Stereotypical Biases.” National Bureau of Economic
Research, NBER Working Paper 20909.
Leinhardt, Gaea, Andria Seewald, and Mary Engel. 1979. "Learning What's Taught: Sex
Differences in Instruction." Journal of Educational Psychology 71(3):432–39, esp. 432.

32

Lippa, Richard A. 1998. “Gender-related individual differences and the structure of vocational
interests: The importance of the people–things dimension.” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 74:996–1009.
Lippa, Richard A. 2001. “On deconstructing and reconstructing masculinity-femininity.” Journal
of Research in Personality 35:168–207.
Lippa, Richard A. 2010. “Sex differences in personality traits and gender-related occupational
preferences across 53 nations: Testing evolutionary and social-environmental theories.”
Archives of Sexual Behavior 39:619–636.
Lordan, Grace, and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2016. “Does Rosie Like Riveting? Male and Female
Occupational Choices.” National Bureau of Economic Research, NBER Working Paper
22495.
Main, Joyce B., and Ben Ost. 2014. “The Impact of Letter Grades on Student Effort, Course
Selection, and Major Choice: A Regression-Discontinuity Analysis.” The Journal of
Economic Education 45(1):1–10. doi:10.1080/00220485.2014.859953.
Maloney, Erin A., Gerardo Ramirez, Elizabeth A. Gunderson, Susan C. Levine, and Sian L
Beilock. 2015. “Intergenerational effects of parents’ math anxiety on children’s math
achievement and anxiety.” Psychological Science 26(9):1480–1488.
doi:10.1177/0956797615592630.
Morgan, Stephen L., Dafna Gelbgiser, and Kim A. Weeden. 2013. “Feeding the pipeline:
Gender, occupational plans, and college major selection.” Social Science Research 42:989–
1005. doi:10.1016/j.ssresearch.2013.03.008.
Mullis, Ina V.S., Michael O. Martin, Edward G. Fierros, Amie L. Goldberg, and Steven E.
Stemler. 2000. “Gender Differences in Achievement, IEA’s Third International Mathematics
and Science Study (TIMSS).” TIMSS International Study Center, Boston College.
Niederle, Muriel, and Lise Vesterlund. 2010. “Explaining the Gender Gap in Math Test Scores:
The Role of Competition.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 24(2):129–44.
Niederle, Muriel, and Alexandra H. Yestrumskas. 2008. “Gender Differences in Seeking
Challenges: The Role of Institutions.” National Bureau of Economic Research, NBER
Working Paper, w13922.
Nix, Samatha, Lara Perez-Felkner, and Kirby Thomas. 2015. “Perceived mathematical ability
under challenge: a longitudinal perspective on sex segregation among STEM degree fields.”
Frontiers in Psychology 6, Article 530. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00530.
Nollenberger, Natalia, Nuria Rodriguez-Planas, and Almudena Sevilla. 2016. "The Math Gender
Gap: The Role of Culture." American Economic Review 106(5):257–61.
doi:10.1257/aer.p20161121.
33

Nowell, Amy, and Larry Hedges. 1998. “Trends in Gender Differences in Academic
Achievement from 1960 to 1994: An Analysis of Differences in Mean, Variance, and
Extreme Scores.” Sex Roles 39(1–2):21–43.
Nosek, Brian A., Frederick L. Smyth, N. Sriram, Nicole M. Lindner, Thierry Devos, Alfonso
Ayala, Yoav Bar-Anan, et al. 2009. “National differences in gender-science stereotypes
predict national sex differences in science and math achievement.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science 106(26):10593–97.
Orrenius, Pia M., and Madeline Zavodny. 2015. “Does Immigration Affect Whether US Natives
Major in Science and Engineering?” Journal of Labor Economics 33(S1):S79–S108.
doi:10.1086/676660.
Ost, Ben. 2010. “The role of peers and grades in determining major persistence in the sciences.”
Economics of Education Review 29(6):923–934. doi:10.1016/j.econedurev.2010.06.011.
Owen, Ann L. 2010. “Grades, Gender, and Encouragement: A Regression Discontinuity
Analysis.” Journal of Economic Education 41(3):217–234.
doi:10.1080/00220485.2010.486718.
Park, Hyunjoon, Jere Behrman, and Jaesung Choi. 2012. “Do Single-Sex Schools Enhance
Students' STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) Outcomes?” Penn
Institute for Economic Research, Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania,
PIER Working Paper 12-038.
Penner, Andrew M., and Marcel Paret. 2008. “Gender differences in mathematics achievement:
Exploring the early grades and the extremes.” Social Science Research 37:239–253.
Pope, Devin G., and Justin R. Sydnor. 2010. “Geographic Variation in the Gender Differences in
Test Scores.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 24:95–108.
Preston, Anne E. 1994. “Why Have All the Women Gone? A Study of Exit of Women from the
Science and Engineering Professions.” The American Economic Review 84(5):1446–1462.
Preston, Anne E. 2004. Leaving Science: Occupational Exit from Scientific Careers. New York:
Russell Sage Foundation.
Price, Joshua. 2010. "The Effect of Instructor Race and Gender on Student Persistence in STEM
Fields." Economics of Education Review 29(6):901–10.
Qian, Yi, and Basit Zafar. 2009. “Do female faculty influence female students’ choice of college
major, and why?” Northwestern University Working Paper. Available at:
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.212.735.

34

Rask, Kevin. 2010. "Attrition in STEM Fields at a Liberal Arts College: The Importance of
Grades and Pre-collegiate Preferences." Economics of Education Review 29(6):892–900.
doi:10.1016/j.econedurev.2010.06.013.
Rask, Kevin N., and Elizabeth M. Bailey. 2002. “Are Faculty Role Models? Evidence from
Major Choice in an Undergraduate Institution.” Journal of Economic Education 33(2):99–
124.
Riegle-Crumb, Catherine, Barbara King, Eric Grodsky, and Chandra Muller. 2012. “The more
things change, the more they stay the same? Prior achievement fails to explain gender
inequality in entry to STEM college majors over time.” American Education Research
Journal 49:1048.
Rogers, Kara ed. 2010. The 100 Most Influential Scientists of all Time. New York: Britannica
Educational Publishing.
Spencer, Steven J., Claude M. Steele, and Diane M. Quinn. 1999. “Stereotype threat and
women’s math performance.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 35(1):4–28.
Stinebrickner, Todd R., and Ralph Stinebrickner. 2011. “Math or science? Using longitudinal
expectations data to examine the process of choosing a college major.” National Bureau of
Economic Research, NBER Working Paper 16869.
Stoet, Gijsbert, and David C. Geary. 2013. “Sex differences in mathematics and reading
achievement are inversely related: Within-nation assessment of ten years of PISA data.”
PLoS One 8(3):e57988. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0057988.
Strand, Steve, Ian J. Deary, and Pauline Smith. 2006. “Sex differences in Cognitive Abilities
Test scores: A UK national picture.” British Journal of Educational Psychology 76:463–480.
Su, Rong, James Rounds, and Patrick Ian Armstrong. 2009. “Men and things, women and
people: A meta-analysis of sex differences in interests.” Psychological Bulletin, 135:859–
884.
United States General Accounting Office. 2001. Drug Safety: Most Drugs withdrawn in Recent
Years had Greater Health Risks for Women. Washington, DC: Government Publishing
Office.
Wai, Jonathan, Megan Cacchio, Martha Putallaz, and Matthew C. Makel. 2010. “Sex differences
in the right tail of cognitive abilities: A 30 year examination.” Intelligence 38:412–423.
doi:10.1016/j.intell.2010.04.006.
Wang, Ming-Te, Jacquelynne S. Eccles, and Sarah Kenney. 2013. “Not lack of ability but more
choice: Individual and gender differences in choice of careers in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics.” Psychological Science 24(5):770-75.
doi:10.1177/0956797612458937.
35

Weinberg, Bruce A. 2000. “Computer Use and the Demand for Female Workers.” IRL Review
53(2):290–308. doi:10.1177/001979390005300206.
Weinberger, Catherine J. 1999. “Mathematical College Majors and the Gender Gap in Wages.”
Industrial Relations 38(3):407–413. doi:10.1111/0019-8676.00134.
Winters, Marcus A., Robert C. Haight, Thomas T. Swain, and Katarzyna A. Pickering. 2013.
“The effect of same-gender teacher assignment on student achievement in the elementary and
secondary grades: Evidence from panel data.” Economics of Education Review 34:69–75.
doi:10.1016/j.econedurev.2013.01.007.
Wiswall, Matthew, and Basit Zafar. 2015. “Determinants of College Major Choice:
Identification using an Information Experiment.” Review of Economics Studies 82:791–824.
doi:10.1093/restud/rdu044.
Wiswall, Matthew, Leanna Stiefel, Amy Ellen Schwartz, and Jessica Boccardo. 2014. "Does
Attending a STEM High School Improve Student Performance? Evidence from New York
City." Economics of Education Review 40:93–105. doi:10.1016/j.econedurev.2014.01.005.
Wolfinger, Nicholas H., Mary Ann Mason, and Marc Goulden. 2008. “Problems in the pipeline:
Gender, marriage, and fertility in the ivory tower.” Journal of Higher Education 79(4).
Wolfinger, Nicholas H., Mary Ann Mason, and Marc Goulden. 2009. "Stay in the Game:
Gender, Family Formation and Alternative Trajectories in the Academic Life Course." Social
Forces 87:1591–1621.
Xie, Yu, and Kimberlee A. Schauman. 2003. Women in science: Career processes and
outcomes. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Zafar, Basit. 2013. “College Major Choice and the Gender Gap.” Journal of Human Resources
48(3):545–595. doi:10.3368/jhr.48.3.545.

36

Tables and Figures
Table 1: Gender Differences in selected U.S. STEM Advanced Placement Test-Taking,
2016.

Subject Area
Biology
Calculus AB
Calculus BC
Chemistry
Computer Science A
Environmental Science
Physics 1 & 2
Physics C (Electricity)
Physics C (Mechanics)
Total

% of those taking S&E AP Exam
% of
% of
%Female
Males
Females
13.6%
23.5%
60.9%
22.8%
24.5%
49.2%
10.5%
8.5%
42.1%
11.3%
12.3%
49.6%
6.5%
2.2%
23.3%
9.7%
13.3%
55.2%
17.5%
12.3%
38.8%
2.6%
0.9%
24.6%
5.6%
2.4%
27.8%
100.0%
100.0%
47.4%

Source: The College Board.

37

Average Scores
Males
3.01
3.03
3.91
3.05
2.83
2.75
2.49
3.50
3.66
3.04

Females
2.73
2.84
3.68
2.90
2.45
2.38
1.99
3.26
3.24
2.73

% With Highest Score
Males
9.0%
26.7%
51.9%
21.3%
12.9%
9.7%
5.6%
34.5%
33.8%
20.7%

Females
4.8%
21.7%
43.8%
17.8%
6.4%
5.8%
1.8%
24.7%
21.1%
14.3%

Table 2: Distribution of U.S. STEM Employment Across Occupations by College Major
and Gender, 2013

College Major

Employment Sector
Occupation

Computers &
Technology,
Phys. Sci.

Life Science and
Psychology

Engineering

Economics

Other Social Sci

Males Females Males Females Males Females Males Females Males Females

Science

11.6

13.0

13.5

11.4

2.3

3.9

3.6

5.2

4.8

4.1

Engineering

11.2

3.9

2.6

0.6

48.4

42.3

2.7

0.9

2.4

0.3

5.2

6.9

28.7

36.3

1.5

4.8

2.3

7.4

7.3

15.6

Computers

36.8

23.9

3.7

1.8

15.8

13.4

5.5

2.5

4.4

2.0

Management/Business

19.2

20.5

24.9

19.8

21.7

22.6

58.8

51.0

36.8

28.8

Education

3.8

14.3

4.8

11.1

1.1

4.1

2.8

7.0

7.6

13.7

Other Professional

3.0

4.3

5.3

4.4

1.5

2.9

10.3

7.0

18.5

15.0

Other

9.3

13.2

16.4

14.7

7.7

6.0

14.1

19.1

18.3

20.6

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

Health

All

Occupational categories:
 Science: Includes jobs categorized by NSF as science or (directly) managing scientists, including
social sciences (except for psychology), excluding computer science and engineering.
 Engineering: Includes jobs categorized by NSF as engineering, engineering-related, or managing
engineers.
 Health: Includes all medical/health professionals and semi-professionals and psychologists,
counselors and social workers.
 Computers: Includes jobs categorized as the NSF as computer science or computer programming, or
managing computer systems.
 Management/Business: Excludes those categorized by NSF as those directly managing scientists.
 Education: All those teaching K-12 or teaching non-S&E subjects in tertiary education.
 Other Professional: Non-STEM, non-business professions including law, arts, clergy, etc.
 Other: All other jobs including clerical, skilled and unskilled manual, and service occupations.
Source: NSCG 2013. Includes only those working full time.

38

Figure 1: Percentage Female among All US High School and College Graduates and by
STEM Field, 1994–2014
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
1994

1996

1998
High School

2000

2002
All BAs

2004

2006

2008

GEMP BAs

2010

2012

2014

LPS BAs

STEM majors divided into two categories:
GEMP (math-intensive) fields: geosciences, engineering, economics, math and computer science, and
physical science.
LPS (less-math-intensive) fields: life sciences, psychology, and social sciences excluding economics.
Sources:
Percentage female among high school graduates calculated as percentage female among high school (or
higher) graduates aged 20–22 in the US Bureau of the Census’s Current Population Survey.
Percentage female among college graduates by broad major calculated from NSF’s WebCaspar system.

39

Figure 2: Percentage of Bachelors Who Graduate with PhDs Seven Years Later, by Broad
Major Field and Gender
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
GEMP 1992-96

GEMP 2010-2014
Female

LPS 1992-96

LPS 2010-14

Male

Source: Calculated from information on the numbers of female and male Bachelor’s and PhD Degrees
conferred in field. Source: 1992–2014 WebCaspar data.

40

Figure 3: Percent Female among PhDs Conferred by Field, U.S. 1970–2014
80%
70%
60%
Psychology
50%

Life and Soc. Sci
Economics

40%

Engineering
30%

Other GEMP
Humanities

20%
10%
0%
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Source: Calculated from NSF’s WebCaspar System.

41

2005

2010

Figure 4: Percentage Working in Jobs Related to Highest Degree, by Gender and Field of
Highest Degree, U.S. 2013

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Computer
Sci/math

Life Sci

Physical Sci Economics Other Social Engineering
Sci
Women

STEM
Related

Non-STEM

Men

Source: 2013 NSCG. Percentages shown include working in closely and somewhat related field.

42

