                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     SCRAPING BY: INCOME AND PROGRAM PARTICIPATION AFTER THE LOSS
                  OF EXTENDED UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS

                                        Jesse Rothstein
                                       Robert G. Valletta

                                      Working Paper 23528
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23528


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2017




We thank Marianne Bitler, Julie Hotchkiss, and participants at the IZA/OECD/World Bank
Conference on Safety Nets and Benefit Dependence (May 2013) and the All-California Labor
Conference (September 2013) for comments, plus Jeongsoo Kim of the Census Bureau for SIPP
data advice. We also thank Leila Bengali for outstanding research assistance. Rothstein thanks the
Russell Sage Foundation for financial support. The views expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and should not be attributed to anyone else at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,
the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Jesse Rothstein and Robert G. Valletta. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Scraping By: Income and Program Participation After the Loss of Extended Unemployment
Benefits
Jesse Rothstein and Robert G. Valletta
NBER Working Paper No. 23528
June 2017
JEL No. I38,J65

                                           ABSTRACT

Many Unemployment Insurance (UI) recipients do not find new jobs before exhausting their
benefits, even when benefits are extended during recessions. Using SIPP panel data covering the
2001 and 2007-09 recessions and their aftermaths, we identify individuals whose jobless spells
outlasted their UI benefits (exhaustees) and examine household income, program participation,
and health-related outcomes during the six months following UI exhaustion. For the average
exhaustee, the loss of UI benefits is only slightly offset by increased participation in other safety
net programs (e.g., food stamps), and family poverty rates rise substantially. Self-reported
disability also rises following UI exhaustion. These patterns do not vary dramatically across the
UI extension episodes, household demographic groups, or broad income level prior to job loss.
The results highlight the unique, important role of UI in the U.S. social safety net.


Jesse Rothstein
Institute for Research on Labor and Employment
University of California, Berkeley
2521 Channing Way #5555
Berkeley, CA 94720-5555
and NBER
rothstein@berkeley.edu

Robert G. Valletta
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market St.
San Francisco, CA 94105
rob.valletta@sf.frb.org
                                                             Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


                       Scraping By: Income and Program Participation
                      After the Loss of Extended Unemployment Benefits


1. Introduction

       Unemployment Insurance (UI) is designed to cushion the blow of job loss to family

budgets by providing cash flow while a displaced worker looks for work. During economic

expansions, most recipients are able to find work relatively quickly, and the disincentive effects

of UI benefits on job search rise with the duration of potential benefits. Thus, in the United

States, the maximum duration of normal UI benefits is 26 weeks or less, much lower than in

many European countries.

       These potential benefit durations typically are extended around recessions. During 2010-

2012, maximum UI benefit durations reached an unprecedented 99 weeks in most states. Despite

this prolonged UI availability, many recipients used up, or “exhausted,” their maximum benefits

before finding jobs. We examine the experiences of such UI exhaustees during the periods

following the 2001 and 2007-09 recessions.

       Given the limited second-tier safety net in the United States, the extra income provided

by UI extensions is particularly important for families left without any clear means of support at

times when there are few jobs to be had. Insofar as extended benefits help families to maintain

consumption, they also may increase aggregate spending and thus play an automatic stabilizer

role (Gruber 1997; U.S. CBO 2012).

       In standard economic models of optimal unemployment insurance benefits (e.g., Chetty

2008), UI design trades off the economic benefits of the program, primarily increased

consumption among recipients, against the economic costs, which take the form of government

expense and reduced job search effort. In weak labor markets, it may take longer than 26 weeks



                                                 1
                                                            Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


for even a diligent job seeker to find new work, and the disincentive effects may be less

important (e.g., Landais, Michaillat, and Saez 2016; Kroft and Notowidigdo 2016; Schmieder,

von Wachter, and Bender 2012).

       An extended empirical literature examines the effects of UI benefit durations on job

search, including in the U.S. “Great Recession” of 2007-09 and its aftermath (e.g., Rothstein

2011; Farber and Valletta 2015; Farber, Rothstein, and Valletta 2015). But there is comparably

little evidence available about the consumption smoothing effects of UI, at least in the U.S. (see

Kolrud et al. 2016 on Sweden). A key parameter for optimal UI models is the decline in

consumption when UI benefits end (Chetty 2006). Available evidence indicates that UI

recipients have quite limited wealth holdings, suggesting that consumption will fall along with

current income (Gruber 1997, 2001; Chetty 2008). But there has been limited research into the

income available to UI recipients and exhaustees. Unless those who exhaust their benefits are

able to transition quickly to other safety net programs (e.g., Temporary Assistance to Needy

Families or the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program) or other family members are able to

increase their labor supply, the end of UI benefits may dramatically reduce family incomes and

thus consumption. The experience of exhaustees during times of weak economic conditions is of

particular interest, as in every downturn policymakers confront the question of just how long to

extend benefits. Despite their importance, extended UI exhaustees have been the subject of only

limited past research (Needels, Corson, and Nicholson 2001; U.S. CBO 2004; U.S. GAO 2012).

       In this paper, we examine the household incomes, program participation, and health of UI

exhaustees during the periods following the 2001 and 2007-09 recessions, using longitudinal

data from the 2001 and 2008 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP).

In part because the latter recession was so severe, we are able to identify a large number of



                                                 2
                                                                  Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


exhaustees in our sample. We examine how the various components of household income and

safety net program participation, along with self-reported health and insurance recipiency,

change during the six-month periods following job loss and UI benefit exhaustion.

        Our motivation is twofold. First, we hope to shed light on the consequences of UI

exhaustion for recipients and their families, focusing on measureable income components.

Second, we seek to understand program interactions. Do other safety net programs, such as food

stamps, cash welfare, or Social Security, or other sources of income, provide a cushion for

families that have exhausted their UI benefits? Any such interactions have important

implications for both the budgetary cost of UI extensions and the design of UI policy. We

examine a broader range of outcomes than a recent body of research that focused on interactions

between UI and disability insurance (DI) (Lindner 2011; Lindner and Nichols 2012; Rutledge

2012; Mueller, Rothstein, and von Wachter 2016; Inderbitzin, Staubli, and Zweimuller 2016).1

        To preview, our analyses show that UI exhaustees, at least during the recessionary

periods we examine, are broadly similar in observable characteristics to UI recipients who find

jobs before exhausting their benefits, with the obvious exception that exhaustees experience

longer unemployment durations. Because UI exhaustees’ earnings account for nearly 60 percent

of pre-separation household income, job loss and the eventual exhaustion of UI payments both

substantially reduce family resources. UI benefits fill in about one-quarter of pre-separation

household income until they are exhausted. Following exhaustion, while we find subsequent

statistically significant increases in participation in public assistance programs such as food

stamps (Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, or SNAP), the increase in total payments

1
  Much of this work relies on administrative data that ends before the Great Recession. Even with data
covering the post-recession period, direct analysis of UI to DI transitions is complicated by the extensive
time lags between initial DI application and eventual receipt (see e.g. Autor et al. 2011; Mueller,
Rothstein, and von Wachter 2016).

                                                     3
                                                                   Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


from these programs averages only around 2 percent of pre-separation household income, or less

than one tenth of the lost UI income. Other sources of family income also are little changed.

Thus, total family income falls by 13 percent, and the poverty rate rises by 13 percentage points.

The overall change in poverty is from under 10 percent initially to about 20 percent following

job loss and nearly one-third in the six months following loss of UI benefits.

        UI exhaustion is also associated with increases in Medicaid enrollment and the

prevalence of self-reported disability. In general, patterns are broadly similar between the 2001

and 2008 recessions and across demographic groups, though there are some exceptions – for

example, older recipients are more likely to receive Social Security benefits following

exhaustion.

        Our findings shed new light on the experiences of the long-term unemployed and on the

role that UI plays in the social safety net. We discuss these implications further in the concluding

section, along with caveats and implications for future research.



2. Regular and Extended UI in the United States

        UI benefits are available to individuals with sufficient recent work history who lose jobs

other than for cause, typically due to a permanent or temporary layoff. In most states, UI benefits

equal half of the claimant’s pre-separation weekly wage, up to a weekly maximum. This

maximum ranges from $235 (Mississippi) to $979 (Massachusetts, including a dependents’

allowance). Nationally, average weekly benefits are around $300. They are paid only to those

who are available for and actively searching for work.2


2
 The job search rules vary across states and are inconsistently enforced. It is often sufficient for a
claimant to self-report that he or she is actively searching. UI administrators in some states attempt to
verify search effort by, e.g., suggesting that the claimant apply for a particular open position.

                                                      4
                                                                  Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


          Benefits are ordinarily available for 26 weeks, but benefit durations are often extended in

periods of economic weakness. The federal Extended Benefits (EB) program, established in

1970, provides, at the state’s option, 13 or 20 additional weeks of benefits tied to a state’s

unemployment rate. Congress often supplements EB with additional temporary extensions

during national recessions, including the Temporary Extension of Unemployment Compensation

(TEUC) program in 2002-4, and the Emergency Unemployment Compensation (EUC) program

in 2008-13.3 Maximum benefit durations were as high as 72 weeks in 2003, and as high as 99

weeks in late 2009 through 2012. Earlier cycles saw similar responses, although the maximum

available extension durations have risen over time

          Panel A of Figure 1 shows the evolution of UI benefit durations over the last two

business cycles. The black and gray solid lines, respectively, show the minimum and maximum

durations of benefits across states, while the dashed line shows the mean, weighting states by the

number of job losers in each state as measured in monthly Current Population Survey data. The

maxima of 72 and 99 weeks in the early 2000s and 2009-12 are immediately evident. The figure

also shows that mean durations of available UI benefits were slightly above 40 weeks for most of

2002 and 2003, fell to 26 weeks from 2004 through mid-2008, then rose rapidly, reaching nearly

99 weeks from late 2009 through early 2012.4 The average fell to around 64 weeks by late 2012

and stayed near that level through the end of 2013, when the EUC program expired and the

average fell below 26 weeks.5



3
 For additional details regarding the prevalence, distribution across states, and labor market effects of
EUC and EB, see Rothstein (2011), Farber and Valletta (2015), and Valletta (2014). See Whittaker (2008)
and Whittaker and Isaacs (2012) for earlier benefit extensions, as well as for details of TEUC and EUC.
4
 13 weeks of EB benefits were available in Alaska in mid-2005 and in Louisiana in late 2005 and early
2006 (following Hurricane Katrina).
5
    Eight states cut their benefit durations below 26 weeks in 2011-2013.

                                                      5
                                                            Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


        Panel B of Figure 1 shows the number of UI recipients, separately for regular state

programs and for the extended and emergency programs. Both rose during each of the labor

market downturns and fell afterward. However, the cycle is more dramatic for the

extended/emergency programs: Regular program recipiency rose from under 3 million in 2007 to

a peak of just over 6 million in 2009, then gradually returned to around 3 million by late 2013.

By contrast, EUC and EB caseloads rose from 0 in early 2008 to a peak just shy of 6 million in

early 2010, falling back to under 2 million by late 2013. Bitler and Hoynes (2016) show that total

UI expenditures nearly quintupled between 2007 and 2010. SNAP (Food Stamp) enrollment and

expenditures also rose substantially during that period, though by less, while expenditures on the

other key means-tested safety net program – Temporary Assistance to Needy Families – were

largely flat.

        The Department of Labor tracks the number of UI recipients who exhaust their last week

of regular benefits (not including EUC and EB) each month. This rose from about 200 thousand

prior to the Great Recession to nearly 800 thousand at its peak in 2009, subsequently falling

under 300 thousand by the end of 2013. In the earlier cycle, it peaked around 400-450 thousand

in mid-2002. The pattern of final exhaustions from extended and emergency benefits over the

business cycle is more complicated, due to opposing effects: Unemployment durations rise

during downturns, but potential benefit durations rise as well. Mueller, Rothstein, and von

Wachter (2016) used EUC and EB program data to estimate final exhaustions. They found that

due to these opposing effects, exhaustion rates fell as benefits were extended during the

recession and early recovery, then rose along with unemployment durations.




                                                6
                                                              Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


3. UI, Consumption, and Program Interactions

A. Optimal UI and consumption

         Economists model the optimal duration of unemployment insurance as one that balances

the costs and benefits of additional weeks. The benefits derive from consumption smoothing:

When the marginal utility of consumption among the unemployed is lower than that of the

employed, social welfare can be improved by transferring additional resources from workers to

job-seekers. This transfer is constrained, however, by the need to limit the disincentive (“moral

hazard”) effects on job search among the unemployed. The optimal unemployment benefit

balances these two considerations (Baily 1978; Chetty 2008). The moral hazard effects of UI are

well studied (Rothstein 2011; Farber and Valletta 2013; Farber, Rothstein, and Valletta 2015;

Valletta 2014; Katz and Meyer 1990; Card and Levine 2000; and Card, Chetty, and Weber

2007).

         Much less is known about the degree to which UI benefits are necessary to permit

recipients to maintain their consumption during periods of unemployment, but the limited direct

evidence suggests substantial effects. Gruber (2001) examined the wealth holdings of the

unemployed. He found that the typical job loser in the 1984-92 SIPP panels had enough liquid

assets to replace only 5.4 weeks of earnings, with the long-term unemployed having less than

half as much wealth as the short-term unemployed. In other work, Gruber (1997) examined how

the consumption spending of the unemployed varies with the generosity of UI benefits. His

results indicate that more generous benefits are associated with higher levels of consumption

during unemployment, suggesting that UI benefits substantially enhance consumption smoothing

for recipients.6 Saporta-Eksten (2014) reports similar results using more recent data. Chetty


6
 Gruber (1997) examines food expenditures but is unable to examine a broader consumption basket or to
distinguish reduced consumption from changes in home production (e.g., increased labor devoted to

                                                  7
                                                             Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


(2008) reinforced these findings by showing that many households receiving UI benefits are

liquidity constrained. His estimates indicate that much of the increase in unemployment

durations associated with more generous UI benefits reflects the relaxation of this liquidity

constraint rather than moral hazard effects.

          Even less is known about the financial situation or consumption behavior of individuals

who have exhausted their UI benefits, a key parameter in optimal UI duration calculations.

Gruber’s (2001) analysis suggests that such individuals are quite unlikely to have substantial

remaining assets upon which to draw. We are aware of one study that used the 2001 panel of the

SIPP to investigate the characteristics of individuals who had exhausted their UI benefits in late

2001 and early 2002 (U.S. CBO 2004).7 Those who were still not employed as of three months

after the end of their UI benefits had average monthly family incomes of $2,530, about half of

the pre-unemployment level. The vast majority ($1,970) of the post-UI income came from

earnings of family members other than the exhaustee. Only 7 percent of UI exhaustees had

Social Security income, while one in ten were receiving food stamps. Among all exhaustees, 36

percent were in poverty; the corresponding figure was 73 percent for those who did not have

other earners in the family. Our study builds on this by focusing more closely on the period

immediately before and after benefit exhaustion, enabling us to distinguish exhaustion effects

from heterogeneity – exhaustees might have had high poverty rates even before exhaustion – and

by bringing in data from the 2008 panel, which due to the Great Recession has many more UI

exhaustees.




economical food preparation).
7
    See also Needels et al. (2001), U.S. GAO (2012).

                                                       8
                                                            Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


B. UI exhaustion and alternative income support

       UI may serve as a substitute for other income transfer programs (e.g., food stamps,

retirement benefits, disability insurance benefits, and cash welfare) by providing temporary

income support during unemployment spells, thereby alleviating the need to participate in these

other programs. Alternatively, UI may complement other programs, if UI disincentive effects

reduce job-finding and recipients increase their use of other programs to supplement low UI

benefits during their extended unemployment spells.

       Again, little direct evidence on interactions between extended UI and other programs is

available. Some recent research has examined interactions between UI and DI applications.

Lindner and Nichols (2012) explored the effect of UI benefit generosity and eligibility criteria on

DI applications. Rutledge (2012) and Mueller, Rothstein, and von Wachter (2016) examined the

effect of UI exhaustion on DI application. Rutledge found that the presence of a UI extension is

positively associated with DI applications among those who were claiming UI when the

extension was announced. By contrast, Mueller et al. used UI extensions as a source of variation

in the date of UI benefit exhaustion and uncovered no effect of impending or recent exhaustion

on DI application. Using Austrian data, Inderbitzin, Staubli, and Zweimuller (2016) found

evidence for both complementarity and substitution effects between extended UI benefits and

retirement programs, with the substitution effects tending to dominate for the older worker

groups in their data. We examine retirement (Social Security) income as part of our analyses.



4. SIPP Nonemployment Spell Data

       Our analysis relies on panel data from the 2001 and 2008 panels of the Survey of Income

and Program Participation (SIPP). The SIPP is a nationally representative sample of individuals



                                                 9
                                                                    Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


and the households in which they reside. It was designed specifically to “provide accurate and

comprehensive information about the income and program participation of individuals and

households in the United States, and about the principal determinants of income and program

participation.”8 As such, it is well-suited for the analysis of receipt of UI and other types of

income, changes over time, and related labor market outcomes. The SIPP is structured as a series

of non-overlapping panels, with new panels beginning every three or four years and respondents

to each panel interviewed every four months. Each interview collects income and related data at

a monthly frequency and labor force status at the weekly level, covering the period since the

prior interview. This permits direct measurement of employment transitions, unemployment

durations, and program participation.

          The 2001 SIPP panel consisted of 9 interview waves, covering October 2000 through

January 2004. The 2008 panel had 16 waves, stretching from May 2008 through late 2013.9

These correspond closely with the periods of labor market weakness and UI benefit extensions

associated with the 2001 and 2007-9 recessions.

A. Sample construction: base sample, UI exhaustees

          Our goal is to examine individuals who have lost jobs, gone onto UI, and exhausted their

benefits before becoming reemployed. However, we start with a broader sample of job

separators, which we use for comparison purposes with UI exhaustees.

          To construct our sample, we begin with individuals age 18 to 64 (at the time they enter

the panel) who report job separations into unemployment at any time during the 2001 or 2008




8
    See the description at http://www.census.gov/sipp/intro.html.
9
 Because interviews for each wave are staggered across a four-month period, the complete number of
calendar months covered by each panel is slightly larger than the number of waves multiplied by four.

                                                      10
                                                                  Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


SIPP panels.10 We restrict attention to separations that follow jobs that lasted at least three

months, as separations following short-term jobs are unlikely to result in new UI eligibility.

Although the SIPP has only limited and inconsistent information about the reason for job

separation, our primary analyses focus on individuals who received UI benefits during their

nonemployment spells, ensuring that the corresponding separations largely reflect job losses

rather than quits (which are generally ineligible for UI). Our spells start with unemployment (i.e.,

active job search), but we keep individuals in the sample as long as they remain jobless, as some

respondents report UI recipiency despite also reporting that they are not active searchers (i.e.,

they self-identify as labor force non-participants).

          Unfortunately, the SIPP data do not measure the duration of UI benefits for which a

respondent is eligible. We thus cannot observe benefit exhaustion directly. We explored

identifying exhaustees as those who received benefits continually from job loss to the maximum

duration of available benefits in their state at the time. As discussed below, few UI recipients

meet this definition of exhaustion, but a much larger number receive benefits for a time, then

stop receiving them despite continued nonemployment.

          We adopt a sample definition intended to identify exhaustees, including those who

receive less than the maximum potential benefits in their states, while minimizing the number of

non-exhaustees included. Beginning with our sample of job separators, we restrict attention to

those who received UI during at least four months of the subsequent nonemployment spell. We

then identify the end of the nonemployment spell, allowing for very short-term jobs: We count

the nonemployment spell as ending in a week where the individual is employed, provided that he




10
     See Appendix A for additional details regarding sample construction and definitions.

                                                      11
                                                                 Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


or she remains employed for at least four consecutive weeks.11 We define an individual as an

exhaustee if his or her nonemployment spell continued for at least one month beyond the last

month in which UI benefits were received.12 We then track income and program participation

from the date of UI exhaustion until the individual is reemployed or for six months, whichever is

shorter. Our restriction to nonemployment spells that continue beyond the end of UI benefits is

meant to exclude those who might have drawn more UI benefits but did not because they became

reemployed.

        Many of the SIPP respondents that we classify as UI exhaustees receive fewer months of

UI benefits than appear to be available in their states at the relevant time. We are unable to

distinguish whether these individuals were eligible for less than the maximum benefit duration

(due, e.g., to insufficient earnings histories), whether their benefits were cut off, whether they

voluntarily stopped claiming UI despite having the option to continue (e.g., to receive retirement

benefits instead), or whether their UI benefit durations are misreported. Panel A of Figure 2

displays the distribution of months of UI receipt for UI exhaustees, while Panel B displays the

distribution of the ratio of the number of months of benefits to the maximum number that should

be available given state and federal law.13 In each case, we show results separately for the 2001

11
  This, like several of our other sample construction procedures, follows Cullen and Gruber (2000) and
Chetty (2008). However, they focus on unemployment (rather than nonemployment) spells, which can
end when an individual exits the labor force. The four-week requirement roughly corresponds to what
would register as a flow into employment in the monthly Current Population Survey.
12
  Meyer, Mok, and Sullivan (2015) document under-reporting of UI and other program benefits in the
SIPP. This may cause us to erroneously count as exhaustees respondents who report some but not all of
their UI recipiency. Assuming this reporting error is random, it likely will cause an understatement of the
impact of UI exhaustion on other outcomes.
13
  We measure the denominator by merging the SIPP data to a database of maximum UI durations by state
and month constructed from Department of Labor “trigger notices,” as described in Rothstein (2011) and
Farber and Valletta (2015). This database yields durations in weeks; we divide by 4.33 (52/12) to obtain
durations in months. The numerator is the number of calendar months in which benefits were received,
which can legitimately exceed the number of full months of available benefits when spells start or end
mid-month or recipients draw their UI benefits non-continuously.

                                                    12
                                                                Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


and 2008 panels, in recognition of the very different potential benefit durations in the two

periods.

        The ratio plot in Panel B shows that a substantial number of exhaustees have UI durations

notably shorter than the statutory maximum available in their state (i.e., ratios well under one). In

the 2008 panel, about 45 percent of our exhaustee sample receives fewer months of UI benefits

than we calculate as their maximum eligibility. Nevertheless, there is clear evidence of a “hump”

in the distribution around a ratio of one, corresponding to benefit durations equal to the statutory

maximum. We opt to include the shorter durations in order to maximize the available sample size

and also because it is likely that in many cases the shorter durations indeed reflect exhaustions

(due to individual UI eligibility durations that are shorter than the state maximum) rather than

reporting error. To minimize the influence of potential reporting error, however, we also discuss

estimates below that restrict the sample to spells exceeding 75 percent of the apparent

maximum.14

        A well-known measurement issue in the SIPP and other panel surveys is “seam bias,” or

a tendency for changes in reported outcomes to concentrate in the first month covered by a new

interview wave (see e.g. Moore 2007; Ham, Li, and Shore-Sheppard 2009). We see evidence of

this in our measure of UI receipt: Roughly twice as many measured exhaustions occur in the last

month of an interview wave as would be expected by chance. We take two steps to minimize the

impact of seam bias. First, our analyses generally focus on averages over four or more months

prior to or following exhaustion, so each period includes at least a full wave of data. Second, we

have confirmed that our results are robust to excluding exhaustions occurring in the last month of


14
  The EUC program (as well as EB in many states) was temporarily suspended twice in 2010, though
only briefly. We confirmed in our data that there is no noticeable uptick in measured UI exhaustion rates
during the suspension months.

                                                   13
                                                                Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


a wave, or to reweighting the data so that the last month is not overrepresented in our exhaustee

sample.

B. Sample characteristics and descriptive statistics

        Table 1 displays detailed descriptive statistics for four subsamples of respondents who

separate from a job and enter unemployment (as defined above) in the 2001 and 2008 SIPP

panels.15 The first column includes our full sample of job separators with post-separation

unemployment. This column includes over 36,000 separations, representing over 23,000

individuals. (Some individuals experience repeated separations.)

        Column 2 limits the sample to nonemployment spells during which the respondent

reports no receipt of UI benefits. Columns 3 and 4 limit to those with UI: In column 3, we

include those who received UI in the last month before reemployment, while column 4 shows

our exhaustee sample of long-term UI recipients whose nonemployment spells continued for at

least one month beyond the end of their UI benefits.16 Only about one-quarter of those

experiencing unemployment spells report receiving UI income, and in most of these cases it is

received through the end of the nonemployment spell. Less than one-fifth of spells with UI

income lead to exhaustions, by our definition. This corresponds to 1,721 UI exhaustions

experienced by 1,299 unique individuals (implying that about one-quarter of exhaustees




15
  The SIPP sample includes both cross-sectional weights and longitudinal weights. Neither corresponds
very well to our sample definitions. Our primary analyses therefore rely on unweighted estimates (though
we present results using SIPP cross-sectional weights in Appendix Table B2). The descriptive statistics in
Tables 1 and 2 are weighted using the SIPP cross-section weights corresponding to the final month of
each nonemployment spell.
16
  Spells with short-term UI receipt followed by nonemployment without UI are represented in Column 1
but not in any of Columns 2-4.

                                                   14
                                                                Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


experience multiple exhaustions within a single SIPP panel). The weighted counts show that this

corresponds to about 5.1 million individuals.17

        Comparing the demographic characteristics across columns of Table 1, our exhaustees

are generally similar in their demographic characteristics to non-exhausting UI recipients and to

jobless individuals who do not receive UI. UI recipients are slightly older than non-recipients,

and exhaustees older than non-exhaustees, but the differences are small. Distributions of

educational attainment, race, and family structure are all quite similar across groups.18

        Rows near the bottom of Table 1 show average earnings and household income (inflation

adjusted) during the period 2-4 months prior to the beginning of the jobless spell. UI recipients

have somewhat higher pre-separation earnings and household incomes than do those who do not

receive UI, likely in part a reflection of the earnings history requirements for UI recipiency, but

there is little difference between UI recipients who do and do not go on to exhaust their benefits.

The next row of the table lists poverty rates averaged over the months of the nonemployment

spell. Consistent with Census Bureau definitions, our poverty calculations are based on income

including money transfers but not in-kind benefits (see Appendix A). Exhaustees have much

higher poverty rates than do other UI recipients, while those who do not receive UI are

intermediate between the two.

        The final rows in Table 1 list household wealth figures (inflation adjusted), focusing on

total net worth and liquid financial wealth; the latter excludes home equity, retirement funds, and

other illiquid assets (see the table notes for exact definitions). These are merged from the SIPP

17
  Over 3 million of these are in the 2008 panel. A recent study from the U.S. GAO (2012), using data
from the Displaced Workers Survey, identified about 2 million exhaustees from 2007 through early 2010.
There were presumably more in the 2008-2013 window covered by the SIPP.
18
 Women and racial minorities are somewhat overrepresented among UI exhaustees versus UI recipients
more generally. This is consistent with the finding from a study of UI exhaustion during the tight labor
market of the late 1990s (Needels et al. 2001).

                                                   15
                                                                   Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


topical modules on assets and liabilities, which are only available yearly (every third survey

wave) and not at all after 2011. The observation counts listed show that we have pre-spell wealth

data for a little over half of our sample of spells. We list median values because the means are

heavily influenced by high values in the long tail of the distribution of household wealth.19

        During the year leading up to job separation, the median household has net worth equal to

about 5 to 6 months’ worth of household income. However, most of this positive net worth

consists of home equity. Thus, median liquid financial wealth is not far above zero and is only

equal to about one-half of monthly household income.20 Eventual UI exhaustees have somewhat

lower net worth and liquid wealth than do other UI recipients.

        UI exhaustion would not be very interesting to study if few people remained jobless for

long following the end of benefits. For example, past evidence indicates that some UI recipients

delay reemployment until their benefits are exhausted (e.g., Katz and Meyer 1990; Rothstein

2011). For purposes of optimal UI policy, these recipients’ post-exhaustion consumption patterns

are of little interest. Appendix Figure B1 shows nonemployment and unemployment spell

survival rates dated both from job loss (panel A) and from UI exhaustion (panel B). Over 50

percent of the 2001-04 exhaustees that we identify remain out of work three months after

exhaustion, and 30 percent remain in that state after six months. These figures are significantly

higher – roughly 65 percent and 50 percent, respectively – in the 2008 panel. Overall,

reemployment hazards after UI exhaustion are quite similar to those in the early months of a



19
   The SIPP is known to understate wealth amounts relative to alternative sources such as the Survey of
Consumer Finances (see for example Eggleston and Klee 2015). We use the SIPP wealth data for limited,
illustrative purposes in our analyses, but we acknowledge that they may understate household financial
assets and security to some degree.
20
   Unsecured debt (e.g., credit card debt) is subtracted to form net worth, but it is not used to adjust our
liquid financial wealth variable. We discuss this further in our analysis of UI exhaustion (Section 6).

                                                      16
                                                                 Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


jobless spell, and they indicate that a substantial fraction of individuals who exhaust their UI

benefits remain jobless for an extended period.

        The figures listed in Table 1 differ little between the 2001 and 2008 panels (not

reported).21 But the number of job separations, the duration of nonemployment, and the number

of exhaustions is much higher in the 2008 panel. Table 2 displays separate figures for the 2001

and 2008 SIPP panels, focusing on the substantial differences in the incidence and duration of

nonemployment spells across the two panel periods. We identify roughly twice as many spells

and more than twice as many UI recipients and exhaustees in the 2008 panel, reflecting the much

worse labor market and large number of job losses in this period. Weighted tabulations indicate

that our count of transitions from employment to unemployment is nearly 50 million in 2001-04

and nearly 100 million in 2008-13. While these are very large numbers, they are readily

reconciled with data on monthly gross labor force flows from the Current Population Survey

(CPS). These data show an average of nearly 2 million monthly transitions from employment to

unemployment during 2001-04 and about 2.2 million during 2008-13.22 Table 2 also shows that

nonemployment spells are much longer for exhaustees than for non-exhaustees or for those who

do not receive UI. Durations are longer for all groups in the 2008 panel, but particularly so for

exhaustees, nearly half of whom are out of work for more than 99 weeks. This is unsurprising,

given the dramatic benefit extensions during this period – someone who became reemployed

relatively quickly would not have exhausted benefits during this period.

        In our subsequent analyses and others not reported here, we find few meaningful

differences between the 2001 and 2008 panels. We therefore pool the data from the two panels,

21
  One exception is average age, which is uniformly higher for all categories of job separators in 2008.
The relative age of exhaustees, compared to non-exhaustees, does not differ between the two panels.
22
  The CPS flows would imply even larger samples than we obtain, perhaps reflecting significant numbers
of spurious transitions (https://www.bls.gov/webapps/legacy/cpsflowstab.htm).

                                                    17
                                                             Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


although we provide a comparison of results across them in Table 6. We begin by examining

changes in incomes following job loss, then turn to the period surrounding UI exhaustion.



5. Income and Program Dynamics Surrounding Separation

        We lay the groundwork for our analysis of UI exhaustion by first examining outcomes

before and after job loss. This serves the dual purpose of identifying the outcomes of interest and

also providing a set of initial facts about the size of the “hole” in household budgets that UI

benefits are intended to help fill.

        Figure 3 displays the time pattern of total household income during the period leading up

to and following an initial job loss, labeling the month in which the job was lost as 0 and the

surrounding period by the time relative to that month. Income is measured as a share of its

average level over the period 2-4 months before the job loss event. Estimates are shown for the

full sample of UI recipients (including those who do not exhaust their benefits) and for our UI

exhaustee sample. For the exhaustee sample, we show estimates for total household income and

for income less UI benefits.

        Among all UI recipients, household income falls by a bit less than 20 percent

immediately following job loss. It then begins recovering immediately as some find new jobs.

The exhaustee sample sees a larger decline, around 25 percent, that is more persistent. The

decline reflects a nearly 50 percent decline in non-UI income, about half of which is offset by

increases in UI. The larger decline in income and greater persistence in the exhaustee sample

relative to the full UI recipient sample reflects the longer duration of unemployment spells

among exhaustees, as many UI recipients become reemployed quite quickly and the income




                                                 18
                                                                  Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


decline following job loss largely evaporates within six months. Among exhaustees, income does

not recover meaningfully within the six-month window following job loss.

        Table 3 summarizes household incomes and their composition during the three months

prior to and the first six months of nonemployment after job loss, along with the difference

between them. (For individuals who are reemployed within six months, only the months before

reemployment are used to compute the post-separation mean.) The sample is restricted to

eventual exhaustees. Bold text indicates a pre-post difference that is statistically significant at the

5 percent level.

        The tabulations in Table 3 again show that household income drops nearly 25 percent on

average (or about $1,500) after job losses that lead to long-term unemployment spells and

eventual UI exhaustion. The displaced worker’s own earnings account for slightly more than half

of household income prior to job loss in this sample of UI recipients, and fall to near zero after

separation.23 UI benefits replace about 40 percent of the lost earnings on average. These two

factors account for nearly the entirety of household income changes observed after job loss.

        Other income components show only small changes. Earnings of other household

members increase a bit following job loss, making up about one-tenth of the displaced worker’s

lost earnings. The share of households with earnings from other members rises by about 8

percentage points, indicating that much of this is occurring on the extensive margin. Recipiency

of SNAP (food stamps), Social Security, and other social welfare programs also increases after

separation, though the amounts are small – increases in these programs make up only about 4

percent of the lost earnings.


23
  Results from Couch and Placzek (2010) indicate that job displacement is associated with substantial
long-term earnings losses for UI recipients. This finding likely applies with particular force to our sample
of exhaustees, given their protracted jobless spells.

                                                     19
                                                            Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


       The last row of the table shows the expected large and statistically significant increases in

poverty rates following job loss. The poverty rates in our sample rise from about 8 percent—

lower than the 13-15 percent average for the general population during our sample frame—to 22

percent.



6. Income and Program Dynamics Surrounding UI Benefit Exhaustion

       We now turn to our examination of outcomes for the period surrounding exhaustion of UI

benefits. We focus first on the complete sample of exhaustees and then turn to selected sub-

samples

A. Results for the complete UI exhaustion sample

       Figure 4 (panels A and B) shows average total household incomes over this period, as

before measuring them as a share of pre-separation income. Here, month 0 corresponds to the

final month in which UI income was received, and month 1 to the first month without UI

income. Recall that our exhaustee sample is limited to individuals who do not begin an

employment spell lasting four weeks or more in the month following UI receipt. A consequence

of this definition is that earnings cannot make up for lost UI income in month 1, though they can

in months 2 and thereafter. Thus, we show two sets of estimates. Panel A presents a series for all

of our exhaustees, whether or not they have returned to work, along with a comparison group of

all spells with UI income, including those who transit directly from UI to work. Panel B presents

three series that restrict attention to those whose nonemployment spells extend for varying

lengths beyond the end of UI. The dashed line shows estimates for those who remain out of work

for at least three months after leaving UI, while the grey line shows those who remain out of




                                                20
                                                                  Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


work for at least six months. The solid line shows estimates for a dynamically evolving sample,

where the estimate for month t includes only those who have not returned to work by month t.24

        Estimates for the full exhaustion sample show that household income falls by about 15

percent of its pre-separation level in the month following the end of UI benefits. Average

incomes rebound thereafter – by month 5, they exceed their level while on UI, though they

remain about 15 percent below their pre-job-separation level. The rebound reflects the return to

work of some exhaustees in months two and thereafter. In our sample of still-jobless workers,

there is much less rebound; the initial drop is similar, but incomes remain 30 percent below the

pre-separation level through the end of our sample. This is our first piece of evidence that

income components other than the exhaustee’s own earnings contribute little to filling the hole

left by the disappearance of UI benefits.

        Figure 5 examines the evolution of different components of household income for the

dynamic sample of ongoing nonemployment spells. UI payments drop from about 25 percent of

pre-separation income to zero at exhaustion. There is no sign of an immediate response of either

other household members’ earnings or transfer payments. Each rises gradually in the months

following UI exhaustion, but the cumulative magnitudes are quite small relative to the lost UI

income.25 Transfer payments increase by about eight percent of pre-displacement income over

the six months following exhaustion. We show below that this is driven by Social Security

income and concentrated among older exhaustees; responses for those not able to draw on Social

Security are much smaller. Panel D of the Figure shows the evolution of the household poverty


24
  As implied by our earlier discussion of Appendix Figure B1 (Section 4B), about 45 percent of our
exhaustees remained nonemployed for at least 6 months after their UI benefits stopped.
25
  Note that the increase may reflect the dynamically evolving sample composition, as the population
represented for, say, four months after the end of UI benefits is different from that represented at one
month after benefit exhaustion.

                                                     21
                                                                 Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


rate. Poverty rises immediately and dramatically following the loss of UI benefits, by about 15

percentage points.

        Figures 4 and 5 show relatively consistent patterns during the periods preceding and

following the loss of UI benefits. To pin down the quantitative effects, we turn to an examination

of average outcomes over the period three months prior to and six months following the

cessation of UI benefits. Table 4 has the same structure and underlying sample of nonemployed

UI exhaustees as Table 3, but it focuses on the period surrounding UI exhaustion rather than the

period surrounding the initial job separation. We compute pre-exhaustion and post-exhaustion

means of each outcome, including in the latter only months during the nonemployment spell.

That is, if an individual returns to work three months after exhaustion, her post-exhaustion mean

is calculated as the average of her month +1 and month +2 observations. To reduce sample

selection effects arising from differences in survival time, in averaging across individuals we

weight individuals – and not observed months – equally.

        Table 4 shows that when UI benefits expire households lose UI income equal to about

one-quarter of pre-separation household income, or about one-third of their income just prior to

UI exhaustion, roughly the mirror image of the increase following job loss. The drop in UI

income is buffered somewhat by increases in other income sources. The main offsetting increase

is in own earnings, amounting to a bit less than 10 percent of pre-separation income, or less than

one-fifth of pre-separation own earnings. This is consistent with our definition of reemployment,

which requires the individual to remain reemployed for at least four consecutive weeks so allows

for earnings from transitory or intermittent jobs during an ongoing nonemployment spell.26


26
  While the results for other household member earnings and total income may be affected by changes in
marital status, this influence appears limited. From two months prior to two months after exhaustion, less
than 2 percent of our sample changes marital status (measured by presence of spouse in the household).
Transitions into and out of marriage almost exactly offset, so the fraction married in our sample is

                                                    22
                                                                Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


        Looking across other income sources, we see significant increases in SNAP benefits,

other social assistance, and Social Security payments, but both the participation rate effects and

dollar amounts are very small – the latter add up to less than one-tenth of the lost UI income.27

As a result, household income declines by 13 percent of its pre-separation level, on net,

following UI exhaustion. This amounts to a decline of $522 per month, on average. Family

poverty rates rise by about 13 percentage points (on a base of 20 percent at the end of the UI

spell). Appendix Table B1 shows that these patterns are largely unchanged when we restrict the

sample to UI exhaustion spells for which time spent on UI is at least 75 percent of the legislative

maximum in the state, where we are more confident of the exogeneity of measured UI

exhaustion. One exception is own earnings, which as expected increase by somewhat less

following exhaustion in this restricted sample due to our narrower measurement of true

exhaustions.28

        Table 5 presents evidence on health-related outcomes, in particular receipt of public and

private health insurance and self-reported work disability status, for our UI exhaustee sample

during the periods surrounding job loss (Panel A) and UI exhaustion (Panel B). The structure is

similar to Tables 3 and 4, respectively. Panel A shows that the fraction of our sample of eventual

UI exhaustees covered by private health insurance falls by 18 percentage points shortly after job

loss. This is partly offset by a nearly 7 percentage point increase in coverage through Medicaid,



essentially unchanged after UI exhaustion.
27
  Our findings regarding participation in other transfer programs are broadly consistent with the findings
in U.S. GAO (2012), which uses a different sample and method of identifying exhaustees. UI benefits are
commonly included as income for purposes of determining eligibility for means-tested transfer programs.
However, any resulting delays in claiming such benefits are likely to be resolved within the six-month
post-exhaustion timeframe for our analyses.
28
  These results are all based on unweighted analyses; Appendix Table B2 replicates the analysis with
SIPP sample weights and shows that the results are not sensitive to the use or exclusion of weights.

                                                    23
                                                               Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


but the overall fraction lacking coverage increases substantially.29 Panel B shows no further

decline in private coverage following UI exhaustion but a further rise in coverage via Medicaid.

Of the 45 percent of exhaustees who maintain private insurance, a relatively high proportion

(about two-thirds) are married and probably obtain insurance through their spouses. We examine

outcome heterogeneity by marital status below.

        Table 5 also lists the prevalence of self-reported work-limiting and work-preventing

disabilities; the latter is conditioned on the respondent reporting a work-limiting disability, so the

total prevalence is reflected in the work-limiting category. Panel A shows that work-limiting and

work-preventing disabilities rise by about 4.5 and 4 percentage points, respectively, following

job separation. A likely partial explanation is that some of the workers in our sample lose their

jobs due to the onset of a disability. Interestingly, disability rates rise again following UI

exhaustion (Panel B). The prevalence of work-limiting disabilities in our sample of exhaustees

rises by another three percentage points at the time of UI exhaustion. The rise in work-preventing

disabilities is even larger, at 4.5 percentage points, nearly doubling the pre-exhaustion

prevalence and implying that some respondents switch from reporting work-limiting to work-

preventing disabilities. Because these data are self-reported, it is impossible to know whether

they represent real changes in health status or changes in reporting, perhaps influenced by a

decision to apply for disability benefits. It is worth noting, however, that there is no direct

incentive to misreport one’s health status on the SIPP. This pattern of rising self-reported

disability may imply a subsequent increase in DI applications.30

29
  For an earlier period, Gruber and Madrian (1997) document substantial declines in health insurance
coverage among job separators in general.
30
   Direct analysis of DI applications would require matching our SIPP records with administrative data
(as in Lindner 2011 and Rutledge 2012). Using such data, Couch et al. (2013) found that extended jobless
spells experienced by prime-age men around the time of the 1980-82 recessions were associated with
significantly higher likelihoods of DI benefit receipt 20 years later.

                                                  24
                                                                  Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


          A potential methodological concern with the pre-post comparisons in Tables 4 and 5 is

that the comparison groups are not fully balanced because individuals drop out of the post

sample when they become reemployed. Our use of averages only over pre-reemployment months

is meant to address this, but would not do so perfectly if outcomes were related to the time since

job separation. Even pure calendar time effects – e.g., rising disability rates – could appear as

exhaustion effects in these analyses. In Appendix C, we describe and present results from an

event study analysis that accounts both for the changing composition of the sample and possible

time patterns in our outcomes that are unrelated to individual UI exhaustion. Results are similar

to those from the simpler analyses in Tables 4 and 5.

          Declines in household income are of relatively little concern if UI exhaustee households

have substantial wealth and assets that can be used to substitute for lost income during their

prolonged nonemployment spells. As discussed in Section 4B, prior to job separation the

households of eventual UI exhaustees have net worth and liquid financial wealth that is

somewhat lower than other UI recipients and not substantially different from job separators in

general.

          We expand on these earlier tabulations by examining changes in household net worth and

liquid financial wealth for our UI exhaustee sample before, during, and after their

nonemployment spells.31,32 Following our approach in previous tables of comparing income

changes to pre-separation household income, Figure 6 translates these household wealth

measures into equivalent months of pre-separation household income, with net worth displayed

31
   We limit this sample to UI exhaustees for whom we can match wealth data from the topical modules to
all three sub-periods relative to their nonemployment spells. This reduces the sample size substantially
because the relevant topical modules were administered annually and not at all after 2011 (most of the
loss of observations is post spell, after 2011). The results are similar, however, when we include all
observations with wealth data for each separate sample sub-period.
32
     Gruber (2001) examines wealth holdings of the unemployed in detail, using earlier SIPP panels.

                                                     25
                                                               Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


in Panel A and liquid financial wealth in Panel B. Panel A shows that about 35-40 percent of UI

exhaustee households have total net worth that equals less than one month of pre-separation

income, with the fraction rising slightly across the before, during, and after spell periods. On the

other hand, the fraction with net worth equal to at least six months of household income also

rises slightly across the three periods, to about 50 percent in the post period. As discussed earlier,

for many respondents net worth largely consists of home equity. Home price indices indicate

rising home prices throughout the 2001 panel and for the second half of the 2008 panel (from

2012 onward), with rough stability from mid-2009 through late-2012.33 The long-term

unemployed may have faced difficulties accessing their home equity to finance current

consumption, however.

           The tabulations for liquid wealth in Panel B indicate smaller short-term financial

cushions. Over 60 percent of UI exhaustee households have liquid wealth equal to one month or

less of pre-separation income, with the fraction rising slightly across the three periods. Only

about 15 percent have liquid wealth equal to six or more months of pre-separation income.

Moreover, as noted in Section 4B, our liquid wealth measure is not adjusted for credit card

balances and other unsecured debt. The median household in our exhaustee sample has

unsecured debt in the range of about $2,000 (inflation adjusted as in Table 1) prior to the

nonemployment spell, with declines generally evident during and after the spell. This suggests

limited reliance on credit cards to finance consumption during the spell, and more speculatively

that households typically do not have access to additional credit of this form while unemployed.




33
     See, e.g., https://fred.stlouisfed.org/graph/?g=deG5.

                                                       26
                                                                Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


B. Sub-sample analyses

        To further probe the UI exhaustion effects, Tables 6 and 7 repeat the primary analyses of

changes in income components and health-related outcomes from Tables 4 and 5B for sub-

samples of UI exhaustees. To conserve space, we list only the average difference between the

period before and after the end of UI benefits (corresponding to the results in column 3 in Tables

4 and 5B). We provide four breakdowns: by age (greater than or less than 50); household

composition (married or single, with or without children); three income groups (defined by

terciles of household income prior to job loss); and period (2001 panel vs. 2008 panel).

        The differences in results across age groups, household composition, and income are

modest and generally not surprising. Individuals over age 50 see smaller increases in own

earnings and larger increases in Social Security benefits and self-reported disability following UI

exhaustion than do younger individuals.34 Comparing across household composition groups,

single parents see the largest proportional income drop and largest increase in poverty, primarily

because their incomes are initially low. For groups defined by pre-separation income tercile, the

loss of UI benefits has the smallest proportional effect on total household income in the highest

income group, as expected. Also as expected, the lowest income group sees the largest increase

in income from social welfare program participation (including Medicaid), although the increase

is not statistically significant in some cases; they also see a large and statistically significant

increase in self-reported disability status. Perhaps surprisingly, the increase in poverty rates is

similar across the three income groups.




34
  Additional age breakdowns not reported show that the results regarding Social Security receipt are
primarily driven by individuals age 62 and over, as expected given the normal age requirements
associated with claiming Social Security benefits.

                                                   27
                                                               Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


        The final two columns in Panel B of Tables 6 and 7 compare results between the 2001

and 2008 SIPP panels. The differences in results once again are modest. The proportional decline

in income is larger in the 2008 panel, but the increase in poverty rates is very similar across the

two panels. Exhaustees in the 2008 panel experience a larger increase in participation in social

welfare programs, such as food stamps and other social assistance, but the associated income

amounts are quite small. The increases in Medicaid recipiency and self-reported disability also

are somewhat larger in the 2008 panel.

        To summarize the results by sub-groups, they generally show that UI exhaustion is

associated with especially adverse consequence for less advantaged groups. This includes single

parents and households with low pre-separation income: the income hit is larger for them, and

their higher take-up of alternative social benefits does little to offset it. A similar interpretation

applies to the results for the 2008 SIPP panel versus the 2001 panel: the former recession was

much more severe, and UI exhaustees in that period relied more on other social benefits and

reported a larger increase in disability following the loss of UI.



7. Conclusion

        Little is known about individuals who remain jobless for a prolonged period after their UI

benefits are exhausted, in part because in normal times this is an unusual occurrence. During the

Great Recession and its aftermath, however, the severity of long-term unemployment created

large numbers of UI exhaustees, despite the historically unprecedented extensions of available

benefits. Using panel data from the SIPP, we find that the characteristics of UI exhaustees during

this period and in the early 2000s are broadly similar to the characteristics of other individuals




                                                   28
                                                             Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


who are unemployed due to a job loss but do not exhaust their benefits. Of course, UI exhaustees

have longer nonemployment durations.

       The loss of UI benefits is associated with substantial declines in income for the large

fraction of UI exhaustees who remain nonemployed. Although participation in other safety net

programs increases, these programs make up only a small share of the lost UI income. The

incidence of poverty – measured post-transfer in our analyses – spikes. These patterns are most

pronounced for less advantaged groups in our data, including single parents and households with

initially low income.

       Our results imply that UI benefits in general, and in particular extended benefits during

our two SIPP sample frames of 2001-04 and 2008-12, function as an important element of the

social safety net in the United States that is not duplicative of other programs (consistent with

Bitler and Hoynes 2013). We find limited evidence for UI benefits operating as substitutes or

complements with other programs, at least over the short timeframe that we examine

(Inderbitzin, Staubli, and Zweimuller 2016). Given the large numbers of individuals who

received extended benefits during 2008-12, and the subsequent large numbers who have

exhausted them, these considerations loom especially large in recent years.

       There are three significant caveats to our analysis, which suggest avenues for future

research. First, we measure family income changes but not consumption. It is possible that

families are able to draw on savings or loans from outside the immediate family to offset the

impact of sharp income declines. While we cannot definitively reject this possibility, our

analyses using supplemental SIPP data on assets and liabilities suggests that exhaustee

households have very little wealth—outside of home equity and retirement funds—that can be

used to sustain consumption during their nonemployment spells (consistent with Gruber 2001).



                                                 29
                                                                Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


Further direct analysis of wealth buffers and consumption losses could be informative on these

points.

          A second caveat is that our SIPP data and empirical methods are better suited for

capturing high-frequency changes in income in the months immediately surrounding exhaustion

than they are at identifying responses that happen months or years later. This may cause us to

miss some program interaction effects, particularly with respect to programs with long and

variable lags between eligibility and receipt (like Disability Insurance or the Earned Income Tax

Credit). We expect that our estimates understate the medium-term effects of UI exhaustion on

Social Security income and Medicaid recipiency as well, but we do a better job of capturing

effects on receipt of food stamps and other cash transfer programs with relatively quick

application processes. Further analyses that track UI exhaustees over a longer timeframe would

be useful in this regard.

          Finally, and related, the increase in self-reported work disability that occurs after UI

exhaustion raises the possibility that some exhaustees may later file for and receive disability

insurance payments. This has been an active topic for research, and the findings are far from

definitive (see Lindner 2011, Lindner and Nichols 2012, Rutledge 2012, Mueller, Rothstein, and

von Wachter 2016). Expansion of our analysis to a longer timeframe and perhaps incorporation

of administrative data on disability program applications could shed significant light on these

issues. Only about one-sixth of our sample reports work-related disabilities after exhaustion,

however, suggesting that disability insurance will not offset lost UI income for most exhaustees.




                                                   30
                                                         Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


References

Autor, David, Nicole Maestas, Kathleen Mullen, and Alexander Strand. 2011 “Does Delay
       Cause Decay? The Effect of Administrative Decision Time on the Labor Force
       Participation and Earnings of Disability Applicants.” MRRC Working Paper #2011-258,
       September.

Baily, Martin N. 1978. “Some Aspects of Optimal Unemployment Insurance.” Journal of Public
       Economics 10 (December): 379–402.

Bitler, Marianne, and Hilary Hoynes. 2016. “The More Things Change, the More They Stay the
        Same? The Safety Net and Poverty in the Great Recession.” Journal of Labor Economics
        34(S1): S403-S444

Card, David, Raj Chetty, and Andrea Weber. 2007. “The Spike at Benefit Exhaustion: Leaving
       the Unemployment System or Starting a New Job?" American Economic Review, Papers
       and Proceedings 97: 113-118.

Card, David and Philip B. Levine. 2000. “Extended Benefits and the Duration of UI Spells:
       Evidence from the New Jersey Extended Benefit Program.” Journal of Public
       Economics 78(1-2): 107-138.

Chetty, Raj. 2006. “A General Formula for the Optimal Level of Social Insurance.” Journal of
       Public Economics 90: 1879-1901.

Chetty, Raj. 2008. “Moral Hazard versus Liquidity and Optimal Unemployment Insurance.”
       Journal of Political Economy 116(2): 173-234.

Couch, Kenneth A., and Dana W. Placzek. 2010. “Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers
       Revisited.” American Economic Review 100(1, March): 572-89.

Couch, Kenneth A., Gayle Reznik, Christopher R. Tamborini, and Howard Iams. 2013.
       “Economic and Health Implications of Long-Term Unemployment: Earnings, Disability
       Benefits, and Mortality.” Research in Labor Economics 38: 259-305.

Cullen, Julie Berry, and Jonathan Gruber. 2000. “Does Unemployment Insurance Crowd Out
       Spousal Labor Supply?” Journal of Labor Economics 18 (3, July): 546–72.

Eggleston, Jonathan S., and Mark A. Klee. 2015. “Reassessing Wealth Data Quality in the
       Survey of Income and Program Participation.” SIPP Working Paper Number 274, U.S.
       Census Bureau. February.

Farber, Henry S., and Robert G. Valletta. 2015. “Do Extended Unemployment Benefits Lengthen
        Unemployment Spells? Evidence from Recent Cycles in the U.S. Labor Market.”
        Journal of Human Resources 50(4, Fall): 873-909.




                                              31
                                                          Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


Farber, Henry S., Jesse Rothstein, and Robert G. Valletta. 2015. “The Effect of Extended
        Unemployment Insurance Benefits: Evidence from the 2012–2013 Phase-Out.”
        American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 105(5): 171–176

Ganong, Peter, and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 2013. “The Decline, Rebound, and Further Rise in
      SNAP Enrollment: Disentangling Business Cycle Fluctuations and Policy Changes.”
      NBER Working Paper No. 19363, August. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
      Economic Research.

Gruber, Jonathan. 1997. “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance.”
       American Economic Review 87(1): 192-205.

Gruber, Jonathan. 2001. “The Wealth of the Unemployed.” Industrial and Labor Relations
       Review 55(1, October): 79-94.

Gruber, Jonathan, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 1997. “Employment Separation and Health Insurance
       Coverage.” Journal of Public Economics 66(3, Dec.): 349-82

Ham, John C., Xianghong Li, and Lara Shore-Sheppard. 2009. “Seam Bias, Multiple-State,
      Multiple-Spell Duration Models and the Employment Dynamics of Disadvantaged
      Women.” NBER Working Paper No. 15151, July. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
      Economic Research.

Inderbitzin, Lukas, Stefan Staubli, and Josef Zweimüller. 2016. "Extended Unemployment
       Benefits and Early Retirement: Program Complementarity and Program Substitution.”
       American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8(1, Feb.): 253-288.

Katz, Lawrence F., and Bruce D. Meyer. 1990. “The Impact of the Potential Duration of
       Unemployment Benefits on the Duration of Unemployment.” Journal of Public
       Economics 41(1): 45-72.

Kolsrud, Jonas, Camille Landais, Peter Nilsson, and Johannes Spinnewijn. 2016. “The Optimal
       Timing of Unemployment Benefits: Theory and Evidence from Sweden.” Working paper,
       London School of Economics, June.

Kroft, Kory, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2016. “Should Unemployment Insurance Vary with
       the Unemployment Rate? Theory and Evidence.” Review of Economic Studies 83(3,
       July): 1092-1124.

Landais, Camille, Pascal Michaillat, and Emmanuel Saez. 2016. “A Macroeconomic Approach
       to Optimal Unemployment Insurance: Theory.” Working Paper, August. Forthcoming in
       American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.

Lindner, Stephan. 2011. “How Does Unemployment Insurance Affect the Decision to Apply for
      Social Security Disability Insurance?” Working paper, Urban Institute. Washington, DC.




                                              32
                                                          Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


Lindner, Stephan, and Austin Nichols. 2012. “The Impact of Temporary Assistance Programs on
      Disability Rolls and Re-Employment.” Working Paper 2012-2. Chestnut Hill, MA:
      Center for Retirement Research at Boston College.

Meyer, Bruce D., Wallace K.C. Mok, and James X. Sullivan. 2015. “The Under-Reporting of
       Transfers in Household Surveys: Its Nature and Consequences.” Working paper, June
       (revised version of NBER Working Paper No. 15181, July 2009).

Moore, Jeffrey C. 2007. “Seam Bias in the 2004 SIPP Panel: Much Improved, but Much Bias
      Still Remains.” Working paper, US Census Bureau, December.

Mueller, Andreas I., Jesse Rothstein, and Till M. von Wachter. 2016. “Unemployment Insurance
      and Disability Insurance in the Great Recession.” Journal of Labor Economics 34: S445-
      S475.

Needels, Karen, Walter Corson, and Walter Nicholson. 2001. “Left Out of the Boom Economy:
      UI Recipients in the Late 1990s.” Report, Mathematica Policy Research, October.
      Princeton, NJ.

Rothstein, Jesse. 2011. “Unemployment Insurance and Job Search in the Great Recession.”
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall: 143-210.

Rutledge, Matthew S. 2012. “The Impact of Unemployment Insurance Extensions on Disability
       Insurance Application and Allowance Rates.” Working Paper 2011-17, revised April
       2012. Chestnut Hill, MA: Center for Retirement Research at Boston College.

Saporta-Eksten, Itay. 2014. “Job Loss, Consumption and Unemployment Insurance.”
       Manuscript, Tel-Aviv University, October.

Schmieder, Johannes F., Till Von Wachter, and Stefan Bender. 2012. “The Effects of Extended
      Unemployment Insurance over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Regression
      Discontinuity Estimates over 20 Years.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127: 701-52.

U.S. Congressional Budget Office. 2004. Family Income of Unemployment Insurance Recipients.
       Washington, DC: Congress of the United States. March.

U.S. Congressional Budget Office. 2012. Unemployment Insurance in the Wake of the Recent
       Recession. Washington, DC: Congress of the United States. November.

U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2012. “Unemployment Insurance: Economic
      Circumstances of Individuals Who Exhausted Benefits.” GAO-12-408. Washington, DC:
      February.

Valletta, Robert G. 2014. “Recent Extensions of U.S. Unemployment Benefits: Search
        Responses in Alternative Labor Market States.” IZA Journal of Labor Policy 3 (Sept.): 1-
        25.



                                               33
                                                        Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


Whittaker, Julie M. 2008. “Extending Unemployment Compensation Benefits During
       Recessions." Report RL34340, Congressional Research Service, December.

Whittaker, Julie M., and Katelin P. Isaacs. 2012. “Unemployment Insurance: Programs and
       Benefits." Report RL33362, Congressional Research Service, April.




                                             34
                                                                Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss




Figure 1: UI Benefit Duration and Recipiency, 2000-2013
    99                                     Panel A: UI Availability
                        Max                  Mean
                        Min
    8364
Weeks
45  26




      2000         2002         2004             2006    2008      2010       2012       2014
           Note: Authors' calculations from U.S. DOL and BLS data. Minimum and maximum measured
           across states, average weighted by job losers in monthly CPS data. Temporary program
           suspensions (Apr, Jun/Jul, and Dec 2010) ignored. Gray areas denote NBER recession
           dates.



                                     Panel B: UI Benefit Recipiency
    12




                        Total
                        Regular state programs
    10




                        Extended and emergency
    8
Millions
   64
    2
    0




      2000          2002        2004             2006    2008       2010      2012       2014
           Note: From U.S. DOL (seasonally adjusted). Gray areas denote NBER recession dates.




                                                    35
                                                                    Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss




                    Figure 2: Distribution of UI Benefit Duration
                               UI exhaustee sample
                                         Panel A: Duration in months
        200



                                                                                         2001 panel
                                                                                         2008 panel
              150
 Number of spells
50   1000




                    4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
                                              Months of UI receipt


                          Panel B: Duration as fraction of maximum available
        200




                                                                                         2001 panel
                                                                                         2008 panel
             150
 Number of spells
50   1000




                    .1   .2   .3    .4   .5   .6   .7    .8    .9      1   1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5
                                   (Months used)/(months available), bins

        Note: Unweighted SIPP data. UI exhaustion sample consists of nonemployment spells following
        job loss in which UI was received for at least 4 months but no UI was received in the first two months
        following reemployment; see text for details. UI duration is the number of calendar months with
        positive UI income, and is censored at 26 months in panel A. Maximum available benefits are the
        number of weeks available in the month the last UI payment was received, divided by (52/12).



                                                    36
                                                                                 Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss



                              Figure 3: Household Income (ratio to pre-separation average)
          1.2                                       (2001 & 2008 SIPP panels, pooled)
                                                                                                  All spells with UI income
                                                                                                  UI exhaustee sample
                                                                                                  UI exh. sample (ex. UI income)
                    1
  Relative HH income
.6         .8
          .4




                        -3                               0                        3                                                6
                                                        Months from start of UN spell
                         Note: Samples restricted to UI recipients. Job separation occurs in month 0. UI exhaustion
                         sample is spells for which UI benefits stop prior to job finding. Unweighted data. Each spell
                         is treated as a distinct event.




                                                                   37
                                                                      Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss




                 Figure 4: Household income (around UI exhaustion)
                             2001 & 2008 panels; ratio to pre-separation average

                                           Panel A: UI recipients and exhaustees
          1.1       1
  Relative HH income
.7     .8     .9




                                   All spells with UI income
                                   UI exhaustee sample
          .6




                        -3                           0                      3                                   6
                                                    Months from end of UI spell


                                   Panel B: UI exhaustees remaining nonemployed
          1.1




                                                                                Nonemp (monthly)
                                                                                Nonemp (>=3 months post exh.)
                    1




                                                                                Nonemp (>=6 months post exh.)
  Relative HH income
.7     .8 .6  .9




                        -3                           0                      3                                   6
                                                    Months from end of UI spell

          Note: Samples restricted to UI recipients. UI payments end in month 0. Panel A displays all UI
          recipient spells and those for whom benefits stop prior to job finding. Panel B displays results
          separately for a those who are non-employed each month and for fixed samples of those who
          remain non-employed for at least 3 or 6 months after exhaustion. Each spell is treated as
          a distinct event.

                                                               38
                                                                                                    Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss




      Figure 5: Household income components and poverty (around UI exhaustion)
                            Ratio to pre-separation average HH income (ex. poverty rate)

                        Panel A: UI payments                                          Panel B: Other HH members' earnings




                                                                        .48
.3




                                                                        .44
.2




                                                                        .4
.1




                                                                        .36
                                                                        .32
0




      -3                0                   3                  6              -3              0                   3                  6
                     Months from end of UI spell                                           Months from end of UI spell


           Panel C: Means-tested transfers & social security                                  Panel D: Poverty rate
.25




                                                                        .4
.2




                                                                        .3
.15




                                                                        .2
.1
.05




                                                                        .1



      -3                0                   3                  6              -3              0                   3                  6
                     Months from end of UI spell                                           Months from end of UI spell

  Note: See notes to Figure 4. For months > 0, only ongoing non-employment spells are included. Vertical axis scale differs across
  panels.



                                                                   39
                                                         Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss




         Figure 6: Household Wealth, UI Exhaustees
   Measured relative to pre-separation household income, in months

                                          Panel A: Net Worth
  Period relative to
nonemployment spell

  Pre-spell


During spell


 Post-spell

               0             20             40              60             80                  100
                                                  percent
                         <1 month          1-3 months         3-6 months          >=6 months




                                    Panel B: Liquid Financial Wealth
  Period relative to
nonemployment spell

  Pre-spell


During spell


 Post-spell

               0             20             40              60             80                  100
                                                  percent
                         <1 month          1-3 months         3-6 months          >=6 months



 Note: Displays percent of observations with household wealth equal to the sum of pre-separation
 household income over the indicated number of months. Net worth defined as the sum of self-
 reported household asset values and equity (real estate, business, vehicles, other) less total
 unsecured debt (credit cards, other). Liquid financial wealth excludes equity in own home,
 vehicles, and business, plus retirement accounts; not reduced by unsecured debt. Pre and
 post periods extend 13 months before and after the date of job loss. Sample restricted to
 nonemployment spells for which wealth data is available in all three periods (N=139).



                                            40
                                                            Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


      Table 1: Descriptive Statistics, SIPP Nonemployment Spells (2001 and 2008 Panels)
                      (spells completed or censored in final panel month)

                                        (1)                (2)            (3)           (4)
                                                    2001 and 2008 Panels Combined
                                       All1              No UI        Received UI income
                                                                     To end of   Ends before
                                                                            2
                                                                      spell       spell ends3
Variable
Number of spells4                     36,561             26,101        7,440          1,721
 Percent of total                      100.0              71.4          20.4           4.7
Number of individuals                 23,574             16,744        4,691          1,299

Age (years)
 Average                                39.2             38.3           41.5           42.8
 Share 50+                             0.248             0.233         0.279          0.323

Education categories
 <College                              0.802             0.801         0.805          0.800
 College+                              0.198             0.199         0.195          0.200

Race
 White                                 0.804             0.799         0.825          0.775
 Non-white                             0.196             0.201         0.175          0.225

Female                                 0.425             0.442         0.365          0.440
 Married                               0.198             0.206         0.170          0.220
 Single                                0.227             0.236         0.195          0.220
Male                                   0.575             0.558         0.635          0.560
 Married                               0.276             0.246         0.366          0.291
 Single                                0.299             0.312         0.269          0.269

Married                                0.474             0.452         0.536          0.511
 Kids                                  0.261             0.250         0.297          0.253
 No Kids                               0.213             0.202         0.238          0.258

Single                                 0.526             0.548         0.464          0.489
  Kids                                 0.156             0.169         0.120          0.131
  No Kids                              0.370             0.378         0.344          0.358

                                                                                    (Continued)




                                               41
                                                                Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


Table 1 (continued)

                                            (1)                (2)            (3)           (4)
                                                        2001 and 2008 Panels Combined
                                           All1              No UI        Received UI income
                                                                         To end of   Ends before
                                                                                2
                                                                          spell       spell ends3
Variable
Income amounts (before job
separation; means, inflation
adjusted)5
  Monthly UI (UI>0 only)                                                   1,163           1,151
                    6
 Monthly earnings                         2,337              2,013         3,185           3,119
 Monthly HH total income                  5,785              5,641         6,127           6,149

Household in poverty                      0.231              0.251         0.147           0.286

Household wealth (before job
separation; medians, inflation
          5,7
adjusted)
  Net worth                               33,090             31,346        38,928         33,195
  Liquid financial wealth                 1,348              1,189         1,830          1,549
  Observation count (wealth data)         20,188             14,276        4,168           983

Footnotes:
 (1) All nonemployment spells initiated with at least one week of reported unemployment
 (active job search).
 (2) Includes all spells in which UI income is still being received at the end of the spell or again
 within two months after spell ends.
 (3) Includes only spells in which UI is received for four or more months.
 (4) Columns 2-4 do not sum to column 1 due to a small share of unclassified observations
 (spells with short-term UI receipt followed by non-employment without UI).
 (5) Dollar amounts expressed in sample end terms (Nov. 2013) using the GDP PCE deflator.
 (6) Monthly earnings not available for all spells due to restriction that earnings are computed 2-
 4 months prior to (after) spell start (end).
 (7) Net worth defined as the sum of self-reported household asset values and equity (real estate,
 business, vehicles, other) less total unsecured debt (credit cards, other). Liquid financial wealth
 excludes equity in own home, vehicles, and business, plus retirement accounts; not reduced by
 unsecured debt. Based on available spell observations with data from the SIPP assets and
 liabilities topical modules (up to 13 months prior to the spell start date).
Note: Calculations use SIPP cross-section weights (except unweighted "number" counts). Weight
value generally corresponds to final month of the nonemployment spell, except weighted counts,
which are based on the average final weight across all spell months.
                                                   42
                                                                                                            Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


                                 Table 2: Descriptive Statistics, SIPP Nonemployment Spells (2001 and 2008 Panels)
                                                    (completed or censored in final panel month)
                             (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)                 (5)          (6)            (7)               (8)
                                               2001 Panel                                                      2008 Panel
                                  1                                                                 1
                            All            No UI         Received UI income                   All           No UI          Received UI income
                                                       To end of   Ends before                                           To end of   Ends before
                                                              2
                                                        spell      spell ends3                                            spell 2
                                                                                                                                      spell ends3
Variable
                 4
Number of spells           11,377          8,284         2,097            504               25,184         17,817          5,343           1,217
 Percent of total          100.0            72.8          18.4            4.4                100.0           70.7           21.2            4.8
 Weighted number          46,919,455     33,945,393     8,748,818       2,131,105          94,321,698     66,946,151     19,800,138       4,624,651
Number of individuals      8,124           5,916         1,430            414               15,450         10,828          3,261            885
 Weighted number          33,473,622     24,167,998     6,001,962       1,743,253          57,358,457     40,142,657     12,110,970       3,350,687

Duration of
nonemployment spell
  Average                  16.1            13.4           14.1           56.9                24.8           18.8           24.7           101.3
  Share <27 weeks          0.821           0.867          0.849         0.096                0.747          0.821          0.675          0.056
  Share 27-52 weeks        0.117           0.086          0.135         0.464                0.126          0.099          0.190          0.209
  Share 53-99 weeks        0.045           0.034          0.015         0.310                0.072          0.043          0.116          0.295
  Share >99 weeks          0.016           0.012          0.001         0.130                0.056          0.038          0.019          0.440

Exit routes
 Exit to employment        0.803           0.821          0.797         0.569                0.792          0.813          0.783          0.546
 Censored                  0.197           0.179          0.203         0.431                0.208          0.187          0.217          0.454

Footnotes:
 (1) All nonemployment spells initiated with at least one week of reported unemployment (active job search).
 (2) Includes all spells in which UI income is still being received at the end of the spell or again within two months after the spell ends.
 (3) Includes only spells in which UI is received for four or more months.
 (4) Columns 2-4 (6-8) do not sum to column 1 (5) due to a small share of unclassified observations (spells with short-term UI receipt followed by
 non-employment without UI).
Note: Calculations use SIPP cross-section weights (except unweighted "number" counts). Weight value generally corresponds to final month of
nonemployment spell, except weighted counts, which are based on the average final weight across all spell months.

                                                                         43
                                                                    Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


                      Table 3. Household income before and after job separation
                         (UI exhaustee sample; 2001 and 2008 panels pooled)

                                         (1)         (2)       (3)              (4)        (5)        (6)
                                       Amounts (relative to pre-job             Any income (0-1; sample
                                          loss household income)                    fractions listed)
                                         Pre        Post      Diff              Pre       Post        Diff
Household income ($/month)              5,198      3,700     -1,498              --         --         --
                                       [3,423]    [3,000]     (93)               --         --         --
Income components
    Total                               1.000        0.769       -0.231          --         --           --
                                       [0.000]      [0.563]     (0.020)          --         --           --
    Own earnings                        0.569        0.033       -0.536        0.553      0.028       -0.525
                                       [0.304]      [0.150]     (0.012)       [0.309]    [0.166]      (0.016)
    Other HH member earnings            0.302        0.363        0.061        0.303      0.381        0.078
                                       [0.299]      [0.481]     (0.015)       [0.303]    [0.534]      (0.022)
    UI                                  0.019        0.227        0.208        0.024      0.234        0.211
                                       [0.078]      [0.224]     (0.008)       [0.089]    [0.229]      (0.010)
    SNAP                                0.019        0.028        0.009        0.022      0.031        0.009
                                       [0.075]      [0.092]     (0.002)       [0.081]    [0.099]      (0.002)
    Other social assistance             0.011        0.014        0.004        0.010      0.015        0.005
                                       [0.053]      [0.066]     (0.002)       [0.052]    [0.070]      (0.002)
    Social Security                     0.046        0.059        0.013        0.049      0.065        0.015
                                       [0.121]      [0.150]     (0.003)       [0.126]    [0.152]      (0.004)
Household in poverty                      --           --           --         0.078      0.220        0.142
                                          --           --           --        [0.242]    [0.362]      (0.012)


Notes: "Pre" columns report average values and standard deviations (in brackets) over the three months prior
to the month in which job separation occurred. "Post" columns report average values over the period beginning
the month after job separation and ending 6 months later or in the last month of the nonemployment spell,
whichever comes first. "Diff" column reports the difference in means and the standard error (in parentheses) of
this difference. Relative income measures divide monthly income by source by average household income in
the period 2-4 months prior to the initial job loss. Households for which this average is below $500 are set to
missing; ratios are censored at [0,10]. N=466 spells in 2001 panel, 1,149 spells in 2008 panel (sample from
columns 4 and 8 in Table 2, less observations with missing values of average household income). Differences
that are statistically significant at the 5% level are bolded.




                                                      44
                                                                   Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


                Table 4. Household income before and after the end of UI payments
                        (UI exhaustee sample; 2001 and 2008 panels pooled)

                                        (1)         (2)       (3)              (4)        (5)        (6)
                                      Amounts (relative to pre-job             Any income (0-1; sample
                                         loss household income)                    fractions listed)
                                        Pre        Post      Diff              Pre       Post        Diff
Household income ($/month)             3,795      3,273      -522               --         --         --
                                      [3,056]    [3,138]     (72)               --         --         --
Income components
    Total                              0.811        0.683       -0.129          --         --          --
                                      [0.616]      [0.697]     (0.020)          --         --          --
    Own earnings                       0.019        0.104        0.084        0.059      0.283       0.224
                                      [0.131]      [0.365]     (0.012)       [0.237]    [0.451]     (0.017)
    Other HH member earnings           0.370        0.386        0.016        0.605      0.623       0.018
                                      [0.516]      [0.563]     (0.013)       [0.489]    [0.485]     (0.011)
    UI                                 0.261        0.000       -0.261        0.981      0.000      -0.981
                                      [0.239]      [0.000]     (0.008)       [0.137]    [0.000]     (0.005)
    SNAP                               0.029        0.032        0.003        0.199      0.228       0.030
                                      [0.094]      [0.101]     (0.002)       [0.399]    [0.420]     (0.010)
    Other social assistance            0.016        0.021        0.005        0.082      0.104       0.022
                                      [0.078]      [0.089]     (0.002)       [0.275]    [0.305]     (0.008)
    Social Security                    0.070        0.085        0.014        0.215      0.253       0.038
                                      [0.181]      [0.202]     (0.004)       [0.411]    [0.435]     (0.008)
Household in poverty                     --           --           --         0.195      0.324       0.129
                                         --           --           --        [0.376]    [0.436]     (0.015)


Notes: "Pre" columns report average values and standard deviations (in brackets) over the three months prior
to the last month in which UI income was received. "Post" columns report average values over the period
beginning the month after the last month of UI receipt and ending 6 months later or in the last month of the
nonemployment spell, whichever comes first. "Diff" column reports the difference in means and the standard
error (in parentheses) of this difference. Relative income measures divide monthly income by source by
average household income in the period 2-4 months prior to the initial job loss. Households for which this
average is below $500 are set to missing; ratios are censored at [0,10]. N=466 spells in 2001 panel, 1,149
spells in 2008 panel (sample from columns 4 and 8 in Table 2, less observations with missing values of average
household income). Differences that are statistically significant at the 5% level are bolded.




                                                     45
                                                        Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


                Table 5. Health insurance and health conditions
              (UI exhaustee sample; 2001 and 2008 panels pooled)

                        Panel A: Around job separation
                                         (1)            (2)           (3)
                                     Incidence (0-1; sample fractions listed)
                                         Pre           Post          Diff
Covered by Medicaid                     0.092         0.158         0.066
                                       [0.289]       [0.365]       (0.010)
Covered by private health insurance     0.701         0.521         -0.180
                                       [0.458]       [0.500]       (0.016)
Disability: work limiting               0.096         0.142         0.046
                                       [0.295]       [0.349]       (0.010)
Disability: work preventing             0.009         0.047         0.038
 (conditional on work limiting=1)      [0.097]       [0.212]       (0.008)

                     Panel B: Around end of UI payments
                                        (1)            (2)          (3)
                                    Incidence (0-1; sample fractions listed)
                                        Pre           Post          Diff
Covered by Medicaid                    0.128         0.163         0.035
                                      [0.334]       [0.369]       (0.010)
Covered by private health insurance    0.430         0.449         0.019
                                      [0.495]       [0.498]       (0.012)
Disability: work limiting              0.137         0.167         0.030
                                      [0.344]       [0.373]       (0.010)
Disability: work preventing            0.056         0.102         0.045
 (conditional on work limiting=1)     [0.230]       [0.302]       (0.009)

Notes: Sample, estimation, and pre/post differences defined as in Tables 3 and 4
(column 6). Standard deviations listed in brackets, standard errors in parentheses.
Differences that are statistically significant at the 5% level are bolded.




                                           46
                                                                              Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


               Table 6. Household income before and after the end of UI payments, BY SUBGROUP
           (UI exhaustees, 2001 and 2008 panels pooled; PRE/POST AMOUNT DIFFERENCES ONLY)
                                                     Panel A: Demographics
                                       (1)             (2)                     (3)        (4)       (5)             (6)
                                               Age                                     Household composition
                                                                          Single (no Single (with Married        Married
                                      <50             50+
                                                                            kids)       kids)     (no kids)     (with kids)
Household income ($/month)            -522             -524                  -596          -257        -468         -620
                                      (93)            (106)                  (107)        (186)       (143)        (164)
Income components
    Total                            -0.131          -0.124                   -0.179     -0.084      -0.091       -0.121
                                     (0.027)         (0.027)                 (0.036)     (0.072)     (0.029)      (0.038)
    Own earnings                      0.103           0.047                   0.077       0.140       0.048        0.099
                                     (0.017)         (0.012)                 (0.014)     (0.056)     (0.014)      (0.027)
    Other HH member earnings          0.012           0.025                    0.012      0.039       0.012        0.014
                                     (0.018)         (0.019)                 (0.025)     (0.045)     (0.018)      (0.025)
    UI                               -0.265          -0.253                  -0.296      -0.304      -0.195       -0.254
                                     (0.010)         (0.015)                 (0.016)     (0.026)     (0.013)      (0.015)
    SNAP                              0.004           0.002                   0.006       0.005       0.000        0.001
                                     (0.002)         (0.002)                 (0.003)     (0.006)     (0.001)      (0.004)
    Other social assistance           0.004           0.006                   0.010      -0.003       0.002        0.005
                                     (0.003)         (0.003)                 (0.004)     (0.008)     (0.003)      (0.004)
    Social Security                   0.004           0.034                   0.015       0.016       0.022        0.005
                                     (0.005)         (0.008)                 (0.008)     (0.017)     (0.007)      (0.006)
Household in poverty                  0.131           0.124                   0.196       0.111       0.062        0.113
                                     (0.018)         (0.024)                 (0.026)     (0.045)     (0.023)      (0.028)
Observation count                     1074             541                      566        228         402          419


                                      Panel B: Household income and SIPP panel
                                       (1)       (2)         (3)                           (4)         (5)
                                          Household income                                  SIPP panel
                                      Low    Medium        High                           2001      2008
Household income ($/month)            -347            -637      -580                       -419       -564
                                      (95)           (122)      (150)                     (122)       (88)
Income components
    Total                            -0.151          -0.158      -0.076                  -0.104      -0.139
                                     (0.052)         (0.028)    (0.017)                  (0.029)     (0.026)
    Own earnings                      0.134           0.064      0.056                    0.096       0.080
                                     (0.031)         (0.016)    (0.011)                  (0.021)     (0.015)
    Other HH member earnings          0.047           0.013      -0.011                   0.024       0.013
                                     (0.033)         (0.018)    (0.013)                  (0.018)     (0.017)
    UI                               -0.393          -0.246      -0.145                  -0.246      -0.267
                                     (0.019)         (0.011)    (0.006)                  (0.015)     (0.010)
    SNAP                              0.006           0.003      0.001                    0.001       0.004
                                     (0.005)         (0.001)    (0.000)                  (0.003)     (0.002)
    Other social assistance           0.011           0.002       0.002                   0.002       0.006
                                     (0.006)         (0.002)    (0.001)                  (0.004)     (0.003)
    Social Security                   0.021           0.013      0.008                    0.007       0.017
                                     (0.012)         (0.005)    (0.003)                  (0.005)     (0.006)
Household in poverty                  0.124           0.149      0.114                    0.132       0.128
                                     (0.031)         (0.024)    (0.020)                  (0.028)     (0.017)
Observation count                     533             550           532                   466         1149
Notes: Base sample, estimation, and pre/post differences defined as in Table 4 (column 3). Income groups defined by
terciles of household income prior to job separation. Standard errors in parentheses. Differences that are statistically
significant at the 5% level are bolded.

                                                               47
                                                                    Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


      Table 7. Health insurance and health conditions before and after the end of UI payments,
    BY SUBGROUP (2001 and 2008 panels pooled; PRE/POST AMOUNT DIFFERENCES ONLY)
                                             Panel A: Demographics
                                 (1)          (2)                (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)
                                       Age                                 Household composition
                                                                  Single Single (with Married        Married
                                 <50          50+
                                                                 (no kids)  kids)     (no kids)     (with kids)
Covered by Medicaid             0.032         0.041               0.039       0.044       0.035       0.024
                               (0.014)       (0.016)             (0.018)     (0.042)     (0.014)     (0.019)
Covered by private health       0.018         0.022               0.039       0.031       0.025       -0.019
 insurance                     (0.016)       (0.019)             (0.023)     (0.033)     (0.021)     (0.023)
Disability: work limiting       0.019         0.053               0.041       -0.004      0.029       0.034
                               (0.011)       (0.020)             (0.016)     (0.021)     (0.023)     (0.018)
Disability: work preventing     0.031         0.076               0.054       0.018       0.052       0.043
                               (0.009)       (0.019)             (0.017)     (0.015)     (0.019)     (0.016)
Observation count               1074           541                 566         228         402         419



                                Panel B: Household income and SIPP panel
                                 (1)       (2)       (3)                 (4)               (5)
                                    Household income                            SIPP panel
                                 Low    Medium      High                      2001       2008
Covered by Medicaid             0.066         0.011     0.028                 0.021       0.040
                               (0.024)       (0.015)   (0.014)               (0.018)     (0.013)
Covered by private health       0.009         0.029     0.019                 0.030       0.015
 insurance                     (0.022)       (0.021)   (0.021)               (0.026)     (0.014)
Disability: work limiting       0.038         0.020     0.031                 0.019       0.034
                               (0.019)       (0.017)   (0.015)               (0.020)     (0.011)
Disability: work preventing     0.067         0.035     0.034                 0.039       0.048
                               (0.017)       (0.015)   (0.014)               (0.014)     (0.011)
Observation count                533          550       532                    466        1149

Notes: Base sample, estimation, and pre/post differences defined as in Table 5 (column 3). Income groups
defined by terciles of household income prior to job separation. Standard errors in parentheses. Differences
that are statistically significant at the 5% level are bolded.




                                                       48
                                                            Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


Appendix A: Additional Details on the SIPP Extract Construction

       Age: We restrict the samples to individuals age 18 to 64 when they first entered the panel

(wave 1 or later) and make the further restriction that individuals must always report being

between age 18 and 69.

       Qualifying nonemployment spells: We include only individuals who separate from a job

and become unemployed after the beginning of the panel (or after entering the panel) and who

are present in at least two consecutive waves.

       Nonemployment duration: Labor force status is measured on a weekly basis.

Nonemployment spells begin with a job separation and increment weekly until a valid spell end

is reached. The valid end of a nonemploment spell is identified by a string of four consecutive

weeks in which the individual is employed (with the spell identified as ending in the first week

of the 4-week string). Because we employ this 4-week forward-looking check, spells only

increment if there are actually 4 weeks of observations to check (which eliminates the final panel

month from the sample for all individuals).

       Labor force transitions: For our sample of nonemployment spells initiated by

unemployment, the two transitions we calculate separately and use for the spell survivor curves

in Appendix Figure B1 are from unemployment to not in labor force (UN) and from unemployed

to employed (UE). As above, a transition occurs only when an individual spends four

consecutive weeks out of unemployment. A UE transition is judged to have occurred if the

majority of labor force status values in the 4-week check period are employed. If there is a tie

(e.g. with two weeks of employment and two weeks of nonparticipation), we look at the 5th

week. If there is no 5th week (end of sample period) or the 5th week indicates that the person has

returned to unemployment, then the transition is counted as an exit out of the labor force (UN).



                                                 49
                                                           Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


       UI exhaustion: UI receipt is measured at a monthly frequency in the SIPP. We consider in

our UI analyses only individuals who received UI for at least four months during their

nonemployment spells. An exhaustee is a recipient who has at least one month of non-receipt

preceding the end of the nonemployment spell.

       Poverty measurement: To determine whether our sample individuals are in poverty, we

compare their households’ total monthly income (including money transfers, but excluding in-

kind transfers) to the corresponding Census Bureau poverty threshold (also expressed monthly,

as provided in the SIPP data files based on each household’s composition).




                                                50
                                                                                    Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


Appendix B: Supplemental Displays


      Appendix Figure B1: Nonemployment/Unemployment Spell Survival Rates
                      Kaplan-Meier Estimates, by SIPP Panel

                                                        Panel A: From Month of Job Separation
                                  1.0



                                                                                        Survival in nonemployment, 2008 panel

                                                                                        Survival in nonemployment, 2001 panel
                                  0.8




                                                                                        Survival in unemployment, 2008 panel
        Fraction spells ongoing




                                                                                        Survival in unemployment, 2001 panel
                                  0.6
                                  0.4
                                  0.2
                                  0.0




                                        0   3       6           9         12          15           18            21             24
                                                               Months since start of spell



                                                        Panel B: From Last Month of UI Benefits
                                  1.0




                                                                                        Survival in nonemployment, 2008 panel

                                                                                        Survival in nonemployment, 2001 panel
                                  0.8




                                                                                        Survival in unemployment, 2008 panel
        Fraction spells ongoing




                                                                                        Survival in unemployment, 2001 panel
                                  0.6
                                  0.4
                                  0.2
                                  0.0




                                        0   3       6           9         12          15           18            21             24
                                                            Months since end of UI benefits


                          Note: Unweighted data. Base sample (Panel A) is unemployment spells initiated by job loss,
                          duration of at least least one week; can convert to nonemployment spell. Each spell treated
                          as a distinct event. Post-UI spells (Panel B) require at least 4 months of UI receipt.




                                                                     51
                                                                     Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


               Table B1. Household income before and after the end of UI payments
                       (UI exhaustee sample; 2001 and 2008 panels pooled)
                       Sample with UI duration >= 75% of state maximum

                                          (1)         (2)       (3)               (4)        (5)        (6)
                                        Amounts (relative to pre-job              Any income (0-1; sample
                                           loss household income)                     fractions listed)
                                          Pre        Post      Diff               Pre       Post        Diff
Household income ($/month)               3,710      3,009      -701                --         --         --
                                        [3,001]    [2,937]     (94)                --         --         --
Income components
    Total                                0.802        0.618        -0.184          --          --          --
                                        [0.643]      [0.586]      (0.026)          --          --          --
    Own earnings                         0.002        0.066         0.063        0.009       0.226       0.217
                                        [0.032]      [0.239]      (0.014)       [0.097]     [0.419]     (0.024)
    Other HH member earnings             0.371        0.376         0.004        0.608       0.628       0.021
                                        [0.548]      [0.516]      (0.015)       [0.489]     [0.484]     (0.016)
    UI                                   0.279        0.000        -0.279        0.987       0.000      -0.987
                                        [0.263]      [0.000]      (0.015)       [0.112]     [0.000]     (0.006)
    SNAP                                 0.028        0.031         0.003        0.193       0.218       0.025
                                        [0.095]      [0.096]      (0.003)       [0.395]     [0.413]     (0.015)
    Other social assistance              0.017        0.023         0.006        0.082       0.108       0.025
                                        [0.088]      [0.099]      (0.003)       [0.275]     [0.310]     (0.013)
    Social Security                      0.071        0.080         0.009        0.207       0.241       0.033
                                        [0.188]      [0.192]      (0.005)       [0.406]     [0.428]     (0.013)
Household in poverty                       --           --            --         0.179       0.346       0.167
                                           --           --            --        [0.365]     [0.447]     (0.024)

Notes: Sample and definitions as in Table 4 in the text (other than restriction noted in title above). Estimates
weighted by the SIPP cross-section (monthly) weights, separately averaged over months in the pre and post
periods. Differences that are statistically significant at the 5% level are bolded.




                                                       52
                                                                   Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


               Table B2. Household income before and after the end of UI payments
                                (2001 and 2008 panels pooled)
                                  With SIPP sample weights

                                        (1)         (2)       (3)              (4)        (5)        (6)
                                      Amounts (relative to pre-job             Any income (0-1; sample
                                         loss household income)                    fractions listed)
                                        Pre        Post      Diff              Pre       Post        Diff
Household income ($/month)             3,787      3,240      -540               --         --         --
                                      [3,100]    [3,148]     (77)               --         --         --
Income components
    Total                              0.792        0.661        -0.132         --          --             --
                                      [0.592]      [0.663]      (0.020)         --          --             --
    Own earnings                       0.017        0.106         0.088       0.057       0.284          0.227
                                      [0.124]      [0.362]      (0.013)      [0.231]     [0.451]        (0.018)
    Other HH member earnings           0.369        0.380         0.011       0.607       0.622          0.016
                                      [0.498]      [0.551]      (0.013)      [0.489]     [0.485]        (0.011)
    UI                                 0.257        0.000        -0.257       0.979       0.000         -0.979
                                      [0.231]      [0.000]      (0.009)      [0.145]     [0.000]        (0.006)
    SNAP                               0.027        0.031         0.003       0.190       0.216          0.022
                                      [0.091]      [0.099]      (0.002)      [0.392]     [0.412]        (0.010)
    Other social assistance            0.016        0.021         0.005       0.079       0.103          0.021
                                      [0.078]      [0.089]      (0.002)      [0.271]     [0.304]        (0.009)
    Social Security                    0.063        0.075         0.012       0.198       0.234          0.036
                                      [0.169]      [0.185]      (0.003)      [0.398]     [0.423]        (0.008)
Household in poverty                     --           --            --        0.192       0.325          0.132
                                         --           --            --       [0.374]     [0.438]        (0.016)

Notes: Sample and definitions as in Table 4 in the text. Estimates weighted by the SIPP cross-section
(monthly) weights, separately averaged over months in the pre and post periods. Differences that are
statistically significant at the 5% level are bolded.




                                                      53
                                                            Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


Appendix C: Event Study of UI Exhaustion

Framework

       To bolster and validate the largely descriptive results from the text, in this appendix we

describe a more formal econometric analyses of income dynamics surrounding exhaustion (or

other termination) of UI benefits. Our “event study” approach explicitly accounts for time trends

and unemployment duration effects. We restrict the analyses to our sample of UI exhaustees

(paralleling Table 4 in the text) and focus on a narrow timeframe around the last month in which

UI benefits are received (3 months before and after, excluding the month prior to the last month

of UI recipiency).

       We estimate regressions of the following form:



       yisdt = αis + λd+ βt + εisdt,                                                        (1)




In this equation, i indexes individuals and s indexes nonemployment spells (typically one per

individual, but some have multiple spells in our data). The vector α represents fixed effects for

each spell. The subscripts d and t refer to two time dimensions (in months): time since the

beginning of the nonemployment spell (d) and time since the end of the period of UI recipiency

(t, with negative numbers corresponding to months before UI exhaustion). Equation (1) includes

complete vectors of fixed effects for each dimension, represented by λ and β. The term ε is a

residual that is orthogonal to the explanatory variables by construction. The estimated standard

errors are clustered by individual. We estimate this equation for a set of income-related

dependent variables y, beginning with total household income, then considering income

components one at a time, and ending with an indicator for family poverty.


                                                54
                                                              Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


       Our goal is to estimate the independent effect of UI exhaustion on the income-related

outcomes, controlling for individual heterogeneity and nonemployment duration effects. The

latter are captured through the βt coefficients. The controls for duration of nonemployment are

included because UI exhaustion is more likely to occur at longer durations and duration itself

may affect the other outcomes that we analyze, such as participation in other government income

maintenance programs. The fixed effects for each spell account for observed and unobserved

characteristics of individuals that affect their spell durations and may systematically relate to the

other outcomes we examine. Together, the duration and spell controls will absorb a wide variety

of unrelated determinants of outcomes that may correlate with the loss of UI benefits, making it

likely that our estimated exhaustion effects reflect direct impacts of that loss rather than other

individual characteristics and features of the economic environment.

       Equation (1) does not include explicit controls for calendar time, though time-varying

economic conditions are likely to be systematically related to UI exhaustion and the other

outcomes that we examine. Importantly, spell effects (αis), unemployment duration effects (γd),

and calendar time effects are not separately and nonparametrically identified – this is a version of

the age-time-cohort identification problem that is familiar from demographic studies. However,

the effects of interest in our analysis are the exhaustion-time coefficients βt. These are identified

from variation across cohorts and across states for any particular cohort in the duration of UI

benefits (relative to an excluded category; we normalize β-1=0). Thus, in estimating versions of

equation (1) that include parametric or nonparametric calendar time controls, we found that none

of the substantive results regarding the effects of time since UI exhaustion effects differ from

those presented here.




                                                 55
                                                             Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


Event study regression results

       Table C1 contains the results for our primary event-study analysis of post-UI outcomes

for our sample of UI exhaustees; it is structured similarly to Table 4 in the text. We estimate

equation (1), normalizing β-1=0 and setting βt = β-5 for t<-5 and βt = β4 for t>4. As above, the

analysis is restricted to individuals who remain nonemployed after the loss of UI benefits, and

monthly observations following the end of the nonemployment spell are dropped. We report

averages of the pre-exhaustion period (corresponding to (β-4 + β-3 + β-2 )/3) and the post-

exhaustion period ((β1 + β2 + β3 )/3), along with the difference between them.

       The results with full event-study regression controls in Table C1 are quite similar to those

without controls in Table 4 (focusing on the “Difference” results in columns 3 and 6). However,

the statistical significance of a few of the smaller point estimates, such as the change in food

stamp (SNAP) recipiency, is reduced. Household income falls by about 15 percent of its pre-

separation level in the month following the end of UI benefits. This loss is offset somewhat by

increases in other income sources, mainly own earnings, with only trivial changes in non-UI

transfer payments. Poverty rates increase by about 15 percentage points after UI exhaustion.




                                                 56
                                                                     Rothstein and Valletta, Extended UI Loss


       Table C1. Event study of household income before and after the end of UI payments
                        (UI exhaustee sample; 2001 and 2008 panels pooled)
  (coefficient estimates relative to last month of UI receipt (t=0); standard errors in parentheses)

                                       (1)        (2)         (3)               (4)        (5)        (6)
                                      Amounts (relative to pre-job              Any income (0-1; sample
                                        loss household income)                      fractions listed)
                                      Average,      Average,                  Average,      Average,
                                     t=--4, -3, -2 t=+1,+2,+3   Difference   t=--4, -3, -2 t=+1,+2,+3 Difference
Household income ($/month)               -33         -586         -553           --          --           --
                                        (44)         (57)         (66)           --          --           --
Income components
    Total                              -0.012      -0.170        -0.158           --          --          --
                                       (0.010)     (0.016)       (0.018)          --          --          --
    Own earnings                       -0.025       0.054         0.079        -0.022      0.098        0.120
                                       (0.007)     (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.004)     (0.006)      (0.007)
    Other HH member earnings            0.007       0.016         0.008         0.002      0.012        0.010
                                       (0.006)     (0.012)       (0.014)      (0.005)     (0.007)      (0.009)
    UI                                  0.004      -0.266        -0.270         0.000      -0.963      -0.964
                                       (0.003)     (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.007)
    SNAP                                0.000       0.002         0.002         0.001      0.008        0.008
                                       (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.002)      (0.004)     (0.007)      (0.008)
    Other social assistance             0.000       0.004         0.003        -0.003       0.007       0.010
                                       (0.001)     (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.006)      (0.006)
    Social Security                    -0.004       0.004         0.007        -0.006      0.018        0.024
                                       (0.003)     (0.004)       (0.004)      (0.003)     (0.006)      (0.007)
Household in poverty                      --          --            --         -0.005      0.144        0.149
                                          --          --            --        (0.006)     (0.012)      (0.012)


Notes: Sample defined as in Table 4 in the text, except for a small number of missings for the complete
regression sample periods (N=1592 spells; 460 in the 2001 panel and 1132 in the 2008 panel). See appendix text
for description of event study regression model. Standard errors are clustered by individual. Estimates that are
statistically significant at the 5% level are bolded.




                                                      57
