NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INNOVATION AND AMERICAN K-12 EDUCATION
Aaron Chatterji
Working Paper 23531
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23531

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017

This paper was written for the NBER Innovation Policy and the Economy Forum on April 18th,
2017. I am grateful to Josh Lerner, Scott Stern, and Yasin Ozcan for helpful comments. I also
benefited immensely from my conversations with Benjamin Jones, Wesley Cohen, Kevin Bryan,
and Ashish Arora on this topic. Boya Xu provided excellent research assistance. All errors are my
own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Aaron Chatterji. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Innovation and American K-12 Education
Aaron Chatterji
NBER Working Paper No. 23531
June 2017
JEL No. H52,I20,I21,I28,O30,O32,O38
ABSTRACT
Economists have long believed education is essential to the acquisition of human capital and
contributes to economic growth. However, education researchers, political and business leaders
and other stakeholders have raised concerns about the quality and costs of the K-12 education
system in the United States and the implications for the development of the nation’s future
workforce. Some of these groups have called for more innovation in K-12 education, leveraging
technology in the classroom and experimenting with different organizing models for schools,
both as a means to lower costs and increase quality. To shed light on the prospects of this
approach, I review the economics literature at the intersection between innovation and K-12
education from two different, but related, perspectives. First, I summarize the evidence about the
efficacy of technological and other kinds of innovation in the classroom. Second, I discuss the
state of research on how the American K-12 system influences the production of innovators and
entrepreneurs. In both instances, I identify implications for policy and opportunities for future
research to generate actionable insights, particularly around increasing the low levels of research
and development in the education sector.

Aaron Chatterji
The Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
100 Fuqau Drive, Box 90120
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
ronnie@duke.edu

Introduction
A key objective of public policies designed to promote innovation is to develop, attract,
and incentivize individuals who will generate new technological ideas. Much of the economics
literature in this domain has focused either on increasing the “intensive” margin of innovation
from the ranks of existing inventors via incentives and intellectual property policy (c.f. Stern
2004; Jaffe and Lerner 2011; Bell et al. 2016) or on contributing to the “extensive” margin via
high-skilled immigrants, who have been found to contribute disproportionately to U.S.
innovation and entrepreneurship (e.g., Saxenian 2007; Kerr and Lincoln 2010). However,
economists have written far less about specific policies that can add to the extensive margin of
innovation from a different source, namely, developing the innovative and entrepreneurial
potential of the native-born population.1
The priorities of different sub-fields in economics partially explain this gap. Although
education economists have studied the American K-12 education system extensively, they have
rarely assessed innovation-related metrics, focusing instead on broader outcomes such as test
scores and graduation rates. For their part, innovation economists seldom study the K-12
education system directly, but rather favor studying innovative outputs of firms, universities, and
governments. As a result, we still have much to learn about how education policy can affect the
domestic supply of innovators and whether new technological innovations can improve K-12
educational outcomes. Some quite recent academic work, discussed below, provides some
intriguing insights for policymakers. However, the relatively small number of papers and

1

There is existing work on innovation and entrepreneurship policies that looks at developing geographic regions,
reviewed by Chatterji et al. (2014). Other scholars have explored the role of higher education in producing an
innovative workforce (e.g., Romer, 2000; Stephan et al. 2004).

numerous remaining open questions underscore an emerging opportunity for economists
interested in the intersection between innovation and education.
In this paper, I review two strands of literature that relate to the nexus between innovation
and education. First, I examine the small literature in economics that typically uses experiments
to evaluate the impact of technology (hardware and software) on student achievement. I also
briefly summarize the implications from work on how organizational innovations, such as the
promulgation of new management practices, are related to student outcomes. Second, I discuss
the emerging literature on how the design and curriculum of education systems relates to the
production of an innovative workforce.
Technology, Productivity, and Schools
The economics of innovation has a long tradition of estimating the productivity benefits
from adopting new information technology (e.g., Stiroh 2002). Although technology has
enhanced productivity across various industrial sectors, it has arguably not had that effect in K12 education, despite the great expectations of policymakers, the media, and some technologists.
Cutler (2011) reports that productivity growth in two key sectors, education and healthcare, grew
quite slowly after 1995, in sharp contrast to the economy as a whole, where numerous industries
leveraged new technologies effectively. These two sectors feature prominently in research on the
“cost disease” (Baumol and Bowen 1966; Baumol 2012) which argues that costs can rise rapidly
in industries with low productivity growth, in part because of key services that are particularly
reliant on humans. It is worth noting here that just as Cutler (2011) provides a framework for
understanding where innovators and entrepreneurs can drive productivity increases in healthcare,
a primary aim of the discussion below is to address similar questions with respect to K-12
education. In doing so, I seek to direct the attention of innovation scholars to a new context,

which, much like healthcare, features significant government involvement and complex
regulations.
Several reasons could explain why education has not experienced rapid productivity
gains via technology adoption to date. First, the supply of high-quality technologies might be
limited in comparison to other sectors, due to low investment in research. R&D accounts for a
tiny share of total expenditures in K-12 education, around 0.2%, or 1/50 the rate of the most
innovative industries (See Figure 1). This low level of investment is even more striking when
one considers that total K-12 spending is approximately $600 billion a year, which is similar to
expenditures in R&D intensive industries such as pharmaceuticals (Chatterji and Jones 2012).
Further, given that improving education is typically considered an important national priority,
alongside goals such as enhancing public health, increasing national security, and discovering
more sustainable sources of energy, it is conspicuous that the U.S. invests so little in education
R&D in comparison to these other areas.
What can explain this low level of R&D? The private value from commercializing
innovations for use in K-12 schools could be low. However, at first glance, this explanation
seems at odds with the facts. The market for education technology hardware and software in the
United States is actually quite large. Prior work by Chatterji and Jones (2012) argues that it is the
market structure, as opposed to the size, of the sector that makes it difficult for innovative
entrants to thrive, stunting the development of new technologies, a proposition discussed further
below.
Another, not mutually exclusive, possibility for the lack of IT-related productivity gains
in American schools is that these organizations face endemic management challenges that hinder
the adoption of promising technologies that could increase student achievement. Under this

logic, productivity-enhancing technology is available, but organizations are not adopting it,
whether from fears over substitution of labor for capital or disrupting existing curriculum. If this
explanation were a key factor, we would expect to observe different management practices and
technology-adoption rates across various kinds of schools, for example, between private and
public schools, which differ in terms of flexibility and incentives. We review some indirect
evidence on this point below, though it does not appear private schools are clearly more effective
in their use of technological tools in comparison to public schools on average.
Understanding Technology Adoption in Schools
To develop a deeper understanding of what makes education technology distinct and to
resolve the puzzles posed above, we can leverage prior work in economics on technology
adoption by firms. For both firms and schools, a classic information problem arises when
deciding whether to adopt a new technology. Many new technologies have difficulty in
demonstrating efficacy, particularly across heterogeneous customers, whether those customers
are different kinds of firms or different kinds of schools. Without institutions to facilitate
transparency about the efficacy of particular technologies, organizations that could benefit from
a new technology still might not adopt it.
In other key respects, the technology-adoption decision for a school district is markedly
different from that of a private sector firm. For example, how a typical public school would
necessarily capture the gains from adopting a technological tool that improved student outcomes
is not clear. Whereas firms can use new technologies to lower costs or improve product features,
for example, public schools do not seek profits and do not generally compete for students in the
same way firms compete for customers. Thus, the incentives to adopt technology from a pure
return-on-investment perspective are attenuated.

Another key challenge is related to the market structure of K-12 education.
Approximately 100,000 public schools and over 30,000 private schools are in the United States,2
and they are characterized by diverse preferences. The majority of decisions pertaining to
schools are made at the local level and, with the exception of efforts such as the Common Core
Standards, curricular choices can vary widely across the country. The result is, despite 100,000
potential customers, demand for education technologies is not sufficiently aggregated.3
Designing technological tools in the absence of aggregated demand is challenging. For an
innovator comparing the expected value (V) from successfully commercializing an innovation
with the cost (C) of developing and selling it, this lack of aggregated demand implies the costs,
due to implied customization for each idiosyncratic customer, are much higher than when
customers are more homogenous. As C rises, assuming no increase in V, the incentives to
develop innovation are weakened, limiting the number of high-quality products available.
Another important feature of this setting, as discussed in Chatterji and Jones (2012), is
that the instructional content market in education is dominated by three large textbook makers.
Perhaps surprisingly, 70% of pre-K-12 instructional content today is still printed material.4 These
textbook companies leverage their large marketing and sales efforts to sell complementary
education technology, in many cases tied to their textbooks. This market structure, coupled with
the lack of institutions to independently assess efficacy, depress the expected value (V) for an
innovator with a new technology. If the technology cannot be demonstrated to be effective, who
will adopt it? And even if a handful of schools adopt the tool, how would the innovator scale

2

The National Center for Education Statistics (https://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=84). Last accessed March
28th, 2017
3
Large school districts, including the top five school districts which serve nearly 3 million students combined, do
represent at least the potential for aggregated demand. See Chatterji and Jones (2012).
4
“How are Digital Materials Used in Classrooms?” (http://www.edweek.org/ew/issues/technology-ineducation/#distance).

these efforts to capture a larger part of the market? These uncertainties are one reason rates of
R&D spending and venture capital investment in education technology products might be
comparatively low relative to the total size of the addressable market. As shown in Figure 2,
investment is K-12 education-technology ventures was $741 million in 2015 compared to nearly
$60 billion across all industries in the same year.5
The discussion above suggests the market structure in education and the complex process
by which schools adopt and implement new technological tools can explain why this sector has
not experienced dramatic productivity gains from IT. These themes will frame the next section
of the paper, where I review specific studies of how innovation affects student performance and
other related outcomes.
The Impact of Technology on Student Performance
Federal policymakers have long emphasized the importance of providing computers and
internet access in the classroom. For 15-year-olds in the United States today, the ratio between
computers and students is almost one to one (Bulman and Fairlie 2016). The E-rate program,
launched in 1998 and budgeted at $3.9 billion in 2015,6 provides schools and libraries with
discounted internet access (Goolsbee and Guryan 2006). In part due to this program, nearly every
classroom in the United States has internet access (Fairlie et al. 2010), and 88% of school
districts have high-speed broadband as of 2016, defined as 100 kbps per student.7

5

“$58.8 Billion in Venture Capital Invested Across U.S. in 2015, According to the MoneyTree Report,” NVCA
Press Release, January 15, 2016. (http://nvca.org/pressreleases/58-8-billion-in-venture-capital-invested-across-u-sin-2015-according-to-the-moneytree-report-2/).
6
Wyatt, Edward. “F.C.C. Increases Money for E-Rate Program for Internet in Schools and Libraries” The New
York Times, December 11th, 2014. Last accessed February 26, 2017.
7
EducationSuperHighway. “2016 State of the States” January 2017
(http://stateofthestates.educationsuperhighway.org/).

The market for education technology in the United States is estimated to be
approximately $8 billion a year.89 A proliferation of technology has emerged in American
schools in recent years, with schools spending significant sums on hardware such as tablets and
laptops, interactive “smart boards,” teacher training, and digital curriculum.10 Significant sums
have also been spent on enterprise-software-style solutions designed for managing student
information and a large “after-school” market for mobile education applications. For one data
point that reinforces the scale of this market, consider that Apple’s App Store currently has
170,000 different education applications.11
Proponents of greater use of technology in the classroom generally posit the following
mechanisms by which student performance can be increased via the introduction of technology.
First, as Barrow et al. (2009) articulate, technology might improve student performance by
facilitating more hours of high-quality individualized instruction time. The authors discuss how
access to computers and appropriate software can facilitate “personalized learning” whereby the
education content is provided at a level appropriate for the student and consistent with the
student’s preferred mode of instruction. According to this logic, personalization could
theoretically increase outcomes for high-performing and low-performing students. An ancillary,
but possibly important, benefit is that using technology in the classroom could also allow
teachers to spend more time with each student, because a proportion of students could be

8

Murphy, Meghan E. “As market surges, schools struggle to find the best tech products.” The Hechinger Report,
March 24, 2015 (http://hechingerreport.org/as-market-surges-schools-struggle-to-find-the-best-tech-products/).
9
Herold, Benjamin. “Technology in Education: An Overview” Education Week, February 5, 2016
(http://www.edweek.org/ew/issues/technology-in-education/). Last accessed February 27, 2017.
10
EdNET Insight, “State of the K-12 Market Report 2015” (http://schooldata.com/ednet-insight/).
11
http://www.apple.com/education/products/ (Last accessed March 31, 2017).

occupied at any one time with computer-aided instruction. This scenario poses technology as a
substitute for teachers, as opposed to a complement, a possibility that is discussed further below.
Aside from personalized instruction, digitized content that can be viewed across different
hardware devices can broaden access to education, for example, by providing advanced
placement courses to a geographically isolated school that does not have the appropriate staff or
facilities. Via this channel, greater access through digitization of content could raise student
achievement. Moreover, the user interface provided by digital tools might simply enhance
learning, or the mere presence of new technology in the classroom might increase student
motivation and engagement.
However, despite the ubiquity of technology in the classroom and various proposed
mechanisms of action, rigorous evaluations of the impact of technology on student performance
are rare and the results are mixed (Bulman and Fairlie 2016). Goolsbee and Guryan (2006) find
that while E-Rate increased investments in education technology between 1996-2000 in
California public schools, it produced no statistical impact on student performance. This finding
is consistent with other studies from the United States and around the world, which find little or
no impact of technology on student outcomes (e.g., Angrist and Lavy 2002; Rouse and Krueger
2004). However, other studies have found some positive impact of technology on student
performance (Ragosta 1982; Banerjee et al. 2007; Machin et al. 2007; Barrow, Markman and
Rouse 2009; Cheung and Slavin 2013; Muralidharan et al. 2016). As discussed in Barrow et al.
(2009), these benefits must be weighed against the costs of program adoption and ongoing
implementation.
Researchers have offered several explanations for this apparent disconnect between the
promise of technology and mixed empirical results. One rationale, supported by qualitative

assessments, is that fidelity of implementation is the key barrier. Although technology is present
in the classroom, teachers and students might not use it (e.g., Cuban et al. 2001) or use it in
suboptimal ways (Wenglinsky 1998). For example, some recent high-profile technology
interventions, such as a $1 billion tablet initiative in the Los Angeles Unified School District,
have been roundly criticized by journalists and education policy experts due to implementation
challenges. In the case of L.A. Unified, serious technical issues prevented a large percentage of
students from accessing the required curriculum.12 Such examples are consistent with the idea
that several important complements must be in place to leverage technological tools effectively,
most notably high-quality instructors and the appropriate curriculum.
Note that if teachers and technological tools are complements instead of substitutes, the
implications for productivity from a given intervention might be quite different. For example, to
fully realize the benefits of a given technological tool that complements teachers, a school
district might need to finance more training for its teachers or even hire additional staff, leading
to increased costs, all else being equal. Contrast this scenario with one in which teachers and
technology, say, tablets loaded with self-guided content, are viewed as substitutes. In this
instance, substituting technology for labor might directly reduce costs.
Another explanation for the mixed results of technology interventions could be that some
technological tools are conducive to learning, but we do not know which ones. So the
technologies that are most widely used are not those that are actually most beneficial for
students. Currently, most education technologies do not undergo any kind of systematic and
rigorous evaluation, which obscures efficacy and likely decreases incentives to innovate in the

12

Lapowsky, Issie. “What Schools Must Learn from LA’s iPad Debacle”, Wired. May 8, 2015
(https://www.wired.com/2015/05/los-angeles-edtech/) Last accessed March 29, 2017.

first place (Chatterji and Jones 2012). Without evidence of what works, schools adopt
technological tools based on relationships with existing companies, and the sales cycles are long
and complex, dampening incentives for new entrants, as discussed above. As one illustration of
this phenomenon, the famous venture capital firm Andreessen Horowitz reportedly refuses to
invest in any education-technology company for which a school or district is intended to be the
primary customer.13
Chatterji and Jones (2012, 2016) argue that low-cost and rapid evaluation methods could
increase entry into the education-technology sector, spur broader adoption of the most
appropriate technologies, and possibly raise student outcomes. One way to think about
transparent and rapid evaluation is in the context of the innovator’s decision discussed earlier. If
a new technology could be quickly evaluated and compared with existing products, such a
process would enhance the expected value, V, to prospective innovators. Moreover, it might also
reduce the costs, C, of marketing and selling the product to a diverse set of customers, because
these buyers could presumably review the publicly available evaluation results directly. One
further possibility is that existing demand aggregators, such as the League of Innovative
Schools,14 might have preferences for adopting evidenced-based products. The increase in V and
decline in C would increase the incentives for innovation and make venture investments in
education-technology companies more attractive, spurring future innovation and
entrepreneurship. For a longer discussion on this point, see Chatterji and Jones (2012).
The lack of consistent benefits from technology adoption in schools might have other
explanations. For example, technology could be distracting students to a greater extent than it

13

“Catching on at last” The Economist, June 29t 2013. (http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21580136-newtechnology-poised-disrupt-americas-schools-and-then-worlds-catching-last) Last accessed February 27, 2017
14
The League of Innovative Schools (http://digitalpromise.org/initiative/league-of-innovative-schools/)

contributes to learning, which would be consistent not only with the empirical results from the
academic literature, but also with numerous anecdotes from school administrators.15 In addition,
technologies could be having a positive effect, but not on the skills that can be tested using
traditional methods. For example, technology adoption by schools might result in a higher level
of technological fluency (e.g., greater comfort with various kinds of hardware and software) that
might benefit students later in life, even if it does not directly affect test scores.
Another intriguing possibility is that specific kinds of education technology perform far
better than others. In one of the most recent studies on this topic, Muralidharan, Singh and
Ganimian (2016) find positive and economically large results for their computer-aided learning
intervention in India, prompting them to categorize the literature in this domain as follows:
Those interventions that have focused on supplying hardware alone have generally not been
effective. Software programs that allow students to proceed through grade-appropriate material
at their own speed produce small positive effects. The largest effects, present in their study and
Banerjee (2007), emerge from software interventions that tailor the content to the student’s
ability, consistent with the personalized learning approach referred to above.
This suggestive pattern of results across studies highlights an important gap in the
economics literature: economists have done little work to understand how students learn and how
variations in these styles may affect human-capital acquisition. Although a large literature in
education and psychology has explored how students learn, this work has not been connected in
a meaningful way to economics.

15

Richtel, Matt, “In Classroom of Future, Stagnant Scores” The New York Times, September 3, 2011
(http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/04/technology/technology-in-schools-faces-questions-on-value.html) Last
accessed February 27, 2017)

Education technology that is deemed to be “personalized” to the student can have several
different varieties. First, a personalized software application to teach a particular skill could
simply facilitate a different pace of instruction depending on the student. Some students could
move faster and others could move more slowly, which may provide some advantages over
traditional instruction, where adjusting the speed of delivery to each individual student would
have practical limitations. Second, as discussed in Muralidharan et al. (2016), a software
application could provide personalized content that adapts depending on the student’s previous
answers, providing the most appropriate level of instruction and focusing on key areas of
weakness in a particular domain.
A third approach to personalization is software that is customized to each student’s
“learning style,” defined by Pashler et al. (2008) as “the view that different people learn
information in different ways.” Pashler and co-authors argue that although learning style is a
popular concept in educational psychology and the media, little evidence to date shows they
actually exist. The authors argue that to demonstrate that individuals have different learning
styles, not simply expressed preferences, a researcher would have to randomly assign different
styles of instruction to different kinds of students and demonstrate that “correct” matches
between students and styles actually leads to better performance. More research is required to
document the existence and importance of learning styles and to explore the role specific
education-technology tools could play in matching students to the most appropriate content.
In terms of identifying promising technologies, some recent efforts have been made to
spur increased research and development in the education-technology space. In 2010, the
President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) proposed the creation of
the Advanced Research Projects Agency-Education (ARPA-Ed), modeled after the DARPA

program to create technology platforms and digital curriculum, spurring innovation in the
education sector (Lander and Gates 2010). A key challenge for these efforts is not simply the
evaluations themselves but also the method by which the results are disseminated. Although
many kinds of hardware and content have diffused widely in schools, ranging from Khan
Academy to smartboards, no system is currently in place to incentivize the adoption of education
technology that has been demonstrated to be effective. To address these concerns, Chatterji and
Jones (2012, 2016) propose a platform to rapidly evaluate digital learning activities in the
classroom using randomized controlled trials. Their platform, EDUSTAR, has evaluated 77
digital learning activities to date.
Organizational Innovations in K-12 Education
Recent work in economics and other fields emphasizes another important consideration
for evaluating the promise of innovation in schools: how organizations are managed. Scholars
who study private sector organizations have documented that the benefits of technology adoption
depend heavily on the attributes of the organization. For example, Bloom et al. (2012) argue that
recent U.S. productivity gains relative to Europe were driven by better “people management”
practices among American firms in industries that intensively use IT, such as retail. Because
significant variation exists across schools in terms of governance, human resource practices, size,
strategy, and culture, existing management practices or organizational structures could be
hindering the adoption of technology.
Bloom et al. (2015) find the management of U.S. schools compares favorably to the
management of schools in other nations, which is correlated with higher student outcomes.
Further, charter schools have higher management scores than traditional public and private
schools. This result is consistent with Angrist et al. (2013) and Dobbie and Fryer (2013) who

both find a positive relationship between specific management practices and school performance
measures. Relatedly, a recent field experiment by Fryer (2017) finds evidence for a causal effect
of management training for principals on student achievement in Houston public schools.
Future research could further investigate the relationship between management practices
at schools and the adoption and efficacy of new technologies. The findings could shed new light
on how best to leverage new education technology to aid student learning. Moreover, the rise of
new organizational models in education presents opportunities for research. Although a large
amount of research has focused on charter schools (see Chabrier et al. (2016) for a recent
summary) and school voucher programs (e.g., Ladd 2002), far less research has investigated
other kinds of schools with novel organizational structures and practices, such as STEM-focused
schools and virtual schools (see Woodworth et al. (2015) for an exception).
K-12 Education and an Innovative Workforce
Next, I turn to the second major stream of work in this domain, which explores the
relationship between K-12 education and the creation of an innovative workforce. Economists
have argued U.S. productivity growth depends in large part on the knowledge-intensive sectors
of the economy, which will increasingly require skilled workers to invent and use new
technologies along with developing business models to commercialize them. This demand for
skilled workers has been increasing in the 21st century, as firms shift from investing in
production activities reliant on tangible capital to non-production activities more reliant on
intangible capital. This change will require workers who have higher levels of skills in
innovation, management, and marketing (Hulten and Ramey 2015). Many political and business
leaders argue that the U.S. economy lacks the requisite number of skilled workers to capitalize
on these trends (e.g., Augustine et al. 2010). Figure 3 illustrates that the United States lags China

and India in the number of STEM graduates per year, though many observers have pointed out
that quality-based measures may be more informative indicators.
In response to these challenges, an emerging academic literature has focused on the
allocation of talent in the U.S. economy and its implications for innovation. Much of this
literature has focused at least in part on science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) subjects, which are thought to be particularly important inputs to innovation (Augustine
et al. 2010). At the university level, some work has found an association between STEM degrees
and the propensity to become an inventor (Aghion et al. 2015; Bianchi and Giorcelli 2017).
Recent performance data suggest American secondary students are lagging behind peer nations
in math and science achievement (Lander and Gates 2010; Hulten and Ramey 2015), a concern
not only for innovation per se but perhaps also for these students’ long-term employment
outcomes (see Figure 4).
Although specific policies to support STEM education in the United States can be traced
back to at least the 1958 National Defense Education Act, which was designed to reform the
science curriculum in response to Soviet scientific achievements (Goodman 2017), only recently
has a more targeted strategy emerged. In 2010, the PCAST recommended the creation of a
STEM Master Teacher Corps that could provide increased salary and compensation to STEM
teachers and increase the number of STEM-focused schools to 1,000 by 2020. The PCAST also
called for the National Science Foundation and the Department of Education to develop a
partnership and better coordinate the numerous disparate programs promoting STEM across the
federal government (Lander and Gates 2010).
Fostering interest in STEM fields

Despite significant interest in expanding STEM education, very few rigorous evaluations
of the impact of these programs exist to date. Some evidence suggests particular interventions
can increase student interest in STEM fields. Hulleman and Harackiewicz (2009) employ a
semester-long randomized controlled trial (RCT) with 262 high school science students and find
that asking students to write monthly about the relevance of the course material to their own lives
(compared to a control condition where the students summarize what they learn) increases
student interest in science and their inclination to take science courses in the future.
Understanding how exposure to the media, mentors, and labor market signals influences
students’ selection into STEM fields of study and careers has also been a focus of research.
Some scholars have explored how the “STEM pipeline” can break down, leading to students
expressing interest in STEM early in their academic career but eventually pursuing other fields
of study (e.g., Bettinger 2010). Shu (2016) examines a related conjecture that higher
compensation in the financial services industry has lured away “the best and brightest” of U.S.
college graduates from science- and engineering-based jobs. Using a sample of MIT graduates,
the author does not find that lucrative opportunities in finance are drawing away talented wouldbe scientists and engineers. Shu concludes that finance and STEM jobs have different
requirements and different kinds of preferred candidates and that below-average students are the
ones who respond to shocks to finance salaries. Although this study uses post-secondary
education as an empirical context, the perception of job opportunities might influence
investments in STEM education in secondary schools as well.
The impact of STEM on earnings
Next, some evidence is emerging on the extent to which STEM education affects
earnings and the generation of new inventions later in life. Goodman (2017) finds evidence that

an exogenous increase in math coursework during high school increased African-American
student earnings by 3%-4%. This study is especially notable because most of the prior literature
in the economics of education focuses on the amount of time in school, as opposed to the
subjects over which that time is allocated. This point implicates a key concern in most studies
aiming to establish a connection between STEM courses and long-term outcomes. High-ability
students may select into STEM courses, confounding the relationship between these courses and
outcomes such as earnings, innovation, or entrepreneurship. The most useful studies will be
those that, like Goodman (2017), leverage exogenous variation in the amount of or quality of
STEM coursework and measure long-term outcomes of students against a reasonable comparison
group.
The basic logic behind increasing the absolute number of students studying STEM is that
if more individuals acquire these skills, they will have better job prospects and drive economic
growth via the increased introduction of new innovations. A recent paper by Bianchi (2016),
however, identifies potentially important indirect effects at the university level that are important
to consider. He studies the impact of a change in Italian law that allowed a large number of
students to study STEM subjects in Italian universities for the first time during the 1960s. These
new students came from technical high schools, which generally offered a narrower and more
applied menu of coursework than academic-track high schools. Academic-track high school
students were always able to choose STEM majors in universities and the reform did not
constrain this flexibility.
He finds the introduction of these new students reduces academic performance of the
incumbent academic track students, likely because of constraints on resources that increased
faculty-to-student ratios and greater diversity in preparation across students. Further, Bianchi

finds some high-potential students may have been induced to select non-STEM majors after the
law was enacted. Finally, he finds some evidence that the law might have negatively affected
lifetime earnings for STEM graduates overall. These results suggest policymakers considering
expansions in STEM education opportunities should consider the possible direct and indirect
impacts of such policies, what economists typically refer to as general equilibrium effects. These
effects include not just the impact of a given policy on the absolute number of students who
study STEM and their labor market outcomes, but also how these changes influence the
economic returns to studying STEM (and other fields) for all students.
The link between STEM education and innovation
A new line of work also explores the link between STEM education and innovative
activity later in life. Toivanen and Väänänen (2016) find that policy changes in Finland that led
to greater opportunities to earn an engineering degree are related to the likelihood of patenting.
Bianchi and Giorcelli (2017) investigate the relationship between STEM education and
innovation, using the same 1960s-era reform in Italian universities discussed above. The authors
find that, since the law was enacted, high-achieving students (based on high school grades) are
actually less likely to generate new inventions. However, students with lower high school
achievement are more likely to generate new inventions, compared to similar students who
matriculated before the law.
Interestingly, the decrease in invention among high-achieving students was not
necessarily from the highest potential prospective inventors. Using data on Italian inventors who
patent in the United States (a proxy for quality), the authors conclude the decline in patenting
among individuals who were high-achieving students was likely concentrated among those who
would not have produced the very best inventions. The authors note the different occupational

choices made by students after the change in law might explain these effects. This result
indicates broad expansions of STEM education may not only influence the number of inventions
produced, but also “who” produces them, by changing the composition of would-be inventors.
Another recent effort has taken a different approach to yield novel insights about the
connection between STEM education and innovative activity later in the life. Bell et al. (2016)
link federal tax returns and the U.S. patent data to investigate the link between human capital and
innovation. They find that children of low-income parents (who are more likely to be in lowperforming schools and have lower test scores) are far less likely to be inventors later in life, and
differences that emerge in the early years of schooling can explain this disparity. The authors
also find that children who grow up in a region where innovation in a specific technology class is
prevalent are more likely to invent in that technology class as adults. This result suggests
exposure to specific kinds of innovation in the early years might be important in determining
how young people select their eventual fields of study and shape their decisions to become
inventors. This logic could inform the design of many sorts of programs, for example, mentoring
initiatives for low-income children.
The authors conclude that, particularly as it relates to math education, reducing the
relationship between parental income and achievement could contribute significantly to
innovative output in terms of patents by unlocking the potential of more individuals to develop
inventions. Card and Giuliano (2014) provide related evidence that the strategic use of gifted and
talented programs could be one mechanism to achieve this objective. Their study of gifted and
talented initiatives suggests including disadvantaged students in these programs who do not meet
the IQ cutoffs, but have scored well on state exams, may increase subsequent math and science
performance for these students.

Skills beyond STEM and their role in innovation
Note that not all scholars take for granted that America’s relative standing on STEM
education indicators, such as math and science test scores, is a valuable signal of our nation’s
future innovative and entrepreneurial capability. For example, Bhide (2008) argues the large
domestic market in the United States and the willingness of American consumers to experiment
with new products is a central driver of innovation. Similarly, it is not clear the technical skills
adequately measure the capacity for innovative entrepreneurship. Baumol (2005) observes that
many successful entrepreneurs do not appear to have advanced technical training, and only a
small fraction have created breakthrough innovations on their own. Interestingly, Baumol notes a
possible tension between the kind of foundational technical skills that underlie incremental
innovation and the sort of novel and creative approaches required to develop radical innovations.
He posits that America’s lead in many innovation indicators is not due to the sheer number of
technically trained citizens (an area where we lag behind some peer nations) but is due in part to
the flexibility of our education system and its attitude toward creativity.
Relatedly, Levine and Rubinstein (2016) find that individuals who start incorporated
businesses in the United States are more educated and score higher on exams, but also engage in
more illicit activities, such as drug use, than their peers. These results are consistent with the idea
that creative and less structured tasks such as innovation and entrepreneurship may favor
individuals who deviate from accepted norms. One implication of this study is that increasing
STEM education at the expense of developing other skills could have an unintended impact on
outcomes such as innovation and entrepreneurship.
Aside from math and science, other kinds of skills, including non-cognitive skills
(Heckman 2006), could also be important in developing an innovative workforce. Cook et al.

(2014) find large effects on math scores from an intervention in Chicago schools whereby they
provided both academic and non-academic remediation for students who were at risk of dropping
out of school. The academic component consisted of a daily, one-hour math tutoring session with
two students per instructor. The non-academic component was cognitive behavioral therapy to
improve problem-solving, impulse control, and decision-making, delivered through 27 one-hour
weekly sessions. The authors find that participation in this program raised math test scores by the
equivalent of 15 percentile points within the distribution of national scores, and increased
graduation rates by an estimated 14 percentage points.
Other, seemingly disparate, research in innovation and education suggest teaching “soft
skills” such as social skills and teamwork in K-12 could play a role in increasing innovation and
entrepreneurship. For example, consider Jones (2009), who documents the increase in teamwork
in U.S. innovative activity and finds that inventor team size increased by 35% from 1975 to
1999. More recently, Deming (2015) finds that between 1980 and 2012, jobs with high social
skill requirements increased by 10 percentage points as a share of the U.S. job market. If the
results of these studies are considered in tandem, they imply that teamwork, which necessarily
involves social skills to knit together larger groups of individuals, is crucial for developing new
innovations. Although individuals can learn teamwork in different settings, including at home,
through military service, and in employment, K-12 education could offer a particularly
advantageous setting to develop these skills provided that we can develop evidence-based
practices.
Interestingly, despite the significant attention from policymakers on STEM skills and, to
a lesser extent, non-cognitive skills, to my knowledge, little empirical work has documented the
mechanisms by which increasing the skill level of a population can enhance the quality and

quantity of innovation. Although more educated populations might produce more innovations, a
relatively small share of citizens are directly involved in innovation in advanced economies.
Whether raising the math and science skills of the average American student would have a
significant impact on this metric is unclear, based on the current literature. Nor do we have any
experimental evidence that I am aware of that specific retraining programs lead to increases in
the quality and quantity of innovation. These topics appear ripe for future research.
Conclusion: An Emerging Innovation Agenda for Education?
Despite a large amount of attention from policymakers and the media about the potential
for technological innovation to yield dramatic improvements in our K-12 education system, we
have yet to see significant gains in outcomes or reductions in cost. Relatedly, although it is
intuitive to believe that a skilled workforce, particularly in STEM subjects, will create more
innovations, scant direct evidence for this conjecture exists. These gaps present a tremendous
opportunity for new research to generate actionable policy insights.
Two broad themes emerge from this paper. First, prior work has argued that more
rigorous and rapid evaluations of educational hardware and software can spur wider adoption of
productivity-enhancing technological tools in the classroom (Chatterji and Jones 2012). The
proposed mechanism of action is that institutions that allow demonstration of “what works” will
both provide stronger incentives to would-be innovators and facilitate broader scaling of useful
technologies, particularly where demand is already aggregated. The emerging literature on this
topic suggests the kind of technology being tested is a first-order concern (Muralidharan, Singh
and Ganimian 2016). Some initial evidence suggests “personalized” learning software is
particularly promising in terms of raising student outcomes. But to properly deploy these tools,
we first require a deeper understanding of how students learn. Moreover, an interesting

complementary path will be to explore how organizational and pedagogical innovations facilitate
student learning. Finally, other kinds of outcomes, such as engagement and general technological
fluency, should be assessed in conjunction with traditional student performance measures.
These open questions underscore the noticeably low levels of research and development
in education. In comparison to other national priorities, we have yet to define a coherent R&D
agenda nor have comparable resources been devoted to it. This marked disparity indicates that a
promising agenda would entail understanding why private and public organizations have not
invested large sums in education R&D to date, identifying levers that might be used to encourage
increased investment and articulating a set of research questions that should be prioritized.
For example, it would important to consider whether new investments in education R&D
should be managed from the U.S. Department of Education, other research agencies like the
National Science Foundation, or a new entity entirely. Separately it would be interesting to
document what types of research private sector firms and school districts are already conducting
to better understand the prospective direction of innovation. Finally, developing the specific
research questions to be answered would ideally be done by an interdisciplinary set of scholars
and practitioners, given that research on education spans several academic disciplines and
contexts.
The second key theme of this paper is to highlight the need for new research that links
educational interventions to longer-term outcomes, such as patenting and starting firms. The
insights we do have in this domain (e.g., Bell et al. (2016) are often dependent on access to
sensitive government databases. To establish reliable evidence on how K-12 education is
connected to an innovative and entrepreneurial workforce, we will need more research utilizing
these kinds of data and the creation of new datasets.

The workforce of tomorrow is in school today. Understanding how the hardware and
content we provide them shapes their acquisition of knowledge and long-term outcomes is a
first-order economic policy issue. A tremendous untapped opportunity at the intersection of
innovation and education has the potential to broaden access, increase quality, and lower costs.
One promising path forward could be sustained research collaborations between government,
business, academia, and K-12 schools to generate rigorous evidence on these important
questions.

References
Aghion, P., U. Akcigit, O. Toivanen and A. Vaananen (2015). "Living the American Dream in Finland:
The Social Mobility of Innovators", unpublished manuscript.
Angrist, J. and V. Lavy (2002). "New evidence on classroom computers and pupil learning." The
Economic Journal 112(482): 735-765.
Angrist, J. D., P. A. Pathak and C. R. Walters (2013). "Explaining charter school effectiveness."
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5(4): 1-27.
Augustine, N. R., C. Barrett, G. Cassell, N. Grasmick, C. Holliday and S. Jackson (2010). "Rising above
the gathering storm, revisited: Rapidly approaching category 5." Washington, DC: National Academy of
Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, Institute of Medicine.
Banerjee, A. V., S. Cole, E. Duflo and L. Linden (2007). "Remedying education: Evidence from two
randomized experiments in India." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3): 1235-1264.
Barrow, L., L. Markman and C. E. Rouse (2009). "Technology's edge: The educational benefits of
computer-aided instruction." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1(1): 52-74.
Baumol, W. J. (2005). "Education for innovation: Entrepreneurial breakthroughs versus corporate
incremental improvements." Innovation Policy and the Economy 5: 33-56.
Baumol, W. J. (2012). The cost disease: Why computers get cheaper and health care doesn't, Yale
university press.

Baumol, W. J. and W. G. Bowen (1966). Performing Arts--the Economic Dilemma: A Study of Problems
Common to Theatre, Opera, Music and Dance, MIT Press.
Bell, A., R. Chetty, X. Jaravel, N. Petkova and J. Van Reenen (2016). "The lifecycle of inventors."
unpublished manuscript.
Bettinger, E. (2010). To be or not to be: Major choices in budding scientists. American universities in a
global market, University of Chicago Press: 69-98.
Bhide, A. (2008). The venturesome economy: How innovation sustains prosperity in a more connected
world. . Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press.
Bianchi, N. (2016). "The Indirect Effects of Educational Expansions: Evidence from a Large Enrollment
Increase in STEM Majors". unpublished Manuscript.
Bianchi, N. and M. Giorcelli (2017). "Scientific Education and Innovation: From Technical Diplomas to
University STEM Degrees". unpublished manuscript.
Bloom, N., R. Lemos, R. Sadun and J. Van Reenen (2015). "Does management matter in schools?" The
Economic Journal 125(584): 647-674.
Bloom, N., R. Sadun and J. Van Reenen (2012). "Americans do IT better: US multinationals and the
productivity miracle." The American Economic Review 102(1): 167-201.
Bulman, G. and R. W. Fairlie (2016). "Technology and education: Computers, software, and the internet",
NBER Working Paper No. 22237.
Card, D. and L. Giuliano (2014). "Does gifted education work? For which students?", NBER Working
Paper No. 20453.
Chabrier, J., S. Cohodes and P. Oreopoulos (2016). "What Can We Learn from Charter School
Lotteries?" The Journal of Economic Perspectives 30(3): 57-84.
Chatterji, A. and B. Jones (2012). "Harnessing Technology to Improve K-12 Education. ." The Hamilton
Project, Discussion Paper 2012-05.
Chatterji, A. and B. Jones (2016). "Learning What Works in Educational Technology with a Case Study
of EDUSTAR." The Hamilton Project, Policy Memo 2016-01.
Cheung, A. C. and R. E. Slavin (2013). "The effectiveness of educational technology applications for
enhancing mathematics achievement in K-12 classrooms: A meta-analysis." Educational research review
9: 88-113.

Cook, P. J., K. Dodge, G. Farkas, R. G. Fryer Jr, J. Guryan, J. Ludwig, S. Mayer, H. Pollack and L.
Steinberg (2014). "The (surprising) efficacy of academic and behavioral intervention with disadvantaged
youth: results from a randomized experiment in Chicago", NBER Working Paper No. 19862.
Cuban, L., H. Kirkpatrick and C. Peck (2001). "High access and low use of technologies in high school
classrooms: Explaining an apparent paradox." American Educational Research Journal 38(4): 813-834.
Cutler, D. M. (2011). "Where are the health care entrepreneurs? The failure of organizational innovation
in health care." Innovation Policy and the Economy 11(1): 1-28.
Deming, D. J. (2015). "The growing importance of social skills in the labor market.", NBER Working
Paper No. 21473.
Dobbie, W. and R. G. Fryer Jr (2013). "Getting beneath the veil of effective schools: Evidence from New
York City." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5(4): 28-60.
Fairlie, R. W., D. O. Beltran and K. K. Das (2010). "Home computers and educational outcomes:
evidence from the NLSY97 and CPS." Economic Inquiry 48(3): 771-792.
Fryer Jr, R. G. (2017). "Management and Student Achievement: Evidence from a Randomized Field
Experiment", NBER Working Paper No. 23437.
Goodman, J. (2017). "The Labor of Division: Returns to Compulsory High School Math Coursework",
NBER Working Paper No. 23063.
Goolsbee, A. and J. Guryan (2006). "The impact of Internet subsidies in public schools." The Review of
Economics and Statistics 88(2): 336-347.
Heckman, J. J. (2006). "Skill formation and the economics of investing in disadvantaged children."
Science 312(5782): 1900-1902.
Hulleman, C. S. and J. M. Harackiewicz (2009). "Promoting interest and performance in high school
science classes." Science 326(5958): 1410-1412.
Hulten, C. and V. Ramey (2015). "Introduction: Skills, Education, and US Economic Growth: Are US
Workers Being Adequately Prepared for the 21st Century World of Work?". Education, Skills, and
Technical Change: Implications for Future US GDP Growth, University of Chicago Press.
Jaffe, A. B. and J. Lerner (2011). Innovation and its discontents: How our broken patent system is
endangering innovation and progress, and what to do about it, Princeton University Press.

Jones, B. F. (2009). "The burden of knowledge and the “death of the renaissance man”: Is innovation
getting harder?" The Review of Economic Studies 76(1): 283-317.
Kerr, W. R. and W. F. Lincoln (2010). "The supply side of innovation: H-1B visa reforms and US ethnic
invention." Journal of Labor Economics 28(3): 473-508.
Ladd, H. F. (2002). "School vouchers: A critical view." The Journal of Economic Perspectives 16(4): 324.
Lander, E. S. and S. J. Gates (2010). "Prepare and inspire." Science 330(6001): 151-151.
Levine, R. and Y. Rubinstein (2016). "Smart and Illicit: Who Becomes an Entrepreneur and Do they earn
more?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics: qjw044.
Machin, S., S. McNally and O. Silva (2007). "New technology in schools: Is there a payoff?" The
Economic Journal 117(522): 1145-1167.
Muralidharan, K., A. Singh and A. J. Ganimian (2016). Disrupting Education? Experimental Evidence on
Technology-Aided Instruction in India, NBER Working Paper No. 22923.
Pashler, H., M. McDaniel, D. Rohrer and R. Bjork (2008). "Learning styles concepts and evidence."
Psychological Science in the Public Interest 9(3): 105-119.
Ragosta, M. (1982). Computer-assisted Instruction and Compensatory Education: The ETSI LAUSD
Study Washington, DC, National Institute of Education.
Romer, P. M. (2000). "Should the government subsidize supply or demand in the market for scientists and
engineers?" Innovation policy and the economy 1: 221-252.
Rouse, C. E. and A. B. Krueger (2004). "Putting computerized instruction to the test: a randomized
evaluation of a “scientifically based” reading program." Economics of Education Review 23(4): 323-338.
Saxenian, A. (2007). The new argonauts: Regional advantage in a global economy. Cambridge,MA,
Harvard University Press.
Shu, P. (2016). Innovating in Science and Engineering or'Cashing In'on Wall Street? Evidence on Elite
STEM Talent. unpublished manuscript.
Stephan, P. E., A. J. Sumell, G. C. Black and J. D. Adams (2004). "Doctoral education and economic
development: The flow of new Ph. Ds to industry." Economic Development Quarterly 18(2): 151-167.
Stern, S. (2004). "Do scientists pay to be scientists?" Management science 50(6): 835-853.

Stiroh, K. J. (2002). "Information technology and the US productivity revival: A review of the evidence."
Business Economics 37(1): 30.
Toivanen, O. and L. Väänänen (2016). "Education and invention." Review of Economics and Statistics
98(2): 382-396.
Wenglinsky, H. (1998). "Does it compute? The relationship between educational technology and student
achievement in mathematics". Princeton, NJ, Educational Testing Service.
Woodworth, J. L., M. Raymond, K. Chirbas, M. Gonzalez, Y. Negassi, W. Snow and C. Van Donge
(2015). "Online Charter School Study 2015". Stanford, CA: Center for Research on Education Outcomes,
Stanford University.

Figure 1: R&D Spending by Industry
Pharmaceuticals and medicine
Semicondutors and Eletronic components
Computers and electronic products
Aerospace
Medical equipment and supplies
Machinery
Education
0

5

10

15

20

25

% of revenue spent on R&D
Adapted from Chatterji and Jones (2012) based on 2006 data

Figure 2: Investments in Education Technology Companies (2010-2015)

Source: EdSurge (https://www.edsurge.com/research/special-reports/state-of-edtech2016/funding#investments)

Figure 3: STEM Graduates by Selected Countries, 2016

China

470,000

India

260,000

United States

568,000

Russia

561,000

Iran

335,000

Indonesia

206,000

Japan

195,000
0

1000000

2000000

Source: World Economic Forum Data

3000000

4000000

5000000

Figure 4: International Math and Science Scores for High School Students

Average PISA mathematics scores, 2015
Singapore
Russia
Brazil
United Kingdom
Turkey
Switzerland
Sweden
Spain
Norway
New Zealand
Netherlands
Mexico
Korea
Japan
Italy
Israel
Ireland
Iceland
Greece
Germany
France
Finland
Denmark
Canada
Australia
Chinese Taipei
Hong Kong (China)
B‐S‐J‐G (China)
United States
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

Average PISA science scores, 2015
Singapore
Russia
Brazil
United Kingdom
Turkey
Switzerland
Sweden
Spain
Norway
New Zealand
Netherlands
Mexico
Korea
Japan
Italy
Israel
Ireland
Iceland
Greece
Germany
France
Finland
Denmark
Canada
Australia
Chinese Taipei
Hong Kong (China)
B‐S‐J‐G (China)
United States
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

