                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




SURVEY UNDER-COVERAGE OF TOP INCOMES AND ESTIMATION OF INEQUALITY:
           WHAT IS THE ROLE OF THE UK’S SPI ADJUSTMENT?

                                     Richard V. Burkhauser
                                        Nicolas Hérault
                                       Stephen P. Jenkins
                                         Roger Wilkins

                                      Working Paper 23539
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23539


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2017


This research is supported by an Australian Research Council Discovery Grant (award
DP150102409). In addition, Burkhauser over the past three years has received funding in excess
of $5,000 from the American Enterprise Institute; the Employment Policies Institute; and the
Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation Graduate and Post-Graduate Fellowship Program. Hérault
over the past three years has received funding in excess of $5,000 from an Australian Research
Council Discovery Grant, the New Zealand Treasury and RFi Analytics. Jenkins over the past
three years has received funding in excess of $5,000 from the Research Centre on Micro-Social
Change at the Institute for Social and Economic Research by the University of Essex and the UK
Economic and Social Research Council (award ES/L009153/1). Wilkins over the past three years
has received funding in excess of $5,000 from the Australian Government Department of Social
Services, the Australian Fair Work Commission, and the Australian Workforce and Productivity
Agency. For helpful discussions about the HBAI data and SPI adjustments, we thank Peter
Matejic and his DWP colleagues and Jeremy Reuben from HMRC’s SPI team. We gratefully
acknowledge the perceptive comments of three anonymous referees. The findings and views
reported in this paper are those of the authors and should not be attributed to any of the above-
mentioned persons or organizations, or to the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Richard V. Burkhauser, Nicolas Hérault, Stephen P. Jenkins, and Roger Wilkins. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Survey Under-Coverage of Top Incomes and Estimation of Inequality: What is the Role of
the UK’s SPI Adjustment?
Richard V. Burkhauser, Nicolas Hérault, Stephen P. Jenkins, and Roger Wilkins
NBER Working Paper No. 23539
June 2017
JEL No. C81,D31

                                         ABSTRACT

Survey under-coverage of top incomes leads to bias in survey-based estimates of overall income
inequality. Using income tax record data in combination with survey data is a potential approach
to address the problem; we consider here the UK’s pioneering ‘SPI adjustment’ method that
implements this idea. Since 1992, the principal income distribution series (reported annually in
Households Below Average Income) has been based on household survey data in which the
incomes of a small number of ‘very rich’ individuals are adjusted using information from ‘very
rich’ individuals in personal income tax return data. We explain what the procedure involves,
reveal the extent to which it addresses survey under-coverage of top incomes, and show how it
affects estimates of overall income inequality. More generally, we assess whether the SPI
adjustment is fit for purpose and consider whether variants of it could be employed by other
countries.

Richard V. Burkhauser                              Stephen P. Jenkins
University of Texas—Austin                         Department of Social Policy
Department of Economics                            London School of Economics
2225 Speedway, Austin, TX 78712                    and Political Science
and University of Melbourne                        Houghton Street
and Cornell University                             London WC2A 2AE
and also NBER                                      United Kingdom
rvb1@cornell.edu                                   s.jenkins@lse.ac.uk

Nicolas Hérault                                    Roger Wilkins
Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and        Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic
Social Research                                    and Social Research
Level 5, 111 Barry St                              University of Melbourne
Carlton, VIC 3053                                  Faculty of Business and Economics Building
nherault@unimelb.edu.au                            5th floor
                                                   Victoria 3010, Australia
                                                   r.wilkins@unimelb.edu.au
I. Introduction


Survey under-coverage of top incomes leads to bias in survey-based estimates of overall
income inequality. Using income tax record data in combination with survey data is a
potential approach to address this problem because tax data are likely to have much better
coverage of top incomes. In this paper, we consider a pioneering variant of this approach (the
‘SPI adjustment’) long employed in the UK official income distribution statistics, assess its
strengths and weaknesses for measuring income inequality, and discuss the extent to which
the approach might be applied in other countries.
       That insufficient income from top income groups is captured by household surveys is
discussed in the ‘top incomes’ literature. Atkinson et al. highlight various problems with
surveys, stating that ‘such problems particularly affect the top income ranges’ (2011: 29).
They illustrate their argument by showing how estimates of the share of total income held by
the top 1% derived from the US Current Population Survey (CPS) fall below the estimates
derived from Internal Revenue Service Survey of Income (IRS-SOI) personal tax return data,
even after the CPS estimates have been adjusted upwards to account for their top-coding
(Burkhauser et al. 2012): ‘CPS data that do not measure top incomes fail to capture about half
of [the] increase in overall inequality’ between 1976 and 2006 (Atkinson et al. 2011: 32).
More recently, the under-coverage problem has been highlighted by OECD economists
interested in cross-national inequality comparisons as well as national trends:
               On the one hand, inequality figures drawn from household surveys measure
               income dispersion on a comprehensive and representative portion of the
               population, but are not able to capture top incomes. Yet it is in this portion of
               the distribution that most of the changes in inequality seem to have occurred
               over the last fifteen years … This implies in particular a systematic
               underestimation of inequality levels based on surveys. On the other hand,
               figures derived from tax return data offer an accurate picture for top incomes,
               but remain mute about how top incomes fit in the overall distribution and what
               are the global inequality trends: in particular, the complete evolution of
               inequality in a country where top incomes shares increase but where inequality
               across the rest of the population decreases cannot be determined. (Ruiz and
               Woloszko, 2015: 6).
       Relatively few people are aware that the UK principal income distribution series has
long incorporated an adjustment method intended to address these issues. And no other



                                               1
country in the world employs such a method (as far as we know), although survey under-
coverage of top incomes is a potentially universal issue.
        We examine the ‘SPI adjustment’ methodology that Department for Work and
Pensions statisticians use to modify the incomes of very rich respondents to the Family
Resources Survey, drawing on data from very rich individuals in the Survey of Personal
Incomes, a very large sample of the records for people liable to pay UK personal income tax
held by Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs (HMRC). The SPI-adjusted survey income data
are the basis of the annual income distribution report Households Below Average Income (see
e.g. Department for Work and Pensions 2016a) and the Institute for Fiscal Studies’ annual
commentaries on inequality and poverty (see e.g. Belfield et al. 2016). The data are also used
by many other researchers because they are made available in unit record form through the
UK Data Service.
        The SPI adjustment was a pioneering innovation when introduced almost a quarter of
a century ago (1992), but its methodology merits new scrutiny. The SPI adjustment affects
estimates of income inequality, including the shares of total income held by different groups
(e.g. the top 1 per cent of income-receivers) as well as summary indices such as the Gini
coefficient used to summarize the inequality of income for the population as a whole.1 Given
the growing prominence of debates about inequality levels and trends in public discussion, it
is important to get the inequality estimates right and this requires examination of the data
used to calculate them.
        In this paper, we review the SPI adjustment’s key features and analyse its effects on
the shape of the income distribution at the top end and on measures of overall inequality. Our
work will help research users to understand the methods and it will provide input to
assessments about whether the adjustment could and should be modified or indeed applied in
other countries. No substantive explanation of the SPI adjustment currently exists. There are
only scattered sources (often unpublished) and some features are not documented at all.
        We also assess the SPI adjustment methodology against its own goals. Originally,
these were ‘[t]o improve the quality of data on very high incomes and combat spurious
volatility’ (Department for Work and Pensions 1996: 23) but, in recent years, the adjustment
refers only to the second aspect, i.e. ‘to correct for volatility in the highest incomes captured
in the survey’ (Department for Work and Pensions 2016b: 20). We show that the SPI
adjustment makes more changes to the data than are required to reduce problematic volatility,

1
 Estimates of low-income prevalence are unaffected because the low-income cut-offs used in Households
Below Average Income are all defined as fractions of median income, and the median is unaffected by the SPI
adjustment.

                                                      2
and we argue that there are potentially better ways to improve data quality at the top of the
income distribution.2
        In Section II, we briefly explain the survey and tax data sources. We describe the SPI
adjustment in Section III, explaining what we know and do not know about the method. We
draw attention to issues associated with the adjustment’s use of stratification groups and the
way it estimates the values and numbers of ‘very rich’ incomes using projections from earlier
years’ data. In Section IV we assess survey under-coverage using comparable tax data as the
benchmark, and we analyse the extent to which this problem is addressed by the SPI
adjustment. Next we show the effects of the SPI adjustment on estimates of inequality
summarized by the Gini coefficient, the principal measure used in the UK and most other
countries (Section V). Section VI contains further discussion and conclusions, including
remarks about the extent to which the UK’s approach could or should be modified or
implemented in other countries. Additional tables and figures appear in appendices.




II. Survey data and tax data on incomes


The household survey from which the main UK survey-based income series are derived is the
Family Resources Survey (FRS), a continuous survey of the private household population
that is administered by the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP). Each year, a new
sample is drawn, with an achieved sample size of approximately 25,000 respondent
households each year up until 2010, and a sample size of approximately 20,000 since 2011.
The FRS began in fiscal year 1994/95 and we use the yearly data through to 2014/15.
        DWP statisticians derive three distinct income distribution series from the FRS
annually. The first series, which we label ‘FRS’, is based on the survey responses and
includes sample weights and basic imputations for item non-response (see e.g. DWP 2016b).
The second series (‘HBAI’) is a further cleaned-up series which also incorporates additional
derived income variables employing definitions of income and income-receiving unit that are
employed in the DWP’s Households Below Average Income report. The third series (‘HBAI-
SPI’) is the SPI-adjusted HBAI series – the data from which the report’s statistics are
calculated, and the derivation of which we discuss in detail in the next section.




2
  We do not examine data quality at the bottom of income distribution. For a recent UK study examining this
issue, see Brewer et al. (2015).

                                                      3
        The values of HBAI-SPI income variables differ from their HBAI counterparts only
for the limited number of individuals (and the corresponding households and benefit units)
subject to the SPI adjustments to their incomes, although SPI adjustments also involve
changes to grossing-up weights that extend further down the income distribution (see below).
        ‘Income’ in the HBAI and the HBAI-SPI series used in Households Below Average
Income refers to equivalised net (i.e. disposable) household income, with individuals
attributed with the income of the household to which they belong. Net household income
includes income from employment and self-employment, income from investments and
savings, cash benefits and credits from the government, and private transfers, from which is
deducted payments of personal income tax, employee National Insurance contributions, local
(Council) tax payments, and some other deductions. The adjustment for differences in
household size and composition uses the modified-OECD equivalence scale. See DWP
(2015) for further details.
        The tax return data used for the SPI adjustment come from the Survey of Personal
Incomes (SPI), administered by Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs (HMRC). Each fiscal
year’s SPI is a stratified sample of all tax returns. The number of individuals in the sample
has increased from around 57,000 in 1995/6 to nearly 677,500 in 2010/11, corresponding to
around 32 million taxpayers. Individuals cannot be linked across years of the SPI, or to other
taxpayers from the same family or household within the same year, or to FRS survey
respondents. Our analysis throughout is based on SPI data for 1995/96 through to 2010/11,
i.e. the period for which SPI public use tax return unit record data are available (with the
exception of 2008/09, for which there are no data).3
        The principal income variable available in the SPI is individual gross income,
reflecting the rules of the UK personal tax system (individual-based since 1990). Gross
income is total taxable income from the market plus taxable government transfers, and before
the deduction of income tax. (It is the variable that the top income shares literature focuses
on.)
        With access to the FRS unit record data about income components, it is possible to
create an individual gross income variable in the survey data, and hence reconcile and
combine survey and tax data using appropriately comparable definitions in each source. Also
for comparability’s sake, we sometimes restrict attention to individuals aged 15 years or more



3
 ‘The 2008-09 SPI is still unavailable but HMRC remains committed to producing the 2008-09 SPI’ (HMRC
2016a: 3). Since we began our research, unit record SPI data for 2013/14 have been released but not those for
2011/12 or 2012/13.

                                                       4
in both sources. For further details of income variable construction and samples, see
Burkhauser et al. (2016: Section 2).




III. The SPI adjustment


In principle, each year’s SPI adjustment is straightforward:
   Identify ‘very rich’ individuals in the survey A respondent is counted as ‘very rich’ if his
    or her income is above a threshold, where the threshold depends on whether the
    respondent is a pensioner or non-pensioner and on whether the respondent resides in
    Great Britain (England, Wales, and Scotland) or Northern Ireland.
   Impute cell-means The income of each ‘very rich’ respondent in the FRS is replaced by
    the mean income of a corresponding group of ‘very rich’ individuals in the SPI data.
   Recalibrate weights The numbers of ‘very rich’ individuals in the population is estimated
    from the SPI. The survey grossing factors (weights) are then recalibrated using the
    numbers of high-income pensioners and non-pensioners as control totals, in addition to
    the many other control totals used to derive the grossing-up factors for FRS and HBAI
    data.4
    This brief description omits important details, including how each element has changed
over time. We now elaborate. An important part of our story is to explain that external users
cannot replicate all the internal DWP and HMRC procedures, either because particular
variables are unavailable in public use files, or because of a lack of documentation. The main
documentation of the SPI adjustment is a single page in the Quality and Methodology
Information Report accompanying the HBAI report (see e.g. DWP 2016b: 20).5 We have
gleaned more details from earlier Methodological and Quality reviews (e.g. DWP 1996,
2004), unpublished internal DWP papers (Gray 2007; Matejic n. d.), discussions with DWP
and HMRC staff, and our own analysis of HBAI and HBAI-SPI public-use data.




4
  The DWP derives grossing factors (weights) for both the HBAI and HBAI-SPI using a widely-used calibration
weighting methodology. External data from official sources about population characteristics are used to define
control totals. The grossing factors selected are those that minimize the ‘distance’ between weighted survey
distributions and the population distributions. See Department for Work and Pensions (2016b: 16–19).
5
  Similar information is provided in one page by Belfield et al. (2016: 85).

                                                      5
1. The definition of a ‘very rich’ individual


The DWP determine the eligibility for the SPI adjustments each year at the individual level
using income thresholds above which individuals are deemed ‘very rich’. The thresholds are
set at a level above which, for each group, the FRS data are considered to be ‘volatile due to
the small numbers of cases’ (Department for Work and Pensions 2016b: 20).
       Different thresholds are used for pensioners and non-pensioners and, from 2002/03,
for Great Britain and Northern Ireland. For example in 2012/13, ‘non-pensioners in Great
Britain are subject to the SPI adjustment if their gross income exceeded £236,694 per year
(£131,166 per year in Northern Ireland) and pensioners in Great Britain are subject to the SPI
adjustment if their gross income exceeded £73,631 per year (£60,088 per year in Northern
Ireland)’ (Department for Work and Pensions 2014a: 11). For a full list of the income
thresholds for all years and all groups, see Appendix Table A1.
       Up until 2008/09, the threshold for non-pensioners was based on net (disposable)
income but, since 2009/10, it has been based on gross income. The other change introduced
in 2009/10 was to base ‘the SPI adjustment methodology […] on adjusting a fixed fraction of
the population rather than on adjusting the incomes of all those individuals with incomes
above a fixed cash terms level. This should prevent an increasing fraction of the dataset being
adjusted’ (Department for Work and Pensions 2011: 242).
       Using fixed (nominal) thresholds before 2009/10 led to a varying but generally
increasing share of the population being subject to the adjustment. (For further details, see
Table 2 discussed in Section IV, and also Appendix Table A2.) Since 2009/10, the target has
been to adjust at most around ½ per cent of (weighted) survey observations overall, though
hitting the target exactly is constrained by the use of four stratification groups. Our
investigations indicate that the actual adjustment rule has been to adjust the top 0.3 per cent
of non-pensioners (top 0.3 per cent in GB and top 0.3 per cent in NI) and the top 1.1 per cent
of pensioners (top 1.1 per cent in GB and top 1.1 per cent in NI). Consequently, in practice,
the total fraction of the population adjusted fluctuates slightly from year to year. That is, the
difference in the relative threshold for pensioners and non-pensioners and changes in the
population shares of the four stratification groups lead to slight fluctuations over time in the
total size and composition of the group subject to the SPI adjustment.
       A more fundamental issue is why the stratification groups are defined as they are.
When the FRS started it had no respondents from Northern Ireland (by design) and hence the
SPI adjustment referred to households from Great Britain only. When the FRS was extended


                                                6
to Northern Ireland, from 2002/3, it appears that the decision was taken to define a new
stratification category rather than to change the existing methodology. Gray (2007: 1) states
that the rationale for the distinction between pensioners and non-pensioners ‘is because non-
pensioners are more likely to have higher incomes compared to pensioners, so a threshold
above which some pensioners were considered to be ‘rich’ may be too low a threshold for
some non-pensioners to be deemed ‘rich’. Also, we look at pensioners separately as we are
carrying out an adjustment on behalf of the Pensioner Incomes Series who use the HBAI
data.’ (The DWP also produce a separate Pensioner Income Series annually that uses HBAI
income variables: see e.g. DWP 2014b.) We are not fully persuaded by the logic of the
arguments, and return to the issue of stratification groups in Section VI.


2. Estimating the number of ‘very rich’ individuals and their incomes


The number of ‘very rich’ individuals in the UK population, and the average (mean) income
of each type of ‘very rich’ individual, are estimated using SPI data. Gray (2007) describes the
steps taken to do this each year, but important details are undocumented.
       Given the income thresholds chosen for the year in question, DWP statisticians
request the HMRC staff administering the SPI to provide estimates of (a) the numbers of
‘very rich’ individuals in each top-income group, and (b) each group’s average income.
       On receipt of these estimates, the DWP statisticians replace the individual gross
income for each individual in the HBAI data who is above the relevant income threshold with
the cell-mean estimate derived from the corresponding group in the SPI.
       Finally, some subsequent adjustments are made that re-incorporate some survey
information. In particular, the DWP statisticians ‘add back in other deductions […] but
exclude personal pension payments […] as these are not included in the SPI definition of net
income. We also take out any housing benefit as this is arbitrarily allocated to the head of the
benefit unit and doesn’t necessarily constitute part of their individual income’ (Gray 2007: 3).
These final adjustments mean that ‘very rich’ individuals within each of the four adjustment
groups may have not exactly the same income. But because these subsequent adjustments are
limited in scale, they have small effects on the income distribution.
       The procedures used by the SPI team are the most difficult aspect to assess because
there is no documentation. Here follows what we have been able to ascertain.




                                               7
3. HMRC’s method for projecting the numbers of very rich individuals and their incomes


The numbers of ‘very rich’ individuals and their average income in a given survey year are
projected using SPI data from an earlier year because SPI data for the given survey year are
unavailable at the time at which DWP statisticians create the HBAI and HBAI-SPI data. For
example, ‘[t]he 2013/14 estimates were projections based on 2012/13 data’ (DWP 2015: 11).
From our reading of Households Below Average Income documentation, the projections were
also based on SPI data from one year earlier than the HBAI data for the estimates for each
year from 2009/10 through to 2011/12, and also 2003/04. For 2002/03 and 2004/05 through
to 2009/10, the projections were based on SPI data from two years earlier. What was done
before 2002/03 is undocumented.
       Getting the number of very rich individuals and their incomes correct has a direct
effect of estimates of inequality in SPI-adjusted income distributions, since the greater the
total income (and population share) attributed to this group, the greater will the estimate be.
(This is a separate issue from assessing the nature of survey under-coverage: see Section IV.)
       For the details of the projection method, the SPI team (in personal correspondence)
directed us to Appendix B of HMRC’s Income Tax Liabilities statistical release (HMRC
2016b). The main aim of the release is to provide outturn and projection statistics for
individual income taxpayer numbers, income tax liabilities and average rates of tax broken
down by taxpayer characteristics, i.e., the calculations are not directly tailored to the needs of
Households Below Average Income, which seeks to estimates the numbers of very rich people
and their incomes. In a nutshell, the projections are based on individual reweighting (using
ONS population projections) and on income growth projections by income source based on
the Office for Budget Responsibility forecasts and recent trends from the ONS Annual
Survey of Hours and Earnings (ASHE). Except for labour earnings, for which ASHE trends
are assessed separately for the richest 10% to 5% and the top 5% of taxpayers, the projection
method is not specifically designed to predict differential changes by income group. Thus
projection errors for top income groups (of total income and hence income shares) could
potentially be quite large. The projection methods appear to have been broadly the same since
2011, but there is no information about the years before that.
       In principle, it should be possible to evaluate the accuracy of the SPI projections by
comparing them with the subsequent outturn SPI values. To do this, for each of the four
stratification groups, the mean income in the year t SPI outturn would be compared with the
mean income in the year t HBAI-SPI data (which is the projected SPI value for year t). And


                                                8
the numbers of very rich people can also be compared. However, 2010/11 is the only year in
which the stratification group of each observation can be identified in the SPI outturn data,
since this is the only year in which the dataset contains a ‘state pension age’ flag. For all
other years, it is not possible to accurately determine pensioner status for all individuals.
(Whether the individual resides in GB or NI is identifiable in all years.) Consequently,
2010/11 is the only year it is possible to ascertain the mean income in the SPI for each of the
four stratification groups. We therefore focus first on 2010/11, and then consider what we can
say about earlier years.
       Table 1 shows that the projection for the total income of all individuals in the four
stratification groups, £78.7 billion, is around £6.1 billion below the SPI outturn (£84.8
billion) in 2010/11. There are variations in projection errors across stratification groups. For
example, the projections overestimated mean income for GB non-pensioners (£527,635
versus £492,173) but underestimated the number of individuals over the corresponding
income threshold (112,998 versus 136,186). The net effect was that total income for GB non-
pensioners was £7.4 billion less than the SPI outturn. By contrast, total income for GB
pensioners was £1.1 billion larger than the SPI outturn. For the two GB groups, and for all
groups combined, the outturn values differ by more than two standard errors from the
projected values.
                                      <Table 1 near here>
       Assessment of projection error for 2010/11 is complicated by changes in the UK tax
system that led to behavioural response. A 50% top marginal rate of income tax was
introduced in April 2010 (up from 40%), and the announcement and introduction of this tax
rate provided incentives for high income taxpayers to bring forward income to 2009/10 that
would otherwise have been reported in 2010/11 income tax returns or possibly later years.
This is the process of ‘forestalling’. Subsequently, a reduction in the top marginal tax rate to
45% provided incentives to defer income to later tax years (‘reverse forestalling’). See
HMRC (2012) and Seely (2014) for further discussion.
       In short, the 2010/11 undershoot in the projected total gross income for very rich
individuals may be due to these changes, especially when one notes that the undershoot is
driven by the GB non-pensioner group, the group most likely to contain high-income
taxpayers.
       However, our examination of projection error looking at earlier years, i.e. when there
were no forestalling issues, provides suggestive evidence of a more systematic problem with
the projection method. Given the banded age data available in the SPI in most years, it is only


                                                9
for women aged 55–64 that we cannot infer pensioner status. (The state retirement pension
age for women was 60 years.) Hence it is possible to extend the projection-outturn
comparisons shown in Table 1 for 2010/11 to earlier years if we exclude women aged 55–64
from both the HBAI-SPI and SPI datasets, but not to years before 1997/98 because age
information is not provided in the SPI data before then. Comparisons based on data
implementing this exclusion are shown in Appendix Table A3 for 1997/98 through 2009/10.
         The patterns for 2010/11 describe earlier years as well. Projections of total income
systematically undershoot outturns, with the difference ranging from between 3% in 2001/02
and 28% in 2006/07. There is one exceptional year, 2002/03, in which the Great Britain
projection overshoots total income outturns, possibly reflecting the incorporation of Northern
Ireland into the FRS that year. In all other years, although projections of mean incomes tend
to be overestimates of outturns, this is more than offset by the underestimation of the
numbers of individual affected.6 To the extent that the systematic undershooting of total
income for the very rich translates into undershooting of their income shares, it would appear
that over the past two decades, the HBAI-SPI projection methodology has generated
estimates of inequality levels that are lower than would have been calculated had SPI outturn
data been available. This is a separate issue from survey under-coverage per se, to which we
now turn.




IV. Survey under-coverage of top incomes and the effect of the SPI adjustment on ‘very
         rich’ individuals


This section first examines the extent of under-coverage of top incomes in the survey data
using SPI data as a benchmark. Second, we focus on the ‘very rich’ individuals in the HBAI
data affected by SPI adjustments each year, and document their numbers and the effects of
the adjustment on their income and grossing-up weights.


1. Survey under-coverage of top incomes


Survey under-coverage of top incomes may arise because of either under-reporting by very

6
  This is despite the small downward bias in the estimates of the projected mean incomes arising from ignoring
the potential increase in the cell means due to the exclusion of women aged 55–64. The impact of this exclusion
is likely to be relatively small because this subgroup is likely to form a small fraction of the people counted as
‘very rich’.

                                                       10
rich respondents to the survey, or lower survey participation rates (unit non-response) by very
rich households, or both. We believe that under-reporting is the most important (but not the
only) factor, on the grounds that the values of the top income percentiles (such as the 90th,
and especially 95th and 99th percentiles) in the individual gross income distribution that can
be constructed from the HBAI data are close in value to the corresponding percentiles in the
SPI data.7 There is recent evidence that unit non-response plays a relatively small role in the
USA as well. Bee et al. (2015) link respondents to the 2011 Current Population Survey to tax
return (IRS Form 1040) data and find ‘little evidence of differences between the percentiles
of the adjusted gross income distribution of the linked respondents and non-respondents’
(2015: 3).
        We therefore proceed to document survey under-coverage by taking top income
groups in the survey data for each year and the corresponding groups in the tax return data
and looking at the ratio of group total income in the survey to group total income in the tax
data. Ratios below 100 per cent represent under-coverage. Here, for comparability reasons,
top income groups refer to the top x per cent of the population aged 15 and over (using the
respective SPI and HBAI grossing up factors) and to distributions of individual gross income.
The period analysed reflects the availability of the SPI data (1995/96 to 2010/11, with a gap
in 2008/09).
        Figure 1(a) shows that survey under-coverage of top incomes is a serious problem.
Under-coverage is particularly acute at the 99th percentile and above, with reported ratios of
90 per cent or smaller. Furthermore, the small number of respondents underlying the survey
estimates results in substantial year-on-year volatility, especially for the top 0.1 percent.
However, under-coverage is also an issue further down the distribution, especially in the mid-
to late-2000s. These ‘almost very rich’ income groups are well below those subject to the
DWP’s SPI adjustment (approximately the top ½ per cent in recent years). In contrast, under-
coverage is much less of a problem for the ‘top 10 to 5 percent’ group for most of the period,
with ratios around 100 per cent, though some under-coverage becomes apparent at the end of
the period.8
                                           <Figure 1 near here>

7
  For comparability reasons, the distributions in both data sets refer to individuals aged 15 years or more. The
data to support our claim are provided by Jenkins (2017, Appendix I). Jenkins takes each HBAI individual gross
income top percentile in each year and calculates the percentile in the SPI data that corresponds to that income
value. For example, in 2010/11, 1.1% of individuals in the SPI data have a gross income that is above p99 in the
HBAI data.
8
  Jenkins (2017, Section II) examines under-coverage using ratios of corresponding HBAI and SPI percentiles,
supplemented by density comparisons. He reaches the same conclusions about survey under-coverage at the top
as reported here.

                                                      11
2. Individuals in the HBAI affected by SPI adjustments


Table 2 summarises the effects of the SPI adjustment on individual gross incomes and on
grossing up factors of individuals deemed ‘very rich’ by DWP, for each year over the period
1994/95 to 2014/15.9 Columns 1 and 2 show the estimated population share of individuals
subject to SPI adjustment with column 1 using the original FRS weights and column 2 the
post-SPI adjustment weights. Between 0.09 and 0.36 percent of the weighted FRS sample
(using the original FRS weights) are SPI-adjusted each year. In all years other than 1996/97,
the estimated population share of these individuals increases as a result of the SPI adjustment,
although the magnitude of increase has been larger since 2007/08, since when the weighted
population share post SPI adjustment has been approximately ½ percent in every year.
                                           <Table 2 near here>
        The remaining columns of Table 2 show for each year the impacts of the SPI
adjustment on the mean income among the individuals whose incomes are adjusted. Column
3 presents estimates of means without the SPI adjustments to either individual incomes or to
grossing factors (weights) and column 6 presents estimates of mean incomes after SPI
adjustment of both weights and incomes. Columns 4 and 5 show the estimates of means
based on adjusting the weights but not the incomes and vice versa. In 2014/15, for example,
the SPI adjustment increased the mean gross weekly income of individuals deemed ‘very
rich’ from £4,521 to £7,487. Application of the adjusted individual grossing factors alone
increased the mean from £4,521 to £5,228 (column 4), whereas adjustment of income values
alone increases the mean from £4,521 to £6,272 (column 5). Hence, in 2014/15, the main
effect of the SPI adjustment occurs through changes to individuals’ incomes. This is also the
case in most, but not all, other years. When there are one or more extreme outliers in the
survey data, the SPI adjustment can act to reduce the mean. This occurs in 2000/01, 2001/02,
2005/06, 2008/09 and 2013/14 (compare columns 3 and 6).
        Because Table 2 focuses on mean incomes, it does not reveal that adjustments to
incomes or grossing factors can be substantial for some individuals and groups. For instance,
Appendix Table A4 shows that in 2014/15 the post-adjustment grossing factor for very rich
GB non-pensioners was 117 per cent greater than the pre-adjustment grossing factor. Only for
9
  Although SPI outturn data are not available for 2008/09, HBAI-SPI data, which rely on SPI projections, are
available for all years from 1994/95 to 2014/15. We report full details of the SPI adjustment effects on
individual gross incomes and on grossing-up factors of individuals deemed ‘very rich’ in Appendix Table A4.
The table shows that the number of individual FRS respondents whose incomes are changed by the SPI
adjustment is small in absolute number each year, ranging between 45 (in 1995/96) and 175 (2010/11).

                                                     12
a few years does the adjustment involve a reduction in grossing-up factors, reflecting an
overrepresentation of the ‘very rich’ in the survey data relative to the SPI data.10
        The nature of the SPI adjustment, specifically the way the stratification groups are
defined, means that individuals subject to the adjustments are not necessarily the individuals
with the highest incomes. For example, although ½ per cent of the (post-SPI adjustment)
weighted population in 2010/11 was subject to the SPI adjustment, this does not imply that all
those in the top ½ per cent of the income distribution were subject to the SPI adjustment. The
minimum income in the top ½ per cent of the individual (pre-SPI adjustment) HBAI gross
income distribution in 2010/11 was £136,000 per year. However, the SPI adjustment
thresholds were £65,321 for pensioners in GB, £57,091 for pensioners in NI and £131,166 for
non-pensioners in NI, implying that some individuals in these stratification groups were
subject to the SPI adjustments even though they were not part of the top ½ per cent of the
distribution of individual incomes. Conversely, some non-pensioners in GB who were in the
top ½ per cent were not subject to the SPI adjustment because their income was below the
£236,694 SPI adjustment threshold for non-pensioners in GB in that year. Thus, for 2010/11,
we find that there are significant fractions of SPI-adjusted observations spread across the top
2.5 per cent of the distribution, as well as some in the 96.5 to 96.6 percentile groups. There
are similar results for other years.
        Survey under-coverage means that there is an insufficiently large fraction of the
population observed in the top income ranges of the survey data. The DWP’s SPI adjustment
works by using the information provided by tax data to place more people in the critical
ranges. This is illustrated by Figure 2, which shows kernel density estimates of the upper tails
of the HBAI and HBAI-SPI distributions of individual gross income in 2010/11.11 A higher
density at a given income value means a greater concentration of people. We present
estimates for distributions of log income, rather than income itself, in order to focus attention
on the upper tail, and we deliberately use a small bandwidth in order to bring out the fine
structure. The dashed vertical lines mark the 90th, 95th, 99th, and 99.5th percentiles of the
HBAI distribution. The HBAI distribution (grey density line) has a long right hand tail with a
very tiny amount of density mass. The maximum observed value is approximately £3.54
million, and the next three highest values are £1.39 million, £1.25 million, and £1.14 million.
The DWP’s SPI adjustment replaces the sparse upper tail in the HBAI distribution with just
two distinct clumps of density mass (for the non-pensioner groups), as shown by the dashed

10
   Specifically, grossing-up factors were reduced for GB non-pensioners in 1994/95, 1996/97, 1997/98 and
2000/01, and for NI non-pensioners in 2002/03 and 2004/05.
11
   For comparisons of HBAI and SPI distributions for each year, see Jenkins (2017, Figure 2 and Appendix A).

                                                     13
density line. The effect of changing the incomes of individuals in the two ‘very rich’
pensioner groups is imperceptible.
                                           < Figure 2 near here>
         We now return to Figure 1 and show how under-coverage in the HBAI is mitigated by
the SPI adjustment. Figure 1(a) examines under-coverage of the HBAI by presenting the ratio
of HBAI income to SPI income for percentile groups in the top 10 per cent of the income
distribution. Figure 1(b) presents analogous information for the HBAI-SPI, showing the ratio
of HBAI-SPI income to SPI income for the same top income groups. Across the 1995/96 to
2010/11 period, there is no noticeable difference between the HBAI and HBAI-SPI series for
the top 10 per cent to 5 per cent income groups. This is what one expects since the SPI
adjustment does not impact on incomes in this part of the distribution.
         But comparison of Figures 1(a) and 1(b) shows that the SPI adjustment manages to
bring the survey estimates closer to the SPI estimates. In particular, the gap is greatly reduced
for the top 2 per cent to 1 per cent group (i.e., the 99th percentile group) and for the top 1 per
cent to 0.5 per cent group.
         Moreover, there remain differences in coverage between those in the top 0.5 per cent
to 0.1 per cent group and those in the top 0.1 per cent, because the SPI adjustment calculates
its cell means among stratification groups in which there is a wide range of incomes.12 The
SPI adjustment tends to impute income values that are too large for those in the top 0.5 per
cent to 0.1 per cent group, but too small for the top 0.1 per cent. Hence, mean income for the
top 0.5 per cent to 0.1 per cent group tends to be higher in the HBAI-SPI than in the SPI (31
per cent higher in 2009/10) but smaller for the top 0.1 per cent (up to 50 per cent smaller, in
2007/08). This suggests that one way to improve on the SPI adjustment would be to use a
more finely granulated approach to better reflect inequality among top incomes.
         In summary, the last two sections have shown how the SPI adjustment is implemented
(subject to the caveat that many important details are undocumented), and raised questions
about its stratification groups and projection methodology. We have demonstrated that the
SPI adjustment improves coverage of top incomes relative to a tax data benchmark, but it is
less successful at doing so the further up the distribution we go. But the more important
lesson is that the SPI adjustment does not reach far enough down the distribution. Figure 1
shows that FRS under-coverage of top incomes stretches beyond the income range to which
the SPI adjustment is applied. We return to these points in Section VI.


12
  This general point aside, the post-SPI adjusted series shows a marked deterioration in the coverage of the top
0.1 per cent after 2002/03. It is unclear what is driving this.

                                                       14
V. The impact of the SPI adjustment on measures of inequality


The importance of the SPI adjustment for assessing UK income inequality levels and trends is
highlighted by a comparison of the official series of Gini coefficient estimates for the UK.13
See Figure 3.
           The principal official series is the FRS-based HBAI-SPI series produced by the DWP
that is discussed earlier. The ONS-ETB series is from the ONS’s annual commentary on ‘the
effects of taxes and benefits on household incomes’ (e.g. ONS 2016), and is derived from the
Living Costs and Food Survey. The ONS-EUSILC series, which began in 2005/06, is the
series that the UK contributes to the EU’s social inclusion statistics through EU-SILC. It was
initially based on the General Lifestyle Style and since 2012 has been based on the FRS.
Neither of the two ONS series incorporates an SPI adjustment. All three series refer to
household disposable income equivalised using the modified-OECD scale (rather than the
measure of individual gross income to which the SPI adjustment is made). In the HBAI-SPI
and ONS-EUSILC series, the individual is the unit of analysis and the estimates refer to
inequality among all individuals (including children); in the ONS-ETB series, the unit of
analysis is the household and the estimates refer to inequality among all households. To
facilitate comparisons across series, we have also applied the ONS-ETB definitions to the
SPI-HBAI data: this leads to the HBAI-SPI(hh) series of Gini coefficients.
           To these series, we add two other series derived from HBAI-SPI data. One trims the
top 5%, and the second trims the top 5% and the bottom 5% as per Belfield et al. (2017). We
discuss these two series in Section VI.
                                                  <Figure 3 about here>
           There is a striking difference between the inequality levels recorded by the HBAI-SPI
series and the two ONS series. Inequality levels according to the HBAI-SPI series are around
two percentage points higher each year, and there is a bigger gap between the HBAI-SPI(hh)
and ONS-ETB series. As we show in Figure 4 (discussed below), the SPI adjustment is an
important contributor to these systematic differences. The SPI adjustment also helps explain
the differences in trends over time across series, though the smaller sample sizes underlying
the ONS-ETB and ONS-EUSILC series also contributes to their greater volatility.



13
     For extensive discussion of estimates of top income shares from different series, see Burkhauser et al. (2016).

                                                          15
1. The impact of the SPI-adjustment on the FRS-based estimate of the Gini coefficient


To look at the effect of the SPI adjustment on income inequality estimates in more detail, we
focus on the HBAI-SPI series and the period 1994/95–2014/15. The effects of the SPI
adjustment on the Gini coefficient for household equivalised net income among all
individuals are presented in Figure 4.14
                                            <Figure 4 near here>
         The SPI-adjusted net income series (HBAI-SPI; solid black line) shows higher
inequality than the unadjusted HBAI series (HBAI; solid grey line) in 15 of the 21 years.
Only in 2000/01 and 2008/09 is the Gini coefficient of the adjusted series appreciably lower
than the Gini coefficient of the unadjusted series. The effects of the recalibrations to the
grossing-up factors can be seen by comparing the HBAI series with the ‘HBAI (HBAI-SPI
weights)’ series (dashed grey line).
         This comparison shows that changes to the weights systematically increase the Gini
coefficient in all years other than 1994/95, 1996/97, 1997/98, and 2000/01, where the effect is
negligible. Moving from the HBAI (HBAI-SPI weights) to the HBAI-SPI series shows the
effects of the adjustments to the income values. These adjustments further increase the Gini
coefficient in 11 of the 21 years, but also substantially reduce the Gini coefficient in six of the
years.
         The net effect of the SPI adjustment is to substantially reduce year to year volatility in
estimates of the Gini coefficient. In addition, the HBAI-SPI series leads one to conclude that
inequality increased slightly over the 1994/95 to 2014/15 period, rather than decreased, which
is what the unadjusted HBAI series shows. In particular, the decline in the Gini coefficient
after 2009/10 is markedly smaller for the adjusted series.15
         The SPI adjustment reduces the volatility of other measures of overall inequality as
well. The mean logarithmic deviation, Theil index, and the half the squared coefficient of
variation (HSCV), each commonly used in income distribution analysis, also exhibit
considerably less volatility for the adjusted series. (See Appendix Figures A2–A4.) The
HSCV is particularly sensitive to the presence of outliers and its volatility is greatly reduced
by the SPI adjustment for the years in which the HBAI contains one or two extreme outliers,
such as in 2001/02, 2005/06 and 2008/09.

14
   See Appendix Figure A1 for the corresponding series based on the distribution of individual personal gross
income. The patterns are very similar.
15
   While the Great Recession provides one explanation for the sharp decline in inequality between 2009/10 and
2010/11, the decline is also likely to be due to the forestalling and reverse forestalling issues cited earlier.

                                                       16
VI. Discussion and conclusions


The SPI adjustment has two stated goals: to improve the quality of data on very high
incomes; and to reduce spurious volatility. With respect to the latter goal, Matejic (n. d.)
discusses the effect of the SPI adjustment on volatility for the period between 2002/03 and
2009/10. He reports that once five extreme outlier values for individual-level net income are
excluded (over the entire period), there is little difference between the top three values from
year to year. Matejic’s conclusion is that ‘there is not that much of [a] difference between the
maximum incomes over time, and thus any mean and other statistics would not be very
volatile’ (n. d.: 6). This in turn implies that the current SPI adjustment does much more than
is necessary to reduce top income volatility. The findings discussed in the previous section
corroborate this assessment.
        Systematic trimming of the income distribution is a commonly-used approach to data
quality. For example, Brewer and Wren-Lewis state that they ‘trim the top and bottom 1% of
households in each year; in doing so, we remove all of the very high and very low income
households whose reported incomes are adjusted by government statisticians before the micro
data are made available’ (2016: 297).16 An even more radical approach is taken by Belfield et
al. (2017) who trim the top 5% and the bottom 5%. Trimming removes most high-leverage
outlier observations that account for potentially spurious volatility in inequality trends. But at
the same time, a very important range of the income distribution – the very top, which is
where most changes have been occurring over the last two decades in the UK – is totally
ignored. Figure 3 shows that Belfield et al.’s (2017) estimates of inequality for the middle 90
per cent of the distribution are approximately 10 percentage points lower than the HBAI-SPI
estimates of overall inequality, and variations over time are flattened out. The series without
bottom trimming shows that is the trimming of top incomes that drives these effects. Put
differently, the trimmed series for the income distribution are very different from the series
for the overall income distribution.
        Belfield et al. (2017: 162) raise an additional point. If one’s purpose is to undertake
decompositions by income source, then data including SPI-adjusted incomes are problematic
because the cell-mean imputations refer to an income aggregate (e.g. gross or net income)
and not its components. Radical trimming removes the adjusted observations and makes


16
  Trimming the top 1% would not necessarily remove all the observations subject to the SPI adjustment, as we
show earlier.

                                                     17
decomposition analysis feasible. Observe that the SPI does not have sufficiently detailed
information about income components to take a more disaggregated approach to SPI-type
adjustments.
       However, decomposition is a separate issue from deriving better estimates of overall
inequality levels and trends in the population as a whole. National statistical agencies can
pursue the latter goal for their headline distributional series without compromising other
types of analysis by researchers, as long as access to the detailed survey unit record data
about income components is maintained (as it is in the UK and many other countries).
       While the current SPI adjustment does more than is required to reduce volatility, we
have shown that it falls short of producing an income series in line with SPI data for top
incomes. Thus, we believe that there are prima facie grounds for reconsidering the design of
the SPI adjustment.
       One modification we suggest is to omit the stratification in the adjustment (currently
based on distinctions between pensioners and non-pensioners and between Great Britain and
Northern Ireland residents). Our view is that the main decision regarding the SPI adjustment
concerns the number of high income individuals that should be subject to the adjustment. The
discussion around this decision is much clearer if it is framed simply as a decision about the
number of top income groups to be adjusted. For example, do we want all the top ½ per cent
individual incomes to be SPI adjusted? Or only the top 0.1 per cent? Or the top 5 per cent or
10 per cent? Given the stated goals of the SPI adjustment, there is no obvious reason why
these thresholds should differ for Great Britain and Northern Ireland or between pensioners
and non-pensioners. As we have explained, the stratification by residence appears simply to
reflect a change in FRS survey coverage. Households Below Average Income and The
Pensioner Income Series are based on a common HBAI methodology definitions; it is unclear
why they should have separate top income adjustments.
       Stratification might be motivated by the desire to examine distributions for subgroups
such as devolved administrative regions (but residence in Scotland and Wales is not used for
stratification). In any case, this is not a stated purpose of the SPI adjustment. One could also
conceive of other population subgroups of at least as great an interest such as men and
women, or different age groups (personal characteristics also identifiable in the SPI data).
       In addition to omitting stratification, more fundamental changes to the adjustment
method could be made to better utilise the SPI data to improve the capture of top incomes in
the HBAI data. First, systematic comparison of the SPI and HBAI income distributions could
ascertain how far down the HBAI income distribution the SPI data can be used to improve


                                               18
measurement of high incomes. Our earlier findings, in particular from Figure 1, suggest that
SPI adjustment to the incomes of individuals in the top 5 per cent is likely to be appropriate
to estimates of the Gini coefficient and other inequality indices (see also Jenkins 2017). By
contrast, any adjustment to members of the top 10 per cent to 5 per cent group is unlikely to
have any significant impact because the differences between survey and tax data are limited
for this group.
        Second, when adjusting the HBAI data, information about the distribution of income
among high income individuals could be preserved by adopting a more granular approach
than simply assigning every individual over a particular threshold the same income (a mean).
One possible approach, which we have implemented in Burkhauser et al. (2016), is to
identify the 0.1 percentile group of each individual in the HBAI (personal gross) income
distribution and replace their income with the mean of individuals in the same 0.1 percentile
group of the SPI income distribution.17 (In principle, even greater granularity is possible.)
Burkhauser et al. (2016) focus on the case in which adjustments are made to the top 5 per
cent, but also consider variants in which adjustments made to the incomes of the top 10, 4, 3,
2, 1, or ½ per cent. They find that their inequality estimates are insensitive to variants that
include at least the top 2 per cent, implying adjustments are required further down the
distribution than the SPI adjustment’s ½ per cent.
        Third, and separately from the survey under-coverage issue, we have shown how the
lags in availability of SPI data mean that projections are required in order to implement the
SPI adjustment to HBAI incomes and that there appears to be systematic undershooting of
income totals for very rich groups. This suggests that the principles underlying the projection
method could be fruitfully revisited. Where the focus of attention should be is difficult to say
because there is no detailed documentation, a situation that could be improved. We also
wonder about the possibilities for making SPI data available more quickly. Recent process
reviews enabled the DWP to bring forward the publication of FRS 2015/16 by more than
three months compared to FRS 2014/15 (Department for Work and Pensions 2017: 24).
Timeliness of the release of the Households Below Average Income report, based on the
HBAI-SPI data, has also improved substantially in recent years. Improving the timeliness of
the SPI data (and making more years of unit record data available) is contingent on resources
being made available within HMRC.




17
  Burkhauser et al. (2016) were unable to produce net income variables for the adjusted cases because they did
not have access to the DWP tax-benefit calculator. This constraint is not faced by the DWP.

                                                      19
        We acknowledge that there are some fundamental limitations to the SPI adjustment or
variants of it that arise because it is based on an individual level data set (the SPI).
Individuals from the same household cannot be linked to each other. This matters because we
are most concerned from a welfare perspective in distributions of household income. As a
referee put it, an increase over time in the correlation in the earnings of partners will tend to
increase the inequality of household income in a way that cannot be ‘corrected’ for using the
SPI.
        We also acknowledge that there are other approaches to improving estimates of
overall income inequality that also use tax data to improve coverage of top incomes. A
leading example is the method of Atkinson (2007) and Alvaredo (2011), recently applied to
the UK by Jenkins (2017). Whereas the SPI adjustment and the Burkhauser et al. (2016)
approach use the tax data to modify the survey data and then calculate overall inequality from
the adjusted and combined data, the Atkinson-Alvaredo approach combines inequality
estimates in each of the two data sources separately and then combines them. Total inequality
is calculated as the sum of inequality among the poorest p per cent (derived from the survey)
+ inequality among the richest (100–p) per cent (derived from the tax data) + inequality
between the rich and poor groups (which depends on their mean incomes and p). Jenkins
(2017) demonstrates that the Burkhauser et al. and Atkinson-Alvaredo approaches provide
similar estimates of income inequality trends in the UK between the mid-1990s and the late-
2000s. Both of the two approaches point to a larger increase in inequality in the early-2000s
than does the HBAI-SPI series.18 Both approaches take better account of under-coverage of
top incomes, including of the top 0.1% (cf. Figure 2(b)).
        The UK’s experience suggests some lessons concerning whether other countries could
implement variants on SPI adjustment methodologies to improve their estimates of income
inequality levels and trends. What is needed is access to both suitable income tax record data
and to high quality household survey data with detailed information about income
components. What is available varies across countries and, indeed, the extent and nature of
under-coverage of top incomes in household surveys may vary across countries, necessitating
differences in approach.
        For Australia, Burkhauser, Hahn, and Wilkins (2016) demonstrate that there is
potential to reconcile and combine survey and tax data in an SPI adjustment-type way, but the
ability for the combined data to track the top income share series in Australian Tax Office tax

18
  Another potential approach to deal with under-coverage of top incomes, employed by Alfons et al. (2013) and
Ruiz and Woloszko (2015), is based on fitting a Pareto distribution to top incomes in the survey data (making no
use of tax data). Jenkins (2017) explains why this approach is unsatisfactory.

                                                      20
table benchmarks is currently constrained by aggressive top-coding and perturbation of
observations in the publicly-released tax unit record data. Bach et al. (2009) show that it is
possible to reconcile and combine survey and tax data in Germany, and thereby provide a
better picture of the entire income distribution from bottom to top, as they phrase it. By
contrast with the SPI adjustment, and reflecting the nature of the data available, their
approach uses statistical matching across data sets rather than cell mean imputations. For the
USA, the work of Larrimore et al. (2016) shows that it is possible to reconcile and combine
survey data from the Current Population Survey with IRS SOI personal tax record data. Their
analysis includes definitions of income extended to also include capital gains. Larrimore et al.
(2017) show that in the USA it is possible to link individuals from the same household in the
tax data combining information across the universe of federal income tax data collected by
the IRS.
       These illustrations underline our point that the scope for improving estimates of
inequality levels and trends by taking better account of top incomes using tax data is
contingent on the nature of the data available (and the nature of survey under-coverage). The
more important lesson is that improvements per se are possible and they could be
implemented in many countries by the guardians of national statistical series on income
distribution with appropriate coordination between the agency in charge of the survey and the
national tax office.




References


Alfons, A., Templ, M. and Filzmoser, P. (2013), ‘Robust estimation of economic indicators
       from survey samples based on Pareto tail modelling, Journal of the Royal Statistical
       Society, Series C, vol. 62, pp. 271–286.
Atkinson A. B., Piketty, T., and Saez, E. (2011), ‘Top incomes in the long run of history’,
       Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 49, pp. 3–71.
Bach, S., Corneo, G., and Steiner, V. (2009), ‘From bottom to top. The entire income
       distribution in Germany, 1992–2003’, Review of Income and Wealth, vol. 55, pp.
       303–330.
Bee, C. A., Gathright, G. M. R., and Meyer, B. D. (2015), ‘Bias in unit non-response in the
       measurement of income in household surveys’, unpublished paper (4 August 2015),




                                               21
       Chicago IL: Harris School, University of Chicago.
       https://harris.uchicago.edu/files/jsm2015_bgm_unit_non-response_in_cps.pdf
Belfield, C., Cribb, J., Hood, A., and Joyce, R. (2016), Living Standards, Poverty and
       Inequality in the UK: 2016, Report 117, London: Institute for Fiscal Studies.
       http://www.ifs.org.uk/uploads/publications/comms/R117.pdf
Belfield, C. Blundell, R., Cribb, J., Hood, A., and Joyce, R. (2017), ‘Two decades of income
       inequality in Britain: the role of wages, household earnings and redistribution’,
       Economica, vol. 84, pp. 157–179.
Brewer, M., Etheridge, B., and O’Dea, C. (2015), ‘Why are households that report the lowest
       incomes so well-off?’, http://repository.essex.ac.uk/14894/. Economic Journal,
       forthcoming.
Brewer, M. and Wren-Lewis, L. (2016), ‘Accounting for changes in income inequality:
       decomposition analyses for the UK, 1978–2008’, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
       Statistics, vol. 78, pp. 289–322.
Burkhauser, R. V., Feng, S., Jenkins, S. P. and Larrimore, J. (2012), ‘Recent trends in top
       income shares in the USA: reconciling estimates from March CPS and IRS tax return
       data’, Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 94, pp. 371–388.
Burkhauser, R. V., Hahn, M., and Wilkins, R. (2016), ‘Top incomes and inequality in
       Australia: reconciling recent estimates from household survey and tax return data’,
       unpublished paper, Melbourne: Melbourne Institute for Applied Economic and Social
       Research.
Burkhauser, R. V., Hérault, N., Jenkins, S. P., and Wilkins, R. (2016), ‘Has UK income
       inequality increased recently? Answers from reconciled and combined household
       survey and tax return data’, Working Paper 21991, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau
       of Economic Research. Revised version (August 2016) available from
       http://www.iariw.org/dresden/wilkins.pdf
Department for Work and Pensions (2004), Review of Households Below Average Income
       and the Pensioners’ Incomes Series, National Statistics Quality Review Series, Report
       No. 28. London: Department for Work and Pensions.
Department for Work and Pensions (2011), Households Below Average Income An Analysis
       of the Income Distribution 1994/95 – 2009/10, London: Department for Work and
       Pensions.




                                              22
Department for Work and Pensions (2014a), Households Below Average Income. An Analysis
       of the Income Distribution 1994/95 – 2012/13, London: Department for Work and
       Pensions.
Department for Work and Pensions (2014b), The Pensioners’ Incomes Series. United
       Kingdom, 2012/13, London: Department for Work and Pensions.
Department for Work and Pensions (2015), Households Below Average Income. Quality and
       Methodology Information Report – 2013/14, London: Department for Work and
       Pensions.
Department for Work and Pensions (2016a), Family Resources Survey. United Kingdom,
       2014/15, London: Department for Work and Pensions.
Department for Work and Pensions (2016b), Households Below Average Income. Quality and
       Methodology Information Report – 2014/15, London: Department for Work and
       Pensions.
Department for Work and Pensions (2017), Family Resources Survey. United Kingdom,
       2015/16, London: Department for Work and Pensions.
Gray, C. (2007), ‘SPI documentation – how to decide on thresholds’, unpublished paper,
       London: Department for Work and Pensions.
HM Revenue and Customs (2012). The Exchequer Effect of the 50 per cent Additional Rate
    of Income Tax. London: HMRC.
    http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20140206144454/http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/bu
    dget2012/excheq-income-tax-2042.pdf
HM Revenue and Customs (2016a), Personal Incomes Statistics 2013-14. Tables 3.1-3.11.
       London: HMRC.
       https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/503472
       /SPI_National_Statistics_T3_1_to_T3_11.pdf
HM Revenue and Customs (2016b), UK Income Tax Liabilities Statistics: 2013-14 Survey of
       Personal Incomes, with projections to 2016-17. London: HMRC.
       https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/income-tax-liabilities-statistics-tax-year-
       2013-to-2014-to-tax-year-2016-to-2017
Jenkins, S. P. (2017), ‘Pareto models, top incomes, and recent trends in UK income inequality’,
       Economica, vol. 84, pp. 261–289.
Larrimore, J., Burkhauser, R. V., Auten, G., and Armour, P. (2016), ‘Recent trends in U.S. top
       income shares in tax record data using more comprehensive measures of income




                                              23
       including accrued capital gains’, NBER Working Paper 23007, Cambridge MA:
       National Bureau of Economic Research.
Larrimore, J., Mortenson, J., and Splinter, D. (2017), ‘Household incomes in tax data: using
       addresses to move from tax unit to household income distributions’, Finance and
       Economics Discussion Series 2017-002, Washington: Board of Governors of the
       Federal Reserve System.
       https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2017/files/2017002pap.pdf
Matejic, P. (n. d.), ‘The Survey of Personal Incomes adjustment to HBAI incomes’,
       unpublished paper, London: Department for Work and Pensions.
Office for National Statistics (2016), ‘The effects of taxes and benefits on household
       incomes: financial year ending 2015’, London: ONS.
       http://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/personalandhouseholdfinance
       s/incomeandwealth/bulletins/theeffectsoftaxesandbenefitsonhouseholdincome/financi
       alyearending2015
Ruiz, N. and N. Woloszko (2015), ‘What do household surveys suggest about the top 1%
       incomes and inequality in OECD countries?’, OECD Economics Department
       Working Paper 1265, Paris: OECD Publishing.
Seely, A. (2014), ‘Income tax: the additional 50p rate’, Standard Note SN 249, London:
       House of Commons Library.
       http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/SN00249#fullreport




                                              24
                                             TABLE 1
        Comparison of SPI projections and SPI outturns for ‘very rich’ individuals, 2010/11,
                                      by stratification group


 Stratification group   Mean gross income (£)     Weighted number of      Total gross income (£ billion)
                                                       individuals
                        Projection   Outturn      Projection Outturn    Projection   Outturn    Difference
                                                                                                   (%)
 GB non-pensioner         527,635      492,173      112,998   136,186         59.6       67.0        -11.0
                                        (4,792)                 (232)                   (0.6)
 NI non-pensioner         250,885      239,725        3,301     2,855          0.8        0.7         21.0
                                      (11,020)                   (58)                   (0.0)
 GB pensioner             134,228      123,324      132,797   135,473         17.8       16.7          6.7
                                        (1,363)                 (789)                   (0.2)
 NI pensioner             114,460      118,317        3,400     3,476          0.4        0.4         -5.4
                                      (12,518)                  (109)                   (0.0)

 Total (all groups)       311,546     305,154       252,496   277,991         78.7       84.8         -7.3
                                       (2,815)                  (913)                   (0.7)



Notes. Projections are taken from HBAI-SPI data. Outturns are taken from SPI outturn data. See
       main text for further discussion. Incomes are in 2010/11 prices. GB: Great Britain (England,
       Wales, Scotland). NI: Northern Ireland. Estimated standard errors in parentheses.
Sources: authors’ calculations from HBAI-SPI and SPI data.




                                                      25
                                           TABLE 2
       Impact of SPI adjustments to incomes and grossing factors on population shares and
         mean gross income, individuals subject to the SPI adjustment, 1994/95–2014/15

               Population share of ‘very rich’   Mean individual gross income of the ‘very rich’ (pounds
                individuals subject to the SPI                 per week, 2014/15 prices)
                       adjustment (%)
   Financial   FRS weights         HBAI-SPI         HBAI           HBAI        HBAI-SPI      HBAI-SPI
     year                            weights     incomes and    incomes and     incomes       incomes
                                                 FRS weights     HBAI-SPI       and FRS         and
                                                                  weights       weights       weights
                    (1)               (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)          (6)
  1994/95          0.17              0.18           4,852           4,201          7,452        6,156
  1995/96          0.09              0.12           6,142           6,068          9,198        9,117
  1996/97          0.13              0.13           6,416           6,330          8,921        8,787
  1997/98          0.23              0.26           4,937           4,420          8,331        7,179
  1998/99          0.11              0.14           8,481           8,476        10,319        10,531
  1999/00          0.13              0.20           6,534           6,525          9,256        9,127
  2000/01          0.20              0.24          11,176           9,643         11,049        9,825
  2001/02          0.21              0.27           9,977          11,211          8,637        9,265
  2002/03          0.19              0.27           6,043           5,975          9,443        9,343
  2003/04          0.22              0.28           5,949           6,336          7,638        8,157
  2004/05          0.25              0.32           5,186           5,476          7,575        7,955
  2005/06          0.23              0.34           9,431           9,787          7,590        7,618
  2006/07          0.28              0.42           5,821           5,515          7,628        7,130
  2007/08          0.31              0.51           5,152           4,797          7,722        7,130
  2008/09          0.35              0.50           8,022           8,342          7,126        7,475
  2009/10          0.32              0.50           5,959           7,106          6,818        7,904
  2010/11          0.36              0.50           5,887           5,250          7,271        6,475
  2011/12          0.29              0.49           4,804           4,813          7,020        6,976
  2012/13          0.29              0.49           4,592           4,831          5,778        6,242
  2013/14          0.26              0.50           8,628          12,338          5,905        7,805
  2014/15          0.34              0.50           4,521           5,228          6,272        7,487

Notes: Northern Ireland is included only from 2002/03 onwards.
Source: Authors’ calculations from FRS and HBAI data.




                                                  26
                                             FIGURE 1
      (a) Ratio of individual gross income total (HBAI) to individual gross income total (SPI),
                                          by income group
                    130
                                       Top 10 to 5 percent                  Top 5 to 2 percent
                    125                Top 2 to 1 percent                   Top 1 to 0.5 percent
                    120                Top 0.5 to 0.1 percent               Top 0.1 percent
                    115
                    110
                    105
                    100
                     95
                     90
                     85
                     80
                     75
                     70
                     65
                     60
                     55
                     50
                     45
                     40

                       1995/96      1997/98      1999/00         2001/02   2003/04       2005/06   2007/08   2009/10




    (b) Ratio of individual gross income total (HBAI-SPI) to individual gross income total (SPI),
                                          by income group
                     140
                                        Top 10 to 5 percent                 Top 5 to 2 percent
                     135                Top 2 to 1 percent                  Top 1 to 0.5 percent
                     130                Top 0.5 to 0.1 percent              Top 0.1 percent
                     125
                     120
                     115
                     110
                     105
                     100
                      95
                      90
                      85
                      80
                      75
                      70
                      65
                      60
                      55
                      50

                          1995/96   1997/98      1999/00         2001/02   2003/04       2005/06   2007/08   2009/10




Notes: Income groups are constructed based on HBAI adult gross income and on ONS controls for
       total adult population. Northern Ireland is included in the survey-based series only from
       2002/03 onwards. The data series are explained in Section II.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on FRS, HBAI and SPI data.
(Stata graph Incgroup_Histo_SPIratios1b & Incgroup_Histo_SPIratios2)




                                                                     27
                                                        FIGURE 2
               Density estimates of the upper tail of the distribution of individual gross income, 2010/11,
                                                   HBAI and HBAI-SPI


                   1.4                                                 HBAI               HBAI-SPI


                   1.2


                   1.0
Density




                   0.8

                   0.6


                   0.4


                   0.2

                   0.0
                         20           50        100 150            500      1000                  5000
                                              Income (£'000 per year), log scale


          Notes: Kernel density estimates were calculated for the distribution of log income using
                 observations with income) greater than £20,000 per year, using an Epanechnikov kernel and
                 bandwidth of 0.008. The dashed vertical lines show the 90th, 95th, 99th, and 99.5th
                 percentiles in the HBAI data. The distributions refer to individual gross income among
                 individuals aged 15+.
          Source: Authors’ calculations based on FRS and HBAI.
          (Stata graph overlap10_kdensity_noSPI-SPI _2010)




                                                             28
                                                           FIGURE 3
                                UK income inequality (Gini coefficient), 2005/06–2014/15, by series

                                37
                                36
                                35
                                34
                                33
                                32
             Gini coefficient




                                31
                                30
                                29
                                28
                                27
                                26
                                25
                                24
                                23
                                          HBAI-SPI           ONS-EUSILC                   ONS-ETB
                                22
                                          HBAI-SPI (hh)      HBAI-SPI (trim top5%)        HBAI-SPI (trim t&b 5%)
                                21
                                2005/06         2007/08       2009/10           2011/12         2013/14



Notes. The series are explained in the main text. Only the HBAI-SPI and HBAI-SPI(hh) series
       incorporate SPI adjustments. HBAI-SPI (trim top5%) is the HBAI-SPI series with the top 5
       per cent of individuals trimmed. HBAI-SPI (trim t&b 5%) is the HBAI-SPI series with the
       top 5 per cent of individuals trimmed.
Sources. HBAI-SPI: spreadsheet accompanying Belfield et al. (2016), which is the same series as
       reported in DWP (2016a). HBAI-SPI (hh): authors’ calculations based on HBAI data. ONS-
       ETB: ONS (2016). EU-SILC: series ilc_di12, downloaded from Eurostat’s online database,
       23 August 2016.

(Stata graph: gini_variant_02_01)




                                                                29
                                             FIGURE 4
      Gini coefficients calculated from income distributions with and without SPI adjustments


             0.39               HBAI-SPI
                                HBAI (HBAI-SPI weights)
                                HBAI
             0.38

             0.37

             0.36

             0.35

             0.34

             0.33

             0.32

             0.31
                  1994/95 1996/97 1998/99 2000/01 2002/03 2004/05 2006/07 2008/09 2010/11 2012/13 2014/15



Notes: In each series, the distribution is of equivalised household net income among all individuals.
       Northern Ireland is included only from 2002/03 onwards. The income definition and series
       acronyms are explained in Section II.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on FRS, HBAI and SPI data.
(Stata graph Gini1g)




                                                     30
                           APPENDIX

          (ONLINE SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL)

                          to accompany



Survey under-coverage of top incomes and estimation of inequality:
          what is the role of the UK’s SPI adjustment?




                      Richard V. Burkhauser
          Cornell University and University of Melbourne

                         Nicolas Hérault
                     University of Melbourne

                       Stephen P. Jenkins
                   London School of Economics

                         Roger Wilkins
                     University of Melbourne




                                i
                                         TABLE A1
 Gross income thresholds for eligibility for the SPI adjustments (pounds per year, nominal)

 Fiscal year              Great Britain                  Northern Ireland
                Non-pensioners       Pensioners   Non-pensioners      Pensioners
 1994/95             100,000               50,000        –                 –
 1995/96             100,000              100,000        –                 –
 1996/97             100,000              100,000        –                 –
 1997/98             100,000               50,000        –                 –
 1998/99             150,000               75,000        –                 –
 1999/00             150,000               60,000        –                 –
 2000/01             150,000               60,000        –                 –
 2001/02             150,000               60,000        –                 –
 2002/03             150,000               60,000     150,000           60,000
 2003/04             150,000               60,000     150,000           60,000
 2004/05             150,000               60,000     150,000           60,000
 2005/06             150,000               60,000     150,000           60,000
 2006/07             150,000               60,000     150,000           60,000
 2007/08             150,000               60,000     150,000           60,000
 2008/09             150,000               60,000     100,000           60,000
 2009/10             256,136               60,347     167,133           55,253
 2010/11             202,952               65,321     141,044           57,091
 2011/12             237,136               68,601     131,732           59,731
 2012/13             236,694               73,631     131,166           60,088
 2013/14             259,552               76,347     135,647           63,895
 2014/15               NA                     NA        NA                NA

Notes. In years prior to 2009/10, the thresholds are based on net rather than gross income for
       non-pensioners. For all other years and groups, the thresholds are based on gross
       income. The Family Resources Survey did not include Northern Ireland before
       2002/03. NA: Not available.
Source: Department for Work and Pensions (2015) for 2013/14 and previous HBAI reports
       for earlier years.




                                              ii
                                      TABLE A2
Weighted and unweighted numbers of individuals in HBAI data, by SPI-adjustment eligibility
                        (all individuals aged 15 years or more)

                  Non SPI-adjusted                  SPI-adjusted
  Fiscal                                                                       Total
   year       Weighted       Unweighted       Weighted      Unweighted      population
  1994/95     44,384,604       48,848          77,999           77          44,462,603
  1995/96     44,508,236       48,524          52,004           45          44,560,241
  1996/97     44,698,884       47,271          60,002           61          44,758,887
  1997/98     44,795,192       43,767         116,447           98          44,911,638
  1998/99     45,010,976       42,414          64,001           46          45,074,975
  1999/00     45,130,540       46,138          89,001           56          45,219,542
  2000/01     45,374,004       43,803         109,000           84          45,483,004
  2001/02     45,546,944       46,723         125,008           99          45,671,954
  2002/03     47,291,028       52,950         127,311           93          47,418,339
  2003/04     47,502,560       52,971         133,610          115          47,636,171
  2004/05     47,813,188       51,390         152,601          127          47,965,790
  2005/06     48,366,940       51,569         166,603          126          48,533,542
  2006/07     48,776,460       47,263         203,401          131          48,979,862
  2007/08     49,282,236       45,537         254,401          136          49,536,637
  2008/09     49,730,852       45,611         252,002          162          49,982,854
  2009/10     50,033,588       45,767         249,386          149          50,282,974
  2010/11     50,516,168       46,309         252,496          175          50,768,665
  2011/12     51,351,512       38,118         253,701          114          51,605,215
  2012/13     51,635,808       36,917         256,294          112          51,892,104
  2013/14     51,641,720       36,879         259,103          108          51,892,105
  2014/15     51,997,752       35,873         260,900          125          51,892,106

Source: Authors’ calculations based on HBAI data.




                                            iii
                                         TABLE A3
           Comparison of SPI projections and SPI outturns for ‘very rich’ individuals,
                  1997/98–2009/10, by stratification group (current prices)

                                 Mean gross income (£)    Weighted number of individuals            Total gross income (£bn)
 Year     Stratification group
                                 Projection    Outturn     Projection         Outturn      Projection     Outturn    Difference (%)
                                   361,577     332,387            64,447          80,740         23.3         26.8            –13.2
          GB non-pensioner
                                                (9,881)                          (1,354)                     (1.0)
                                   101,496       83,642           50,178          52,226          5.1          4.4              16.6
1997/98   GB pensioner
                                                (1,362)                          (1,765)                     (0.1)
                                   247,725     234,686          114,625         132,966          28.4         31.2              –9.0
          Total (all groups)
                                                (7,032)                          (2,262)                     (1.0)
                                   550,449     527,387            35,000          45,325         19.3         23.9            –19.4
          GB non-pensioner
                                              (10,154)                             (750)                     (0.5)
                                   153,732     129,039            26,307          25,486          4.0          3.3              23.0
1998/99   GB pensioner
                                                (1,766)                            (370)                     (0.0)
                                   380,217     384,016            61,307          70,810         23.3         27.2            –14.3
          Total (all groups)
                                                (6,942)                            (837)                     (0.5)
                                   547,741     533,052            42,000          53,325         23.0         28.4            –19.1
          GB non-pensioner
                                                (8,361)                            (509)                     (0.5)
                                   127,425     104,744            44,053          49,143          5.6          5.1               9.1
1999/00   GB pensioner
                                                (1,196)                            (833)                     (0.1)
                                   332,569     327,639            86,053        102,468          28.6         33.6            –14.8
          Total (all groups)
                                                (5,457)                            (996)                     (0.5)
                                   569,533     530,661            52,517          66,425         29.9         35.2            –15.1
          GB non-pensioner
                                                (7,382)                            (915)                     (0.6)
                                   157,911     108,410            50,502          50,479          8.0          5.5              45.7
2000/01   GB pensioner
                                                (1,677)                            (894)                     (0.1)
                                   367,747     348,333          103,019         116,904          37.9         40.7              –7.0
          Total (all groups)
                                                (5,240)                          (1,299)                     (0.7)
                                   564,289     512,436            59,894          69,890         33.8         35.8              –5.6
          GB non-pensioner
                                                (6,393)                            (820)                     (0.5)
                                   121,984     107,229            52,818          53,431          6.4          5.7              12.5
2001/02   GB pensioner
                                                (1,160)                            (500)                     (0.0)
                                   357,020     336,872          112,712         123,321          40.2         41.5              –3.1
          Total (all groups)
                                                (4,295)                          (1,000)                     (0.5)
                                   567,244     501,169            62,993          67,787         35.7         34.0               5.2
          GB non-pensioner
                                                (5,928)                            (326)                     (0.4)
                                   420,365     439,427               510             570          0.2          0.3            –14.5
          NI non-pensioner
                                              (76,380)                              (09)                     (0.0)
                                   120,668     108,673            57,249          56,238          6.9          6.1              13.0
2002/03   GB pensioner
                                                (1,130)                            (522)                     (0.0)
                                          0    102,034                 0           1,095          0.0          0.1           –100.0
          NI pensioner
                                                (7,416)                             (75)                     (0.0)
                                   354,901     321,796          120,752         125,689          42.9         40.4               6.0
          Total (all groups)
                                                (4,024)                            (687)                     (0.4)
                                   523,724     508,723            63,059          70,907         33.0         36.1              –8.4
          GB non-pensioner
                                                (6,268)                            (347)                     (0.5)
                                   389,902     398,281               600             781          0.2          0.3            –24.8
          NI non-pensioner
                                              (29,658)                              (36)                     (0.0)
                                   121,845     108,808            55,799          60,910          6.8          6.6               2.6
2003/04   GB pensioner
                                                (1,064)                            (589)                     (0.1)
                                   146,802     116,779             1,100           1,039          0.2          0.1              33.1
          NI pensioner
                                                (8,967)                             (80)                     (0.0)
                                   333,613     322,755          120,558         133,637          40.2         43.1              –6.8
          Total (all groups)
                                                (4,096)                            (760)                     (0.5)
                                   531,573     521,025            71,220          82,226         37.9         42.8            –11.6
          GB non-pensioner
                                                (5,987)                            (428)                     (0.5)
                                   393,707     382,888               700             888          0.3          0.3            –18.9
          NI non-pensioner
                                              (29,851)                              (30)                     (0.0)
                                   123,405     106,522            70,985          73,499          8.8          7.8              11.9
2004/05   GB pensioner
                                                  (955)                            (692)                     (0.1)
                                   153,332     121,038             1,200           1,263          0.2          0.2              20.3
          NI pensioner
                                                (8,627)                             (69)                     (0.0)
                                   326,693     324,077          144,105         157,876          47.1         51.2              –8.0
          Total (all groups)
                                                (3,898)                            (880)                     (0.6)


Continued overleaf



                                                                iv
Year      Stratification group   Mean gross income (£)    Weighted number of individuals            Total gross income (£bn)
                                 Projection    Outturn        Projection        Outturn    Projection     Outturn Difference (%)

                                   540,265     529,534              72,673      108,904         39.3       57.7             –31.9
          GB non-pensioner
                                                (5,754)                            (483)                  (0.6)
                                   391,186     431,422                900          1,138         0.4        0.5             –28.3
          NI non-pensioner
                                              (37,125)                              (35)                  (0.0)
                                   122,515     108,102              72,214        90,344         8.8        9.8              –9.4
2005/06   GB pensioner
                                                  (919)                            (728)                  (0.1)
                                   148,603     119,001               1,400         1,379         0.2        0.2              26.8
          NI pensioner
                                                (7,878)                             (72)                  (0.0)
                                   330,669     337,471           147,187        201,765         48.7       68.1             –28.5
          Total (all groups)
                                                (3,736)                            (947)                  (0.7)
                                   538,304     540,823              89,304      130,357         48.1       70.5             –31.8
          GB non-pensioner
                                                (5,529)                            (516)                  (0.7)
                                   398,104     409,869                900          1,792         0.4        0.7             –51.2
          NI non-pensioner
                                              (24,479)                              (53)                  (0.0)
                                   117,478     107,860              96,361      104,746         11.3       11.3               0.2
2006/07   GB pensioner
                                                  (861)                            (869)                  (0.1)
                                   117,431     128,089                925          1,620         0.1        0.2             –47.7
          NI pensioner
                                                (8,818)                             (82)                  (0.0)
                                   319,270     346,897           187,490        238,515         59.9       82.7             –27.7
          Total (all groups)
                                                (3,612)                          (1,088)                  (0.8)
                                   560,402     569,438           111,301        145,754         62.4       83.0             –24.8
          GB non-pensioner
                                                (6,610)                            (718)                  (1.0)
                                   450,003     440,504               1,300         1,993         0.6        0.9             –33.4
          NI non-pensioner
                                              (30,601)                             (120)                  (0.1)
                                   123,087     109,908           122,029        124,307         15.0       13.7               9.9
2007/08   GB pensioner
                                                  (810)                            (959)                  (0.1)
                                   122,423     113,889               2,201         2,492         0.3        0.3              –5.1
          NI pensioner
                                                (6,182)                             (97)                  (0.0)
                                   330,396     356,304           236,831        274,545         78.2       97.8             –20.0
          Total (all groups)
                                                (4,061)                          (1,282)                  (1.1)
                                   644,261     720,214           111,062        113,807         71.6       82.0             –12.7
          GB non-pensioner
                                                (8,626)                            (445)                  (1.0)
                                   317,331     386,949               3,300         2,603         1.0        1.0               4.0
          NI non-pensioner
                                              (34,682)                              (70)                  (0.1)
                                   125,886     117,078           103,230        131,716         13.0       15.4             –15.7
2009/10   GB pensioner
                                                  (983)                            (748)                  (0.1)
                                   119,899     110,220               3,299         3,435         0.4        0.4               4.5
          NI pensioner
                                                (6,822)                            (154)                  (0.0)
                                   389,291     392,638           220,891        251,560         86.0       98.8             –12.9
          Total (all groups)
                                                (4,605)                            (966)                  (1.1)


Notes. Projections are taken from HBAI-SPI data; Outturns are taken from SPI outturn data.
       Women aged 55–64 are excluded as their pensioner status cannot be determined in the
       SPI data for years before 2010/11. In the HBAI, this group represents between 1.7%
       in 1997/98 and 11.7% in 2005/06 of the individuals deemed ‘very rich’. See main text
       for further discussion.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on SPI and HBAI-SPI data.




                                                                v
                                       TABLE A4
       Summary of SPI adjustments to individual gross income and grossing-up factors
                                    1994/95–2014/15
                        No.                             Income adjustments
                         of                                                                             Adjustment to
                        SPI-     Mean           Cases with upward            Cases with downward         grossing-up
                       adjust   income             adjustment                     adjustment               factors
                         ed     adjust-             Mean     Median               Mean     Median       Mean      %
Year      Group        cases     ment     No.      change    change       No.    change    change      change   change
          Non-
1994/95   pens  GB        52      3,584    49        4,715      4,861        3   –14,904   –18,354      –266      –26
          Pens.   GB      25        471    19          910          993      6      –921      –987       660        72
          Non-
1995/96   pens    GB      40      3,368    36        4,348      4,629        4    –5,449     –6,140      209        23
          Pens.   GB       5      2,187     5        2,187      2,651        0         0           0     399        45
          Non-
1996/97   pens    GB      54      2,836    47        4,331      4,874        7    –7,204      –850       –45        –5
          Pens.   GB       7      1,670     6        2,352      2,821        1    –2,423     –2,423      387        43
          Non-
1997/98   pens    GB      68      4,887    65        5,239      5,532        3    –2,750     –3,108     –126      –12
          Pens.   GB      30        453    24          825        897        6    –1,037      –539       715       74
          Non-
1998/99   pens    GB      24      3,983    20        7,967      8,456        4   –15,935   –19,332       407        41
          Pens.   GB      22        187    16        1,500      1,709        6    –3,314    –2,127       293        29
          Non-
1999/00   pens    GB      28      4,433    24        7,019      8,307        4   –11,080     –9,811      525        58
          Pens.   GB      28        968    25        1,446      1,555        3    –3,016     –1,843      634        63
          Non-
2000/01   pens    GB      47     –1,218    29        7,882      8,230      18    –15,880     –9,422      –13        –1
          Pens.   GB      37      1,705    34        2,152      2,417       3     –3,362     –3,234      522        55
          Non-
2001/02   pens    GB      43     –4,763    36        7,284      7,626       7    –66,714     –6,362      461        50
          Pens.   GB      56        473    42        1,281      1,448      14     –1,953      –994       169        18
          Non-    GB      42      7,016    40        7,858      8,229       2     –9,814     –9,814      473        51
          pens.   NI       2      1,687     1        6,226      6,226       1     –2,853     –2,853      –22        –7
2002/03
          Pens.   GB      49        –55    38        1,319      1,409      11     –4,800    –1,672       398       48
                  NI       0          0     0            0          0       0          0         0         0        0
          Non-    GB      46      3,013    38        6,457      6,244       8    –13,346   –12,370       429       47
          pens.   NI       1      5,708     1        5,708      5,708       0          0         0       294       96
2003/04
                  GB      66        458    52        1,241      1,424      14     –2,452    –1,069       150       17
          Pens.
                  NI       2       –327     0            0          0       2      –327      –327        236       75
          Non-    GB      50      4,401    44        5,770      6,584       6     –5,643    –4,940       423       46
          pens.   NI       2      3,613     2        3,613      3,613       0          0         0       –50       –7
2004/05
                  GB      74        845    64        1,249      1,389      10     –1,742    –1,660       175       21
          Pens.
                  NI       1      1,896     1        1,896      1,896       0          0         0       943      367
          Non-    GB      53     –4,981    43        4,910      5,546      10    –47,509    –5,488       462       51
          pens.   NI       1      1,631     1        1,631      1,631       0          0         0       346       62
2005/06
                  GB      70        688    64        1,158      1,227       6     –4,333    –1,697       401       46
          Pens.
                  NI       2      2,091     2        2,091      2,091       0          0         0       388      126
          Non-    GB      57      3,639    45        6,263      6,194      12     –6,202    –5,414       402       37
          pens.   NI       2      2,774     2        2,774      2,774       0          0         0       149       46
2006/07
                  GB      70        218    56          939      1,128      14     –2,666     –931        617       66
          Pens.
                  NI       2      1,086     2        1,086      1,086       0          0         0       652      228




                                                       vi
                      No.                         Income adjustments
                       of                                                                         Adjustment to
                      SPI-     Mean       Cases with upward            Cases with downward         grossing-up
                     adjust   income         adjustment                     adjustment               factors
                       ed     adjust-          Mean     Median              Mean      Median      Mean      %
Year      Group      cases     ment     No.   change    change    No.      change     change     change   change
          Non- GB        59     5,188    51     6,482     6,934     8       –3,061     –2,544       578       51
          pens. NI        3     3,455     3     3,455     3,618     0            0          0        34        8
2007/08
                GB       68       455    54     1,062     1,150    14       –1,887       –514       942       88
          Pens.
                NI        6       650     5       917       928     1        –685        –685        66       21
          Non- GB        63    –1,139    52     6,806     7,024    11      –38,699     –5,733       662       60
          pens. NI        4     3,664     4     3,664     3,694     0            0          0       464      139
2008/09
                GB       88       375    68     1,055     1,185    20       –1,938     –1,348       383       35
          Pens.
                NI        7       968     7       968     1,170     0            0          0        38       14
          Non- GB        43     1,251    31     5,797     6,214    12      –10,492     –5,832      1285      121
          pens. NI        2       309     2       309       309     0            0          0      1250      329
2009/10
                GB      100       238    79       997     1,078    21       –2,616     –1,094       297       30
          Pens.
                NI        4       494     4       494       521     0            0          0       553      207
          Non- GB        85     1,782    65     5,177     6,236    20       –9,252     –6,257       170       14
          pens. NI        7    –1,990     3     2,218     2,265     4       –5,146     –4,878        68       18
2010/11
                GB       79       702    68     1,048     1,170    11       –1,436       –466       691       69
          Pens.
                NI        4    –1,023     3     1,140     1,245     1       –7,514     –7,514       450      149
          Non- GB        44     4,289    38     5,771     6,251     6       –5,091     –3,793      1038       73
          pens. NI        4     1,862     4     1,862     1,881     0            0          0       528      162
2011/12
                GB       63       546    52       905       986    11       –1,155       –615       840       69
          Pens.
                NI        3       888     3       888       772     0            0          0       800      247
          Non- GB        35     3,000    28     4,736     5,252     7       –3,943     –3,362      1609      110
          pens. NI        2       715     2       715       715     0            0          0      1387      442
2012/13
                GB       69       245    57       992     1,118    12       –3,302       –924       636       49
          Pens.
                NI        6       289     5       727       844     1       –1,905     –1,905       245       76
          Non- GB        22   –10,993    20     5,273     6,671     2      –173,651   –173,651     3705      245
          pens. NI        5       936     4     1,651     1,709     1       –1,920     –1,920       385      131
2013/14
                GB       74     1,191    69     1,352     1,458     5       –1,032      –819        554       42
          Pens.
                NI        7       522     6       731       805     1        –728       –728         92       25
          Non- GB        36     4,082    31     5,520     6,495     5       –4,837     –4,860      1686      117
          pens. NI        4     1,708     4     1,708     1,684     0            0          0       321       84
2014/15
                GB       82       873    71     1,291     1,453    11       –1,826      –835        247       18
          Pens.
                NI        3       578     3       578       479     0            0          0       732      208

Notes: Northern Ireland is included only from 2002/03 onwards. All reported mean and
       median income adjustments are in pounds per week (2014/15 prices). GB: Great
       Britain (England, Wales, Scotland). NI: Northern Ireland. Estimated standard errors in
       parentheses.
Sources: Authors’ calculations from FRS and HBAI data.




                                                vii
                                          FIGURE A1
       Gini coefficients before and after the SPI adjustments (individual gross income)

          0.54                                     HBAI-SPI
                                                   HBAI (HBAI-SPI weights)
                                                   HBAI
          0.53                                     FRS



          0.52


          0.51


          0.50


          0.49


          0.48

              1994/95 1996/97 1998/99 2000/01 2002/03 2004/05 2006/07 2008/09 2010/11 2012/13 2014/15




Notes: Income refers to individual-level gross income (by contrast with Figure 5 which refers
       to equivalised household net income). The individual is the unit of analysis. Estimates
       are based on the population aged 15+. Northern Ireland is included only from 2002/03
       onwards. See Section II for further details of the different series.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on FRS and HBAI data.
(Stata graph Gini1h_ind)




                                                viii
                                         FIGURE A2
              Mean logarithmic deviation (MLD) with and without SPI adjustments
                             (equivalised household net income)

          0.25
                                                           HBAI-SPI
                                                           HBAI
          0.24

          0.23

          0.22

          0.21

          0.20

          0.19

          0.18

          0.17

          0.16
               1994/95 1996/97 1998/99 2000/01 2002/03 2004/05 2006/07 2008/09 2010/11 2012/13 2014/15




Notes: In each series, the distribution is of equivalised household net income among all
       individuals. Northern Ireland is included only from 2002/03 onwards. The income
       definition and series acronyms are explained in Section II.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on FRS and HBAI data.
(Stata graph I0)




                                                  ix
                                                       FIGURE A3
                     Theil index with and without SPI adjustments (equivalised household net income)

                        0.40
                                                                         HBAI-SPI
                                                                         HBAI
                        0.38

                        0.36
                        0.34
                        0.32
Theil index




                        0.30
                        0.28
                        0.26

                        0.24
                        0.22
                        0.20

                        0.18
                             1994/95 1996/97 1998/99 2000/01 2002/03 2004/05 2006/07 2008/09 2010/11 2012/13 2014/15




              Notes: As for Figure A2.
              Source: Authors’ calculations based on FRS and HBAI data.
              (Stata graph I1)




                                                                 x
                                          FIGURE A4
             Half squared coefficient of variation with and without SPI adjustments
                              (equivalised household net income)
          8.00
          7.00               HBAI-SPI
          6.00               HBAI
          5.00
          4.00
          3.00

          2.00



          1.00




               1994/95 1996/97 1998/99 2000/01 2002/03 2004/05 2006/07 2008/09 2010/11 2012/13 2014/15




Notes: As for Figure A2.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on FRS and HBAI data.
(Stata graph I2)




                                                  xi
