NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE INTEGRATION OF ECONOMIC HISTORY INTO ECONOMICS
Robert A. Margo
Working Paper 23538
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23538

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017

I am grateful to Ran Abramitzky, Jeremy Atack, Leah Boustan, Lee Breckenridge, William
Collins, Stanley Engerman, Martin Fiszbein, Claudia Goldin, Kevin Lang, David Mitch, Claudia
Rei, Paul Rhode, John Wallis, Robert Whaples, and participants in the session on “Cliometrics in
Historical Perspective: In Remembrance of Robert Fogel and Douglass North,” held at the ASSA
meetings in Chicago, IL in January 2017 for helpful comments. I acknowledge the generous
assistance of Michael Haupert for helping to complete my collection of CVs of economic
historians; and David Mitch, for altering me to the existence of unpublished documents from the
papers of Robert Fogel held at the University of Chicago and from the papers of Douglass North
held at Duke University. This paper is dedicated to the memory of Robert Fogel and Douglass
North. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Robert A. Margo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Integration of Economic History into Economics
Robert A. Margo
NBER Working Paper No. 23538
June 2017
JEL No. A14,N01
ABSTRACT
In the United States today the academic field of economic history is much closer to economics
than it is to history in terms of professional behavior, a stylized fact that I call the “integration of
economic history into economics”. I document this using two types of evidence – use of
econometric language in articles appearing in academic journals of economic history and
economics; and publication histories of successive cohorts of PhDs in the first decade since
receiving the doctorate. Over time, economic history became more like economics in its use of
econometrics and in the likelihood of scholars publishing in economics, as opposed to economic
history journals. But the pace of change was slower in economic history than in labor economics,
another sub-field of economics that underwent profound intellectual change in the 1950s and
1960s, and there was also a structural break evident for post-2000 PhD cohorts. To account for
these features of the data, I sketch a simple, “overlapping generations” model of the academic
labor market in which junior scholars have to convince senior scholars of the merits of their work
in order to gain tenure. I argue that the early cliometricians – most notably, Robert Fogel and
Douglass North – conceived of a scholarly “identity” for economic history that kept the field
distinct from economics proper in various ways, until after 2000 when their influence had waned.

Robert A. Margo
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
margora@bu.edu

1.0 Introduction
In economics departments in the United States today, the academic field of economic
history is far more economics than history. Freshly minted economic historians with PhDs in
economics write dissertations that are collections of essays, sometimes unrelated, with a
principal “job market paper”, just like in other fields of economics, rather than books-in-waiting
as in history. Many of the freshly-minted will have studied for the PhD in departments where
there is a research group of multiple economic historians and, perhaps, fellow travelers;
dedicated research seminars; and routine doctoral production in the field – again, similar to
other fields of economics.1 Senior faculty mentors in these departments counsel their PhD
students to structure the thesis research – for example, which topics to choose, which
techniques to use, and so on – with the aim of developing the skills necessary to produce
articles on a regular basis for refereed economics journals, ideally the most prestigious general
interest outlets such as the American Economic Review (AER), Journal of Political Economy (JPE),
or the Quarterly Journal of Economics (QJE).

Once the degree is on the horizon, the literally

new economic historian will seek employment as an economist – for example, a tenure track
position as an assistant professor of economics -- for which there is an active and efficient labor
market (Abramitzky 2015).
Compared with just a few decades ago professional behavior in economic history today
falls on a continuum. There are well-known economic historians who are visible in other fields
of economics along with economists who earn fame and fortune in these other fields but who

1

Examples include UC-Berkeley, Boston University, Harvard, Michigan, Northwestern, Stanford, UC-Davis, UCLA,
Vanderbilt, and Yale. Not all of these have dedicated research workshops in economic history but most do.

2

conduct research in economic history from time to time.2 Economic historians are appointed to
prestigious offices or committees in the American Economic Association (AEA), serve on the
editorial boards of mainstream and field journals in economics, are nominated for and
sometimes win major economics prizes, and provide economics expertise as public servants.
These and other related features of professional economic history in the contemporary United
States mentioned in the previous paragraph and this one are markers of a stylized fact that I call
the “integration of economic history into economics”.
I am far from the first scholar to document the integration of economic history into
economics. There are various ways to do so (see, for example, Whaples 1991, 2002), and some
of what I do is related to Abramitzky (2015).3 In the main I shall offer two types of evidence.4
The first derives from automated searching of digitized journal articles using Google Scholar
(GS) to produce indices of instances of the use of econometric language that range between
zero and one (higher values implying more frequent appearance of econometric language in the

2

”Visible” means publishing in economics journals, whether or not the topic is historical. I present evidence this
has become quite common among scholars receiving their PhDs after the year 2000. Examples of economic
historians who received their PhDs after 2000 and who routinely publish in economics journals are Ran Abramitzky
(public economics), Martha Bailey (labor/demographic economics), Leah Boustan (urban economics), Carola
Frydman (corporate finance), and Nathan Nunn (trade). Examples of prominent economists today who do not
consider themselves to be economic historians primarily but who write in economic history from time to time are
Daron Acemoglu, Oded Galor, Robert Gordon, Lawrence Katz, Matthew Kahn, Daniele Paserman, Thomas Piketty,
Claudia Olivetti, Valerie Ramey, and James Robinson.
3
In particular, Abramitzky (2015) also uses GS to show that the percentage of economic history articles appearing
in “top-five” economics journals (e.g. AER) increased after 2000, which is consistent with the findings of my Table
1. See also Seltzer and Hamermesh (2017) who show that economic historians frequently co-author papers, just as
in other fields of economics.
4
In writing this paper I have also been influenced by reading various unpublished documents from the papers of
Robert Fogel, held at the Special Collections Research Center, Regenstein Library, University of Chicago; and from
the papers of Douglass North, held at the Rubinstein Rare Books and Manuscript Collections, at Duke University.
The views expressed in the documents shaped the development of the theoretical framework in section 3, as well
as my discussion of Fogel’s and North’s different views on the appropriate “scholarly identity” for economic
historians employed in economics departments. The documents that were most influential in my thinking can be
found in Boxes 68 and 159 of the Fogel papers and Box 1 of the North papers. I am most grateful to David Mitch
for alerting me to their existence.

3

relevant journal). The searches are programmed such that items (e.g. articles) in which multiple
words or phrases appear are counted only once and that the resulting indices are comparable
across the journals. There are two journals in economic history, the Journal of Economic
History (JEH) and Explorations in Economic History (EEH); two in labor economics, the Industrial
and Labor Relations Review (ILRR) and the Journal of Human Resources (JHR); and one so-called
“top-five” general interest journal, the American Economic Review (AER). All five journals
exhibit a marked increase over time in use of econometric language, which is no surprise
because economics has become more empirical. What is more surprising is that economic
history lagged somewhat behind economics in general – the AER – and labor economics – ILRR
and the JHR – in particular. In the early 1950s there was little or no econometrics to speak of in
the ILRR or the JEH, but there already was a fairly sizeable gap between both and the AER.
There was a sharp rise in econometric language use in the AER between the early 1950s and
mid-1960s, at which point the upward trend flattened out. The ILRR caught up to the AER by
the mid-1970s; and the JHR, which began publishing in the mid-1960s, surpassed the AER in
econometric language use very quickly. Notwithstanding the lag just mentioned, it was quite
reasonable for the eminent econometrician, Nobel Laureate, and occasional economic historian
James Heckman (1997, p. 404) to remark in 1997 that “[c]liometrics has prevailed … [e]conomic
history has been integrated into mainstream economics, statistical and econometric tools are
widely used in conducting systematic empirical analyses of historical topics[.]”
The second type of data are the early publication histories of economic historians with
doctorates in economics, and of labor economists. By “early” I mean the first ten years postPhD, and by “publication history” I mean the classification of published research into various
4

categories – books, and articles in economics journals (e.g. the AER) vs. economic history
journals (e.g. the JEH) versus history (e.g. Agricultural History) or labor economics (e.g. the
Journal of Human Resources), other social science (e.g. Demography). I consider two nonrandom samples of economic historians who received PhDs in economics and one of labor
economists, all arranged by decade of PhD cohort. Sample #1 consists of “prominent”
economic historians, where “prominent” refers to past EHA presidents, JEH or EEH editors,
fellows of the Cliometric Society, and scholars who obtained tenure at “top-10” economics
departments or equivalent business schools.5 Sample #2 consists of individuals who convened
a dissertation session at the annual meetings of the EHA. Conveners are selected by the EHA
president and therefore reflect the preferences of the chooser. Thus, while there is some
overlap between samples #1 and #2, it is less than perfect, and sample #2 is somewhat more
representative of the economic history profession than sample #1. The labor economists are all
prominent, being Fellows of the Society of Labor Economics (SOLE).
Among economic historians, I find a long-run increase in the fraction of articles
published in economics journals, including the “top-five” (e.g. AER) economics journals. Total
journal productivity is roughly constant across cohorts, so the increase in economics publishing
is offset by a decrease in publishing in economic history and other social science outlets, along
with a decrease in the probability of publishing a monograph. Further analysis shows that,

5

The criteria for getting into sample #1 overlap. For example, Jeremy Atack, who received his PhD in the 1970s,
served as EHA president and JEH editor. The standard joke in economics is that there are more than 10 “top-10”
departments – but not that many more. Scholars in sample #1 who are included solely on this criterion, with the
department/school in which tenure was first obtained are Martha Bailey (Michigan), Hoyt Bleakley (Michigan),
Leah Boustan (UCLA), Maristella Botticini (BU), Dora Costa (MIT), Joseph Ferrie (Northwestern), Carola Frydman
(Kellogg), Timothy Guinnane (Yale), Richard Hornbeck (Chicago Booth), Nathan Nunn (Harvard), and Christina
Romer (UC-Berkeley).

5

while these trends are present in the 1980s and 1990s PhD cohorts (relative to the 1970s),
there is a structural break for those obtaining their doctorates after 2000. Thus, just like the
indices of econometric language, the publication histories suggest a lag in the pace at which
economic history integrated into economics. The lag is confirmed when the publications data
for economic historians are compared with those for SOLE fellows. Even as far back as the
pre-1970s PhD cohorts, SOLE fellows published approximately half of their research articles in
top-five journals, with no discernible trend over time.
I offer a simple analytical framework to account for the integration of economic history
into economics. The components are initial conditions, labor market structure/incentives, and
selection.
The initial conditions are those in effect ca. the mid-1950s. Then, as now, economic
historians in the United States sat either in departments of history or economics, not in standalone departments of economic history.6 The discipline of economics was growing rapidly and
there was an emerging demand within economics for evidence on the historical development
of rich countries like the United States, both to serve as grist for policy advice to developing
countries and as the factual basis for growth theory. I see the cliometrics revolution as a
supply-side response, one that could only come from scholars trained in economics

6

Such departments exist elsewhere in the world, e.g. the UK and Europe. While it certainly is of interest to
examine whether professional behavior of scholars in economic history departments differs from that in
economics or history departments, my interest in this paper lies in the United States where cliometrics originated.

6

departments. Since then, the demand in economics for economic history has waxed and
waned for various reasons but it has always been present in one form or another.7
The second component is labor market structure and incentives. By “labor market
structure” I am referring to the “overlapping generations” nature of academic labor markets.
Senior scholars train junior scholars, and also evaluate junior scholars for tenure and
promotion. The incentives are those associated with labor market success – tenure,
promotion, fame; and, on occasion, fortune. Junior scholars value success and therefore pay
close attention to whatever the incentives happen to be in the discipline in which they are
employed when allocating their time, talents, and resources. While I do not model the process
explicitly, I assume that the standard used in evaluating junior scholars is an equilibrium of a
dynamic game consisting of interactions between senior faculty inside and outside the field,
reflecting their respective beliefs about what is meritorious, and their relative bargaining power
in the decision process.
The final component is selection. While economics had already begun to turn analytical
and quantitative relative to history before World War Two, disciplinary differences in PhD
training in the early years of the cliometrics revolution were not as dramatic as they would later
become. History, too, had a brief fling with social science methods that lasted well into the
1970s. In principle and in fact, therefore, two individuals could enter PhD programs in

7

An example of waxing and waning is the requirement in some departments that PhD students in economics take
a course in economic history (or history of thought, if one is offered). The requirement seems to have been
introduced before World War Two. As of the early 1980s, there was such a requirement at Chicago, Harvard, MIT,
Stanford, and Yale. The requirement has been abandoned at Chicago and MIT; at Harvard, students must satisfy a
distribution requirement that can be met by taking an economic history course; Stanford requires that students
take at least one economic history course, as does Yale.

7

economics or history in, say, the mid-1970s; come of the other end as economic historians, one
with a PhD in history and the other, a PhD in economics; and, conceivably, have similar career
trajectories.8 But academic history turned sharply away from quantitative methods in
particular and social science more generally starting in the mid-1970s. Today, individuals who
matriculate into economics PhD programs are highly selected for particular traits, such as
aptitude for advanced mathematics and related quantitative skills that are rewarded in
professional economics, not in professional history. The typical young economic historian
trained in an economics department today has little interest, and virtually no professional
incentives, to seek employment outside of economics.
Although my framework can broadly explain the integration of economic history into
economics, the lag in econometric usage behind labor economics and economics more
generally as well as the structural break in publication histories for post-2000 PhDs sit uneasily.
Cliometricians are accustomed to celebrating their “revolution” per se but unaccustomed
having to explain why the revolution did not happen more quickly.
The integration of economic history into economics can be seen as an interesting
example of the evolution of scholarly “identity” of a subset of scholars within a wider academic
discipline. While all subfields of economics share content and style, there are intellectual
boundaries, sometimes fluid but typically clear, that mark whether an individual self-identifies
primarily as a “labor economist” or a “macroeconomist”. For the most part, these boundaries

8

Well-known examples include Michael Bernstein (currently serving as Provost at Tulane, but formerly a tenured
faculty member in history at UC-San Diego); Philip Hoffman and Naomi Lamoreaux, both former presidents of the
Economic History Association.

8

exist entirely within the discipline of economics – the individual in question is an “economist”
specializing in, say, “public economics”. Economic history is fundamentally different, however,
in that the boundaries cut across two intellectual disciplines, history and economics.9
As cliometrics began to ascend, the identity question came to the fore. One initial, and
powerful impulse was that, to be successful, cliometricians should strive to meet certain
professional norms in history as well as economics. To accomplish this, it was necessary to walk
the walk and talk the talk – publish books as well as articles, perhaps learn a foreign language or
two, visit the archives regularly, and so on. For the purposes of this paper I associate this first
impulse primarily with Robert Fogel, but it was widely accepted by the early cliometricians, not
just Fogel.
A second impulse was the cliometrics needed to be something more than just history
plus regressions and/or empirical economics with older and oft-poorer quality data.10 Pointedly
cliometricans needed to play the role of the gadfly, studying and documenting crucial factors in
growth and development that economic theory had failed to (yet) incorporate. This impulse is
usually associated with Douglass North but it, too, had many adherents. Taken together, the
two impulses created an intellectual “space” in which the early cliometricians, and their
students, could function.
Because cliometrics began to ascend at a time – the 1960s – when American higher
education was growing very rapidly, the robust labor market enabled the early cliometricains to

9

There are other examples in economics, the most obvious being law and economics and, to a (much) lesser
extent, econometric theory, which overlaps with statistics.
10
Or as it was characterized to me once in a job interview – “bad regressions on bad data”.

9

gain tenure, promotion, and influence relatively quickly. Tenure being what it is, this influence
– and therefore, the two impulses just noted – remained strong into the 1980s and even the
1990s, but waned after 2000, once the early cliometricians began leaving the scene. This
institutional structure, in other words, gives rise to a timing that help explains the lag in
econometric language use as well as the structural break in publication histories.
The integration of economic history into economics has brought tangible benefits to
economic historians with PhDs in economics – an active job market with the relatively high
salaries and good working conditions that come with an economics doctorate. Should
economic historians expect this to continue for the foreseeable future? Taking a cue from
Romer (1994) I suggest that one possible end game of current trends is that economic history
might disappear as a separate field in economics. Instead, historical topics for which
economists profess an enduring demand would become part and parcel of each field, but other
topics not so privileged would disappear from economics scholarship and the economics
curriculum, as would generalist courses in economic history taught in economics departments.
Some of these topics might covered elsewhere in the academy minus the economics, which
could be a worse outcome from a social welfare point of view. I argue that the emergence of a
new “history of capitalism” in academic history is a case in point. In a nutshell, there are costs
to integration as well as benefits.
2.0 Background and Empirical Analysis
I set the stage for my empirical analysis by reviewing the history of economic history in
the United States prior to the arrival of cliometrics. As a professional discipline the origins of

10

economic history can be dated to those of academic economics and academic history in the late
nineteenth century (Lamoreaux 2016). Economic historians worked either in economics or
history departments but were sufficiently small in number and similar in outlook and style that
it never made economic sense to establish separate departments of economic history in the
United States. Whether employed in history or economics, the economic historians of the
early twentieth century were largely united by topic and methods. This can be seen easily by
inspecting virtually any of the economic history articles from the period that were published
from time to time in the main economics journals of the time, such as the AER, JPE, or QJE,
which were similar in format and content to articles on economic history topics appearing in,
for example, the American Historical Review which, like the AER, JPE, and QJE, was founded in
the late 1890s.
Beginning in the 1920s, economic analysis began its long march towards the centrality
of quantitative and mathematical methods. Founded in 1933, the journal Econometrica was
intended from the start to be the outlet for such work. As the discipline shifted towards formal
models and quantitative analysis, history began to take a back seat in economics, and fewer
economic history articles appeared in the principle economics journals, especially the AER.
There were some voices in the opposite direction. Economic historians working in
economics departments before World War Two advocated for the greater use of historical
evidence in economics and, simultaneously, greater use of economic methods in historical
analysis. An especially important voice was the National Bureau of Economic Research, which
was founded in 1920 for the purpose of developing a solid statistical basis for understanding

11

changes in the American economy. Another was the EHA, established in 1941 as joint venture
of the American Historical Association and the AEA.
These developments aside, a snap-shot of the economic history profession at midcentury gives the distinct impression of an intellectual backwater. The topics in play were
largely those that had occupied the profession for the preceding half-century. The JEH, which
had been established in 1941 along with the EHA, was entering its second decade of
publication. By the early 1950s regular issues appeared three times a year, with a fourth
devoted to the “The Tasks of Economic History” consisting of papers given at the annual EHA
meeting and summaries of their discussion. A typical issue had three main articles; a similar
number of shorter notes, comments, or review articles; and book reviews – roughly 100 pages
in length, including front and back matter. Reading an issue while taking the train from, say,
New Haven to Manhattan would have been easy – not so today.
Nonetheless, change was in the air. The economics profession began to grow rapidly
after World War Two. Some of this growth can be attributed to rising demand for college
teaching of economics, fueled by the GI Bill, and also to an expanded role for economists in
government. The trends of greater use of mathematics and statistics, already present before
World War Two, accelerated. Research output began to grow, as reflected in a substantial
annual increase in articles submitted to flagship journals like the AER (Margo 2011).
Of singular importance for economic history was the emergence of a specific intellectual
demand from economics for historical evidence on growth. This demand had three
fundamental sources. The first was the National Bureau of Economic Research, previously

12

mentioned. Led by Simon Kuznets, a research group at the NBER was deeply immersed in
developing the infrastructure for extending the measurement of national accounts back in time
and place. The second source was the Cold War, which created a pressing need in the West to
provide policy advice to developing nations lest they fall into the Soviet orbit. The third source
was growth theory which originated before the War but which received a large intellectual
boost with the publication of Solow’s (1956, 1957) fundamental papers. While doctoral
programs in economics at the time often included some coursework in economic history the
courses were very traditional with little connection to the advances in theory and statistics
occurring elsewhere in the discipline.
The time was ripe, therefore, for a revolution to take place, in which the tools of
economics were put to use to provide a body of evidence and rigorous argument that would
supply the growing demand for historical evidence useful in economics. As I shall argue later,
because this demand had its origins in economics, it could only be supplied from within. This
was the cliometrics revolution.
Usage of Econometric Language
I track instances of the use of econometric language over time in five academic journals
– the JEH, EEH, ILRR, JHR, and the AER. The goal of this analysis is to provide a compact way of
measuring when economic history journals began to “look like” labor economics journals in
particular and economics in general (i.e. the AER), in terms of econometric language use.
I search for instances of econometric language with automated text processing of
digitized files using the “advanced” feature of Google Scholar (GS) as the search engine. The
13

searches are programmed in a multi-step process using Boolean logic so as to yield two integer
counts – a numerator and a denominator – for each journal-year pair. The numerator is
intended to capture the number of discrete items (e.g. articles, comments) in a journal-year
pair in which econometric language is used. The denominator is intended to be the population
at risk – items in which econometric language in principle could be used.
Ideally, the searches would begin with an exhaustive list of words and phrases that
objectively characterize what is meant by “econometric language”. To my knowledge, no such
list exists. However, in practice it turns out that a surprisingly brief list can be used, because
when econometrics is objectively present – e.g. there is a regression equation somewhere in
the paper -- the usage of various words and phrases is highly correlated. For example, if the
phrase “instrumental variable” appears in a paper, it is highly unlikely that the word
“regression” does not also appear, so searching for “regression” sweeps in items in which
“instrumental variables” appears. By judiciously choosing a short list of common words and
phrases, I have found that the automated text processing will determine the numerator and
denominator counts with a very high degree of accuracy. My list consists of “table,”
“regression,” “logit,”, “probit”, “coefficient”, “standard error,” and “maximum likelihood”.
The denominator consists of items in a journal-year paper with one or more of these
words or phrases; the numerator is the same, except the word “table” is excluded. Thus, in
effect, the population at risk consists of items in a journal-year paper in which the word “table”
appears, or one or the other words in my list if “table” is not used. By design, the count in the
denominator is greater than or equal to the count in the numerator, so the ratio of the two falls
within the closed interval [0, 1]. In order to smooth out fluctuations, I average the data over
14

five year periods, beginning with 1950-54 and ending with 2005-2009. The averages are
centered on the mid-points of each period (e.g. 1952 for 1950-54).
Figure 1 graphs the indices by journal. GS is linked to JSTOR. For reasons that are not
documented in the program and, therefore, I cannot explain, GS is unable to process items in
the JSTOR digitization of ILRR after the mid-1970s. However, this has no effect on my
substantive conclusions because, as is clear from the figure, by the mid-1970s the index for the
ILRR reaches the level observed for the AER (see below).
The figure reveals that, in the early 1950s, econometrics was already present in the AER,
albeit at much lower frequency than would be the case just a decade or so later. No
econometrics to speak of, however, is present in either the JEH or the ILRR. Starting in the
early 1950s, econometrics begin to feature more prominently in the AER, and the journal’s
index rises steeply. A plateau is reached by the mid-1960s, from which point the index
continues to rise but more slowly. The presence of a plateau is not surprising – the AER is a
general interest journal and, as such, devotes space to economics research which is “applied” in
a broad sense – and thus, the word “table” is present – but for which econometrics is not the
relevant toolkit.
The figure also reveals a “take-off” in the use of econometric language in the ILRR
starting in the early 1950s such that the index reaches the level observed in the AER by the mid1970s. In the case of the JHR, which was established in the mid-1960s, econometrics is well
represented from the very start, and the index reaches the AER level almost immediately. The
index for the JEH also begins to rise ca. 1960 but the rate of change is slower than in the ILRR or

15

the JHR and the JEH index always lies below those for the two labor economics journals (or, for
that matter, the AER). EEH began publication in the mid-1960s and, when it did, its level of
econometric use exceeded that of the JEH, but was below the other journals. EEH caught up to
the AER and JHR by the 1980s and remained more “econometric” than the JEH to the end of the
sample period.
The comparison between economic history and labor economics is telling because,
shortly after WW2, the ILRR was the academic organ of traditional labor economics, which was
heavily institutional at the time. Then, labor economics experienced the “human capital”
revolution, the empirical fruits of which seem to have diffused more rapidly than the analogous
harvest in cliometrics, judging by my indices.
Early Publication Histories
I examine the early publication histories of successive PhD cohorts of economic
historians who received their PhDs in economics. By “early” I mean the first decade post-PhD –
so, for example, if an individual received her PhD in 1985, the relevant period is 1985 to 1995 –
and by “publication history” I mean the distribution of publications by publication type.11 These
types are monographs and refereed articles. I group the articles into those published in
economics journals, economic history journals, and “other”. An example of an economics
journals is the AER or the Journal of Human Resources. An example of an economic history
journal is Explorations in Economic History (EEH) or the JEH. An example of “other” is Historical

11

There is some censoring in the data, because not all individuals receiving their PhDs after 2000 have experienced
the first full decade of their professional career. The bias is extremely modest, however, because there is only one
censored observation in sample #1 (Richard Hornbeck) and two in sample #2 (Eric Chaney and Marianne
Wanamaker).

16

Methods or Agricultural History. I focus on early publication histories because this is what
determines scholarly tenure, which is a central element in my explanatory framework (see
below).
For the population at risk I select two samples. The first, as previously noted, is a
sample of “prominent” economic historians with PhDs in economics where prominence is
determined by having been a president of the EHA, the editor of the JEH or EEH, a fellow of the
Cliometric Society, or having been awarded tenure at “top-10” economics departments or the
business school equivalent. There are 48 scholars included in sample #1; their PhDs were
awarded between 1952 and 2009.
The second sample consists of “conveners” of the dissertation session at the annual
meetings of the EHA. Beginning in the mid-1960s, the EHA regularly sponsors a session at the
annual meeting at which new PhDs make brief presentations of their thesis research. Two
prizes are awarded, one for the “best’ dissertation in American economic history and similarly,
one for the best dissertation on a non-American topic (for example, the British Industrial
Revolution). Typically, three dissertations are chosen per category for presentation at the
meetings, so six in all. There are two conveners, one for each category, and each of whom
selects the winner (“best”) in their category. In almost all cases the conveners publish
comments on the dissertations presented at the meetings in the Journal of Economic History
and thus the conveners can be identified by name.
The conveners are selected by the EHA president. There are no explicit selection criteria
that must be followed. In fact, however, even a minimal glance at the list of conveners makes

17

it obvious that the choices are made with care. Tastes differ – some presidents favor their own
students, while others might showcase someone whom they or a significant fraction of the field
regard as “up-and-coming”. Because of the latter effect, the list of conveners overlaps
somewhat with sample #1. As with sample #1, all individuals in sample #2 received their PhDs
in economics.
For the purposes of this paper, data on publication histories are gleaned from CVs, as
these are very convenient to use, accurate and complete.12 For sample #1, I was able to obtain
CVs on-line or from an archive maintained by the Cliometrics Society for its Fellows. The
conveners sample is less complete, however, for the dissertation sessions of the 1960s and
early 1970s because some of the conveners have died and their CVs are no longer available.
For sessions held from the mid-1970s to the present, I am able to find on-line CVs for most
conveners, and thus the selection bias is modest.
Table 1 shows sample means, grouped by PhD decade, for the two samples of economic
historians. Sample #1 is in Panel A and sample #2 in Panel B. The columns show the fraction
publishing at least one monograph; the average number of monographs conditional on
publishing at least one; the total number of refereed articles; the proportion of articles
published in economics journal; the percent of total articles published in “top-five” economics

12

I have experimented with data extracted from EconLit and similar sources; however, my experience is that it is
extremely difficult – and for some scholars, impossible -- to generate complete publication histories this way. I
have also experimented with using the “Wayback” machine to retrieve old copies of CVs and found it not to be
fruitful.

18

journals; the percent of articles published in economic history journals; and the percent
published in “other” journals.13
The general patterns are fairly clear. Taking sample #1 first, total journal article
productivity is roughly constant across PhD cohorts, but there is a long-term downward trend in
the proportion publishing at least one monograph in the first decade post-PhD. There are also
downward trends in the proportion of total articles published in economic history and in
“other” journals, and corresponding increases in the proportion published in economics
journals, including top-five. The trends are modest, however, until we get to post-2000 PhD
cohorts – or put differently, there is a structural break for scholars obtaining the PhD after the
turn of the century. 14
Measured by the total number of journal articles sample #2 is somewhat less productive
than sample #1, particularly among scholars who obtained their PhDs in the 1990s. Otherwise,
the trends in publication histories are broadly similar across the two samples, as is the
occurrence of a structural break post-2000.

13

The “top-five” economics journals are those generally agreed upon -- the AER, JPE, QJE, Econometrica, and The
Review of Economics Studies. The results are somewhat sensitive, however, to the exclusion and/or substitution of
The Review of Economics and Statistics (RESTAT) which published some cliometrics articles in the 1970s and 1980s.
Even if RESTAT is included, however, the sharp break evident for post-2000 PhDs in publication histories would still
be present.
14
It might be argued that the post-2000 cohorts benefited from the introduction by the AEA of the AEJ journals,
which function somewhere between a top-five and a top field journal. An individual receiving her PhD in 2000 by
definition could not publish in an AEJ during the first decade post-PhD. Using sample #1, if I assume every paper
published in an AEJ by a post-2000 PhD cohort scholar would have been, instead, published in an economic history
journal instead if the AEJs had never been introduced, the proportion of articles published in economic history
journals increases to 19.1 percent for the post-2000 PhD cohort, still far below the percent so published by the
pre-2000 PhD cohorts. In other words, the structural break is robust to the introduction of the AEJ journals. I am
grateful to Ran Abramitzky for raising this issue.

19

Sample sizes are too small for a detailed regression analysis, but one might wonder if
the patterns are affected by differences across PhD granting institutions. Accordingly, I
estimated regressions for which the dependent variables are the same as in the column titles in
Table 1; the right-hand side variables are either dummies for decade of PhD or linear time
trends, plus a full set of PhD-granting institution dummies. The results (not shown) do not
affect my substantive conclusions about trends in publication histories across cohorts or the
post-2000 structural break.
Finally, Panel C shows sample means of early publication histories of Fellows of the
Society of Labor Economics. Without question SOLE Fellows are prominent labor economists,
by definition, and, indeed, prominent economists in general (e.g. James Heckman, who is
included in Panel C). There are three patterns worthy of comment in Panel C. First, book
publishing was not just the province of economic historians with PhDs from before 1970; it was
also fairly common among SOLE fellows, although not as common as among economic
historians. However, book publishing among SOLE Fellows plummets among the post-1970
cohorts, long before it does so among economic historians. Second, SOLE fellows, essentially
from the very beginning, have always been frequent contributors to top-five journals –
basically, about half of the refereed articles produced in the first decade since the PhD. 15
Third, the proportion of articles published in labor economics journals, rather surprisingly, has
always been quite low, about it increases to about a quarter for the PhD cohorts between 1970
and 1990, which reflects the entry of new journals, such as the Journal of Labor Economics, into

15

Note, as well, that if “general mainstream” is included beyond the top-five to include, for example, RESTAT or
the Economic Journal, the proportions rise to three-quarters or higher, depending on the cohort.

20

the academic market. But for the post-1990 cohort, it is clearly back to publishing primarily in
mainstream journals. Overall, the data for SOLE Fellows confirms the relatively slow pace of
integration of economic history into economics, until the post-2000 PhD cohort.
3.0 Integrating Economic History into Economics: An Explanatory Framework
I sketch in words a simple analytical framework to explain the integration of economic
history into economics. The framework has several moving parts – initial conditions; labor
market structure; and selection. The “theory” part of the framework pertains to labor market
structure, so I start with this.
Labor Market Structure
On the supply side, there are individuals – scholars -- who engage in scholarship and
teaching; on the demand side, there are university departments that hire scholars.
Departments and “disciplines” are equivalent, so there are departments of economics, of
history, and so on. Departments (disciplines) are divided into fields – for example, labor
economics is a field in Economics, “Early Modern Europe” a field in History. “Economic history”
can be a field either in economics or history (or both) but is not itself a discipline (see below).
There is an “overlapping generations” structure to the academic labor market. Scholars
live for three periods. In period #1, a person enters a disciplinary PhD program and devotes all
of her time to human capital investment, eventually obtaining a PhD that qualifies her for
employment in a disciplinary university department. In period #2, she is hired as an assistant
professor and devotes all of her time to research.

21

At the end of period #2, our assistant professor faces an “up or out” vote of the period
#3 faculty at her institution. If a majority vote in favor she advances to period #3 faculty –
senior status or “tenure”; if negative, she takes an outside option. Upon receiving tenure, she
spends part of her time training PhD students (period #1 scholars) and part of her time
evaluating assistant professors (period #2 scholars) for advancement.
Each senior faculty member in department j has one vote in an “up or out” tenure
decision. In deciding which way to vote the senior faculty member personally evaluates the
research of the tenure candidate and also takes into account the opinions of the other senior
faculty in the department and also external senior faculty in the same field as the candidate.
These external scholars do not vote per se but offer their opinions as to whether the vote
should be up or out. Thus, the outcome of the tenure decision depends on a weighted average
of the opinions of internal senior faculty in the same field as the tenure candidate (if any), the
external senior faculty in the same field whose opinions are solicited, and the opinions of
internal senior faculty in other fields.
In evaluating a tenure case, I assume that senior faculty, whether internal or external,
apply reference standards that are specific to the discipline, field, and their PhD cohort.16
These standards refer to content, method – for example, the use of econometrics – and form –
journal articles versus books. Because the tenure decision is a disciplinary one, and all of the

16

See Poelmanns and Rousseau (2016) for evidence that disciplinary standards strongly affect the format and
publication outlets chosen by junior scholars in economic history; and Diamond (1980) for evidence from the late
1970s that year of PhD influenced an economic historian’s “acceptance” of cliometrics in the direction (negative,
meaning older is less accepting) implied by my framework. Implicit in my argument is that the gatekeeping
function of period #3 faculty has value, both to the gatekeepers and to those being evaluated. Alternatively, we
can imagine a hierarchy beyond the department that values academic prestige and has sanctions in place that
guard against a breakdown of tenure standards.

22

voting senior faculty have PhDs in the relevant discipline, it is reasonable to hypothesize that, in
equilibrium, the disciplinary component of the standards will be prominent and, to a first
approximation, broadly similar across fields within a discipline. Thus, for example, candidates
in fields in economics would be expected to offer a research portfolio in which multiple journal
articles are present, for such has long been the disciplinary norm in economics. Whereas, in
history, a tenure candidate would be expected to offer one (or more) books, because books are
the scholarly norm in history.
Crucially, by making the standards depend on PhD cohort of period #3 faculty I am
introducing a lag structure in faculty opinion that potentially will feed back on the behavior of
period #2 faculty and, consequently, tenure outcomes. To keep the time line squarely in mind,
at date T = N, period #2 scholars up for tenure received their PhDs in N – 1 and are evaluated by
period #3 scholars who received their PhDs in period N – 2.
Initial Conditions, Sorting, and the Cliometrics Revolution
I posit several initial conditions before running a thought experiment. The first initial
condition is that there are departments of economics and departments of history, but no
departments of economic history. Instead, “economic history” is a subject that exists in both
economics and history departments; however, an economic historian hired in an economics
department still has to have a PhD in economics (and vice versa, in a history department).
Initially, however, the labor market for economic historians is in equilibrium such that the
standards for promotion have a common component, regardless of whether the scholar is
employed in history or in economics. As a concrete example, we could suppose that an

23

economic historian in an economics department can present a book for tenure that substitutes
for some quantity of articles in economics journals that would otherwise be expected of
candidates in economics.17
Second, I assume that, PhD training in economics requires investment in certain types of
technical skills –for example, mathematics and statistics – which in the initial equilibrium have
no special use or value for historians or for economic historians, whether the latter are
employed in history or in economics departments. If individuals were identical ex ante, there
would be a compensating differential for economic historians employed in economics
department; instead, I shall assume that individuals differ in their ability or comparative
advantage in the aforementioned technical skills. Those with a comparative advantage at
learning technical skills “sort” into PhD economics programs.
Third, a shock occurs at date T = K that creates a new demand for the use of technical
skills in economic history in economics departments. We can think of this shock as derived
from research undertaken by period #3 faculty in economics departments when they were
themselves junior scholars but who are not themselves economic historians – for example, in
order to test a new theory of economic growth a long time-series of GNP is necessary which,
presently, does not exist but which requires technical skills to construct.
To run the model, note that the shock creates an incentive for period #2 economic
historians at date T=K to supply what is demanded, but this cannot come from economic

17

To consider another pertinent alternative, senior economic historians might convince their senior colleagues in
other fields that junior economic historians will promote the discipline of economics by publishing in history
outlets, and this advances the discipline overall.

24

historians employed in history departments because of the sorting assumption. The supply will
necessarily come from period #2 economic historians employed in economics departments.
However, period #2 economic historians in economics departments will soon be
evaluated for tenure. They are evaluated by period #3 economists and economic historians
who received their PhDs in period K – 2 – that is, before the shock. The senior economists like
what the “new” economic historians are doing because it uses technical skills to respond
affirmatively to the demand instigated by the senior economists in K-1. Senior economic
historians, however, place no special value on the use of technical skills because the skills
previously were not used by them. To successfully advance period #2 economic historians in
time period K must figure out how to “package” their research to appeal to two masters – both
the senior economic historians and economists who are evaluating their work. The successful
ones advance to tenure status, and help train period #1 scholars and evaluate period #2
scholars at t = K + 1.
At time K+ 1 the period #2 scholars will now have to gain the support of period #3
economic historians as well as other senior economists. Period #3 economic historians will
expect more technical work in the tenure portfolios they evaluate, because it was expected of
them, but they will also expect that the work will appeal to historians because that, too, was
expected of them. As the model continues to run, the content and form of the research
portfolios of economic historians who are successful getting tenure in economics departments
will become closer in content and form to other fields in economics.

25

The above describes the evolution of the model in response to a demand shock in
economic history. Suppose, instead, that a “technique” demand shock occurs in, say, labor
economics, in which the “interdisciplinary” forces at play in economic history are not present.
Period #2 labor economists still have to convince their elders, some of whom may be reluctant
– but, presumably, there are relatively fewer of these than in the case of economic history. We
expect, therefore, that the demand shock will be absorbed more quickly if it is purely in
economics rather than interdisciplinary.
To summarize thus far, the basic prediction of the model is that, as long as economic
historians continue to be in demand in economics departments, there will be convergence in
the tenure portfolios of period #2 faculty and economic historians employed in economics will
increasingly “look like” other economists. This occurs because of the nature of the incentives
for advancement and the “overlapping generations” structure of the labor market. The speed of
convergence can be fairly quick, but ultimately depends on the precise nature of the standards
employed in evaluating faculty and the relative weight given to the different “interest groups”
among period #3 faculty. If, for example, disciplinary standards are strongly favored in the
voting, convergence can be very rapid.
As noted above, one of my initial conditions is that economics has a technical
component to the skill set, which induces sorting. If the technical component increases over
time, differences in the skill sets between economic historians in economics and history
departments will widen across cohorts. As a result, the content, and possibly the form, will
diverge, perhaps to the point where there will be little or no overlap, even though the field has
the same nominal title in both disciplines.
26

4.0 Discussion and Speculation
In a broad sense Figures 1-3 and Table 1 appear consistent with my model.
Econometric usage in economic history eventually converges with that in economics. Over time
successive PhD generations of economic historians who were employed in economics
departments shifted their early publication portfolios towards economics publication outlets
and away from economic history outlets and book publishing. Subtler features of the data,
however, raise some puzzles. Econometric language use diffused earlier in economics than in
economic history, which is consistent with the framework. However, more specialized methods
diffused more r rapidly in economic history once diffusion started.
My framework reminds us that the first generation of cliometricians had to appeal to
more traditional economic historians as well as economists who wished to encounter a more
“economic” economic history. The diffusion of regression methods in economic history is a
case in point.18 To glean further insight into this diffusion I have read through all of the articles
in the Journal of Economic History in the 1960s that the text processing indicated the word
“regression” was used in the econometrics sense. This is less work than might be imagined,
because there are only 16 such appearances in the 1960s JEH, or roughly 1 in every 20 items in
the population at risk.
In reading the articles it Is not just that they are infrequent; it is also that the manner in
which econometric results are presented and discussed is different from the norm just a decade

18

Other factors not explicitly in my model may be relevant. An example is the availability of data for econometric
analysis. The early cliometricians had to develop these data from scratch – typically, from archival sources –
whereas labor economists, for example, benefited immediately from the availability of household surveys like the
public use sample of the 1960 federal census.

27

or so later. Typically, results are briefly discussed in the text and specific details, if any,
reported in a footnote. Econometrics is never the main event and it is rarely organic, in the
sense that one cannot imagine the same points being made another way. Authors go out of
their way to downplay the novelty of regression.
Fast forwarding to the late 1970s and beyond, regression was still less frequent in
economic history than in economics proper but the gap was closing, and concomitantly, it was
no longer novel and the presentation of results could come out from the cold. When an exotic
technique – logit/probit – proved worthy, it appears in economic history with a lag but then the
gap narrows with more quickly than in the case of regression.
The specific timing here is relevant. The more exotic techniques enter the economics
canon well after the onset of cliometrics, unlike regression, which enters before. Once the
diffusion of these techniques begins in economic history it is more rapid than in economics –
opposite the pattern for regression. This more rapid diffusion occurs at a time when the
publication histories of successive PhD cohorts in economic history also had started to turn
towards economics and away from history. That said, my framework suggests steady
convergence, not a structural break, as occurred in the publication histories of the post-2000
PhD cohorts.
I have argued that the cliometrics revolution was a supply-side response to a specific
demand from economics. However, once the first generation of cliometricians took a careful
look at the economic history literature they inherited it proved to be an irresistible target, an
end in itself. From the perspective of academic economics, the intellectual holes looked wide

28

and deep, the academic equivalent of shooting fish in a barrel.19 Relatively early in the 1960s
the JEH came under the sway of cliometrics through the appointment of like-minded editors
and editorial board members. New journals of “quantitative history” were established such as
the Journal of Interdisciplinary History, Historical Methods, and Social Science History. For
papers thought to be too technical for the JEH or an interdisciplinary outlet, along came
Explorations in Economic History in 1969.
With the benefit of hindsight, one can certainly question whether that the goal of
subjecting as much of history as possible to cliometric scrutiny was worth the scholarly effort
allocated to it. After the initial novelty wore off, economics decided it had limited interest in
who won which historical debate and why, and the formats and outlets favored – monographs
and “interdisciplinary” journals – had less prestige value than economics journals. History, too,
began to part with cliometrics by the mid-to-late 1970s, in part because of the rancorous
debate over Fogel and Engerman (1974) but also simply because economics was becoming ever
more technical. Demand for one of the scholarly activities privileged by the early
cliometricians – “reinterpreting” (see Fogel and Engerman 1971) the pre-existing literature -began to dry up.
The impulse in early cliometrics towards reforming history is commonly associated with
one Nobelist in the field, Robert Fogel. Another impulse was to use economic history to reform
economics. This impulse is associated with Douglass North, the other Nobelist in economic

19

As Fogel reminisced about the early years of his graduate teaching, “I challenged [PhD] students to pick any page
at random from whatever history book they had at hand. The odds were … that there’d be either an explicit or
implicit quantitative statement that needed to be measured. The challenge was often taken up and I was never
shown up[.]” The quotation is from Williamson and Lyons (2013, p. 350).

29

history. North’s dissertation was traditional business history, but he quickly signed on to the
cliometrics revolution, and his work in the late 1950s and early 1960s reflects this. But, by the
late 1960s and early 1970s, North had shifted gears towards institutions and institutional
change for which he is honored today. North believed that economic theory and econometrics
were powerful tools but the models favored in economics at the time – for example, the Solow
growth model – were seriously flawed because they omitted or downplayed factors that North
felt were first order. North frequently chided cliometricians for not doing enough to change
economics and for becoming too cozy with the status quo (see, for example, North 1997)
The impulse that economic history should reform economics may have had a similar
effect in moderating the speed of integration. It is not often that disciplinary criticism is
successful. A critic may have a worthy target, but not necessarily the means to fix the problem.
Economics eventually did buy into the idea that institutions matter and the requisite tools did
appear once the theory of dynamic games developed to the point where it could be applied
profitably to institutions and institutional change (Acemoglu and Robinson 2006). But these
tools came from economics proper, not economic history.
To the extent that the impulses just described caused the first few waves of students of
the early cliometricians to integrate more slowly with economics than otherwise, the effects
can be seen in the publication histories of the 1970s cohorts, and perhaps, even the 1980s and
1990s. Book publication was universal, and the vast majority of journal articles appeared in
economic history or “other” journals – roughly six of every seven – than in economics journals.
The 1980s and 1990s cohorts had begun to move towards economics outlets, but the changes
were relatively modest on average.
30

Why, then, does the structural break occur? One simple explanation is that the battles
that engaged the early cliometricians no longer had sway over younger scholars, due to cohort
succession. Another is that various second or third generation cliometricians gradually
stepped in, taking over from Fogel, North, and the other early cliometricians, serving as role
models for integration. For example, Claudia Goldin’s early articles and first book (Goldin 1976)
were squarely in the Fogelian tradition but her second book (Goldin 1990) and the articles
associated with it addressed a far larger core audience in economics, showing how historical
evidence could reshape and advance fundamental topics in labor economics as well as
economic history. Christina Romer’s various papers on spurious volatility in aggregate time
series (e.g. Romer 1986) provided spectacular examples of how a large and very important
field, macroeconomics, could go wildly astray by collectively forgetting the historical details
underlying the sources of macroeconomic data. Goldin was a PhD student of Robert Fogel’s.
Her PhD students, among those of other second and third generation cliometricians who
participated in this “quiet revolution” of sorts, are some of the post-2000 PhD economic
historians who, as Table 1 shows, shifted their publication sharply toward economics,
accelerating the pace of integration.20
I suspect, however, that a role model explanation is not the full story behind the
structural break. In the early 2000s development economics found new common cause with
economic history, one not rooted in the “lessons” from the past achievements of developed
countries but rather how “natural experiments” in the distant past could explain contemporary

20

For example, Leah Boustan, a PhD student of Goldin’s, is in the post-2000 part of sample #1. Of the 13 articles
Boustan published in the first ten years after her PhD, 11 appeared in economics journals.

31

differences in per capita income (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson 2001; Diamond and
Robinson, 2011). The formal theory of economic growth was revitalized with the development
of so-called “endogenous growth models” which, as in the 1950s and 1960s, created a burst of
enthusiasm for economic history in the growth field (e.g. Galor and Weil 2000).
Macroeconomists discovered that dynamic general equilibrium models could be applied to
problems in long-term growth, such as the shift of labor out of agriculture, the demographic
transition, and rising female labor force participation (e.g. Greenwood, Seshadri, and
Vandenbroucke 2005). The vast majority of economists who participated in these lines of
research were not trained as economic historians but their collective willingness to pursue such
topics was a signal that historical evidence and argument remained important to a broad swath
of economics. But that broad swath of economics was accustomed to publishing and reading
articles in economics journals, not in economic history journals. This, too, was a signal, to
which the post-2000 PhD generation of economic historians appears to have responded loudly
and clearly.
In addition, there is the relative profitability of an economics career to be considered.
Although (much) more research needs to be done on long run trends of salaries in economics
relative to other fields, it appears that when cliometrics came into being differences in salaries
and other aspects of working conditions between economics and history were not large. But,
by the end of the twentieth century and certainly today, starting salaries for economic
historians are far higher in economics departments, and jobs much more plentiful, than in
history. In addition, today there are significant economic returns in economics to publishing in
“top-five” journals like the American Economic Review or the Quarterly Journal of Economics;
32

there are analogous, if smaller, returns to publishing in the American Economic Association’s
field journals (for example, the American Economic Journal: Applied Economics). To some
extent, therefore, the post-2000 PhD generation of economic historians is simply responding to
these incentives by choosing to publish a (much) larger fraction of their total production of
articles outside of economic history outlets.
Speculation: The End of Economic History?
One can speculate about the future of economic history, assuming that integration of
economic history into economics does not reverse course. I am not the first to engage in such
an exercise – see, in particular, Romer (1994) who, in the aftermath of the awarding of Nobels
to Fogel and North, provocatively queried whether there might be an “end” to economic
history.
By raising the question Romer was, in effect, pointing out the endogeneity of “fields” in
an academic discipline (see also Stigler 1984). Fields exist for good economic reasons because
they are focal points for scholars seeking fellow travelers with associated infrastructure –
journals, conferences – where division of labor can occur and intellectual agglomeration
economies realized. However, fields are not set in stone. Economic history is a case in point.
In my framework, economic history is demanded in economics because historical
evidence is valued for reasons that may vary over time but which never entirely vanish. The
model does not specify why but in the real world, not all historical evidence is created equal.
As McCloskey (1976) famously quipped, the past does have useful economics, but not

33

everything that economic historians do is useful in economics. Moreover, the useful bits are
not necessarily supplied by individuals who self-identify as economic historians.
One end game has economic history disappearing as a separate field in economics but
historical content is still part of economics. Under this scenario, historical evidence and
argument relevant to fields like labor or public finance would be developed primarily by
specialists within these fields. There would be no generalist keepers of the historical flame but,
rather, public economists whose job it is to study and teach about the history of, say, taxation
and government finance; labor economists who study and teach about the evolution of
retirement; macroeconomists who look to events of the past like the Great Depression for
evidence to evaluate theories about fiscal multipliers; and development economists who have
extracted what they believe to the key features of early industrialization, if any, that are
deemed relevant for policy advice today. The knowledge developed in each of the fields
would be integrated into PhD field courses, but generalist economic history courses would
almost certainly pass from the economics curriculum.21 It seems obvious that, were this to
occur, many topics that have been part and parcel of such courses would no longer be taught in
economics, although specific aspects might still retain sufficient interest for instruction.22 A
similar dynamic would be true of economics research.

21

This would happen in the model because no faculty in economics would be sufficiently knowledgeable to teach
them. Instead, relevant historical topics in health would be covered in courses in health economics.
22
The possibility that specific historical topics might still be sufficiently in demand might also provide incentives for
covering the more general historical context. For example, if public finance economists thought that the New Deal
experience provided useful evidence for understanding the local effects of government expenditures, students
might still learn more broadly about the Great Depression.

34

Thinking this way calls attention to an important and, arguably, negative externality
associated with the integration of economic history into economics. The loss of courses and
research topics from the economics curriculum may be socially undesirable compared with
having the same topics re-emerge elsewhere in the academy. A current, controversial example
is the so-called “History of Capitalism”. On paper, historians of capitalism are history PhDs
who are interested in some of the same topics that have long captivated cliometricians, such as
the economics of American slavery. However, historians of capitalism conduct their business
eschewing economic methods and largely ignoring past scholarship in cliometrics, even when
the latter is directly on point. Economic historians who have looked carefully at the recent
literature of the history of capitalism find scholarly lapses of fact and interpretation so prolific
in number and egregious in content that it is easy to be dismissive of the entire line of research
– except that books by historians of capitalism have been nominated for prestigious national
awards, such as the Pulitzer Prize (Olmstead and Rhode 2016; Hilt, forthcoming).
Like all academic fields, history is subject to whims and fashion, and the history of
capitalism may be today’s but not tomorrow’s fancy. But it is a reminder that it is not only in
economics that there is demand for economic history. History retains some such demand, as
do other social sciences, as does the general public. The more integrated economic history
becomes in economics, the less likely it that economists will engage productively with these
other demands.

35

5.0 Concluding Remarks
In higher education in the United States today there are only a few academic disciplines
for which it can be said that there is a relatively robust demand for new PhDs. Economics is
one of these disciplines. New PhDs in economics have opportunities not only in universities
but also the private sector and in government. Not only are there more jobs, but pay and
working conditions are far better than in the humanities or natural sciences, on average. At
present, PhD economists who self-identify as economic historians can have their cake, and eat
it, too.

There may be a future in which economic history is no longer a separate field in

economics, but it would be very surprising, indeed – and, I would argue, very unlikely --- if
historical evidence was not part of the conversation of academic economics at some level.
We can have our cake and eat it too because, over the past several decades, economic
history has integrated into economics. This integration was largely inevitable once the initial
demand shock took place calling forth the cliometrics revolution. I say “inevitable” because
the nature of the shock and the institutional environment created strong incentives for scholars
doing economic history to follow the money. I say “largely” because strong incentives, by
themselves, do not guarantee conforming behavior. By and large, though, the incentives
worked.
I have largely refrained in this paper from engaging in normative analysis – that is,
whether the integration of economic history into economics is desirable on social welfare
grounds. A simple revealed preference argument of desirability suffices for particular
economic historians who followed the path of integration. I believe that integration is desirable

36

for economic history and economics beyond what it means for individual economic welfare. At
the end of the day, there are only two types of empirical evidence in economics – experimental
and observational. There is too little of the former to be broadly useful in all fields of
economics, so we cannot avoid the use of observational data. By definition, all observational
data in economics sit in a particular historical context. There may be excellent reasons to
downplay or simply ignore the historical context in any particular analysis, as is the norm in
much of empirical economics. But this is not obvious ex ante; putting the context front and
center is the essence of economic history, its fundamental contribution to economics per se.
That said, there are social costs to integration. As economic history integrates,
economic historians burrow deeper into the other field(s) of economics in which their topic fits.
At some point, scholarly identity may shift to the other field – lock, stock, and barrel. Such
trends are accentuated as economics becomes ever more technical. The “big picture”
disappears from view or is taken up elsewhere, and not always for the better. Individuals
benefit from integration but economic historians with PhDs in economics lose influence in the
broader conversation.
As an intellectual endeavor cliometrics has been around for almost six decades and
economics is far older. As a field of study, the history of economic thought has largely been
intellectual history rather than about the historical evolution of the industrial organization of
economics – its nuts and bolts, how it works. Consequently, there is much about the evolution
that is obscure or poorly understood. Economic historians may have some comparative
advantage in doing the economic history of economics, as I hope this paper suggests.

37

Figure 1

Source: see text.

38

Table 1
Early Publication Histories: “Prominent” Economic Historians with PhDs in Economics
Panel A: Sample #1, First 10 Years post-PhD
PhD
Decade

P(Book)>0

Mean
Number
of
Books if
>0
1.44

Mean
Number
of
Refereed
Articles
9.8

Percent of
Total in
Economics
Journals

Percent of Percent
Percent N
Economics of Total in of Total
in Top
Economic in Other
General
History
Interest
Journals
19500.83
31.2%
32.4%
60.2%
9.2%
12
1969
{58.3}
19700.93
1.15
14.9
18.1
29.6
61.1
20.8
14
1979
{59.3}
19800.67
1.33
12.4
34.9
39.3
45.2
19.9
9
1989
{76.7}
19900.50
1.33
13.0
40.0
38.5
44.6
15.4
6
1999
{51.3}
20000.11
1.00
12.9
78.2
28.8
20.2
1.7
9
2009
{59.4}
Source: compiled from CVs. 1950-69: Fred Bateman, Lance Davis, Stanley Engerman, Robert Fogel,
Peter Lindert, Larry Neal, Douglass North, Peter Temin, Richard Sylla, Thomas Weiss, Jeffrey Williamson,
and Gavin Wright. 1970-79: Lee Alston, Jeremy Atack, Barry Eichengreen, Alexander Field, Claudia
Goldin, Michael Haines, John James, John Komlos, Gary Libecap, Deidre McCloskey, Joel Mokyr, Alan
Olmstead, Hugh Rockoff, and Richard Steckel. 1980-89: Ann Carlos, Price Fishback, Avner Grief, Timothy
Guinnane, Robert Margo, Christina Romer, Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, John Wallis, and Eugene White.
1990-1999: Maristella Botticini, William Collins, Dora Costa, Joseph Ferrie, Paul Rhode, and HansJoachim Voth. 2000-2009: Ran Abramitzky, Martha Bailey, Hoyt Bleakley, Daniel Bogart, Leah Boustan,
Carola Frydman, Richard Hornbeck, Kris Mitchener, and Nathan Nunn. Top General Interest: Outside
parentheses: American Economic Review, Econometrica, Journal of Political Economy, Quarterly Journal
of Economics, Review of Economic Studies; in { } includes all general interest. Papers published prior to
receipt of PhD are included.
Panel B: Conveners Sample
PhD
Decade

P(Book)>0

Mean
Total
Number of
Refereed
Articles
12.5

Percent of
Total in
Economics
Journals

1.00

Mean
Number
of
Books if
>0
1.25

19701979
19801989
19901999

0.67

1.70

12.7

27.6

0.36

1.25

8.5

26.4

4.0%

39

Percent of
Economics
in Top-Five

Percent of
Total in
Economic
History
Journals
76.0%

Percent
of Total in
Other

30.4

56.2

16.2

31.0

62.7

10.9

0.0%

20.0%

20000.22
1.50
10.3
58.1
23.9
38.7
3.2
2009
Source: compiled from on-line CVs. Sample size is 52; 4 in row #1 (1970s), 16 in row #2 (1980s), 13 in
row #3 (1990s; and 9 in row #4 (2000s). Calculations in Panel B proceed in the same manner as in Panel
(e.g. definition of top-five).
Panel C: Fellows of the Society of Labor Economics (SOLE)
PhD
Decade

P(Book)>0

Mean
Number
of
Books if
>0

Mean
Total
Number
of
Refereed
Articles

Percent of
Total in
Economics
Journals,
Non-Labor

Percent of Percent of Percent N
Economics Total in
of Total
(NonLabor
in Other
Labor) in
Economics
Top
Journals
General
Interest
19500.55
1.80
11.4
78.0%
54.0%
13.2%
8.9%
10
1969
{87.6%}
19700.18
2.00
16.9
63.6
49.5
25.2
11.2
15
1979
{76.4}
19800.25
1.00
17.5
72.4
46.4
23.2
4.4
17
1989
{70.7}
19900.09
1.00
14.1
84.4
54.1
12.9
2.7
11
1999
{80.1}
Notes: Sample consists of Fellows of the Society of Labor Economics for whom on-line CVs could be
found. Top General Interest: Outside { }, top five, see Panel A; in { }: includes all general interest
economics journals.

40

References
Abramitzky, Ran. 2015. “Economics and the Modern Economic Historian,” Journal of
Economic History 75 (December): 1240-1251.
Acemoglu, Daron; Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic
Review 91 (December): 1369-1401.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson. 2006. Economic Origins of Dictatorship and
Democracy. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Diamond, Arthur M., Jr. 1980. “Age and the Acceptance of Cliometrics,” Journal of
Economic History 40 (December): 838-841.
Diamond, Jared and James A. Robinson (eds). 2011. Natural Experiments of History.
Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Fishlow, Albert. 1961. “The Trustee Savings Banks, 1817-1861,” Journal of Economic
History 21: 26-40.
Fogel, Robert W. and Stanley L. Engerman. 1971. The Reinterpretation of American
Economic History. New York: Harper & Row.
Fogel, Robert W. and Stanley L. Engerman. 1974. Time on the Cross: The Economics of

41

American Negro Slavery. New York: Little, Brown.
Galor, Oded and David Weil. 2000. “Population, Technology and Growth: From Malthusian
Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond,” American Economic
Review 90 (September): 806-828.
Goldin, Claudia. 1976. Urban Slavery in the American South: A Quantitative History.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Goldin, Claudia. 1990. Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of
American Women. New York: Oxford University Press.
Greenwood, Jeremy; Ananth Seshardi; and Guillaume Vandenbroucke. 2005.
“The Baby Boom and the Baby Bust,” American Economic Review 95 (March):
183-207.
Heckman, James J. 1997. “The Value of Quantitative Evidence on the Effect of the Past on the
Present,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 87 (May): 404-408.
Hilt, Eric. Forthcoming. “Economic History, Historical Analysis, and the ‘New History of
Capitalism’,” Journal of Economic History.
Lamoreaux, Naomi R. 2016. “Beyond the Old and New: Economic History in the United
States,” in F. Boldizzoni and Pat Hudson, eds. Routledge Handbook of Global

42

Economic History, pp. 35-54. New York: Routledge.
Margo, Robert A. 2011. “The Economic History of the American Economic Review: A
Century’s Explosion of Economics Research,” American Economic Review 101
(February): 9-35.
McCloskey, D. N. 1976. “Does the Past Have Useful Economics?” Journal of
Economic Literature 14 (June): 434-461.
North, Douglass. 1997. “Cliometrics – 40 Years Later,” American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings 87 (May): 412-414.
Olmstead, Alan L. and Paul W. Rhode. 2016. “Cotton, Slavery, and the New History of
Capitalism,” working paper, Department of Economics, University of
Michigan.
Poelmans, Eline; and Sandra Rousseau. 2016. “Quantifying the Heterogeneity of
Publication Cultures in Economic, Business, and Financial History,” Essays
in Economic and Business History 34: 95-135.
Romer, Christina. 1986. “Spurious Volatility in Historical Unemployment Data,”
Journal of Political Economy 94: 1-37.
Romer, Christina. 1994. “The End of Economic History?” Journal of Economic Education

43

25 (Winter): 49-66.
Selzer, Andrew J. and Daniel S. Hamermesh. 2017. “Co-Authorship in Economic History and
Economics: Are We Different?” working paper, Deparment of Economics, Royal
Holloway University of London.
Solow, Robert M. 1956. “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 70 (February): 65-94.
Solow, Robert M. 1957. “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function,” The
Review of Economics and Statistics 39 (August): 312-320.
Stigler, George. 1984. “Economics: The Imperial Science?” Scandinavian Journal of
Economics 86 (September): 301-313.
Whaples, Robert. 1991. “A Quantitative History of the Journal of Economic History and the
Cliometrics Revolution,” Journal of Economic History 51 (June): 289-301.
Whaples, Robert. 2002. “The Supply and Demand of Economic History: Recent Trends
in the Journal of Economic History,” Journal of Economic History 62 (June): 524-532.
Williamson, Samuel H. and John S. Lyons. 2013. “Interview with Robert W. Fogel,” in J.S.
Lyons, L. P. Cain, and S. H. Willison, eds. Reflections on the Cliometrics Revolution:
Conversations with Economic Historians, pp. 332-353. Paperback edition. New

44

York: Routledge.

45

