NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNAL CAPITAL MARKETS IN TIMES OF CRISIS:
THE BENEFIT OF GROUP AFFILIATION IN ITALY
Raffaele Santioni
Fabio Schiantarelli
Philip E. Strahan
Working Paper 23541
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23541

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017

We would like to thank Giorgio Albareto, Rui Albuquerque, Riccardo De Bonis, Luigi Guiso,
Fabiano Schivardi and participants to the Boston College Macro Lunch and to the Carroll School
Finance Seminar for useful comments and suggestions. We are also grateful to Cerved for access
to the Gruppi Italiani data set. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors’ alone
and do not necessarily represent those of the institutions with which they are affiliated or the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Raffaele Santioni, Fabio Schiantarelli, and Philip E. Strahan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Internal Capital Markets in Times of Crisis: The Benefit of Group Affiliation in Italy
Raffaele Santioni, Fabio Schiantarelli, and Philip E. Strahan
NBER Working Paper No. 23541
June 2017
JEL No. G01,G21,G3
ABSTRACT
Italy’s economic and banking systems have been under stress in the wake of the Global Financial
Crisis and Euro Crisis. Firms in business groups have been more likely to survive this
challenging environment, compared to unaffiliated firms. Better performance stems from access
to an internal capital market, and the survival value of groups increases, inter alia, with groupwide cash flow. We show that actual internal capital transfers increase during the crisis, and
these transfers move funds from cash-rich to cash-poor firms and also to those with more
favorable investment opportunities. The ability to borrow externally provides additional funds
that are shared across group affiliated firms. Our results highlight the benefits of internal capital
markets when external capital markets are tight or distressed.
Raffaele Santioni
Bank of Italy
raffaele.santioni@bancaditalia.it
Fabio Schiantarelli
Department of Economics
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and IZA
schianta@bc.edu

Philip E. Strahan
Carroll School of Management
324B Fulton Hall
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
philip.strahan@bc.edu

I. Introduction
The Italian banking system began experiencing large credit losses starting at the
beginning of the 2008 Global Financial Crisis and increasing further with the onset and
deepening of the Euro Crisis in 2011. By December of 2015, aggregate bad loans had
reached about €200 billion, or approximately 8% of total loans outstanding (Figure 1).
Losses are substantially higher when other troubled loans not yet written off are included.
Unlike other recent banking problems, where losses were concentrated in real estate or
sovereign debt exposure, most of these losses – close to 80% – come from bad debts in
lending to non-financial businesses.
As a result of these banking system-wide losses, the availability of credit overall
in Italy has been constrained. A number of recent studies find that credit supply by
distressed banks was reduced in Italy during both the 2007-2008 Global Financial Crisis
as well as the more recent Euro crisis (e.g., Albertazzi and Marchetti (2010); Bolton et al.
(2013); Bofondi et al. (2013)). Losses at banks, combined with a weak legal system,
have made the situation even worse because Italian firms sometimes delay payments to
banks weakened by past losses and facing large time and legal expenses associated with
enforcing loan defaults in court (Schiantarelli, Stacchini and Strahan (2016)). In
addition, bank distress from exposure to risky sovereign debt has also reduced credit
supply and helped propagate the Euro crisis from distressed to non-distressed countries
across the Euro system (e.g. Popov and van Horen (2013); De Marco (2015)). This
distress is one important reason for Italy’s poor growth performance.
In this paper, we show that Italian business groups have helped firms survive the
ongoing crisis by mitigating the costs of limited credit stemming from banking problems.

1

In 2014, one-third of total employment in industry and services occurs at firms affiliated
with Italian business groups (5.6 million employees). They produce over than €376
billion in value added, or 55 percent of total value added in industrial and service sectors.
We test whether firms in these business groups use their access to the internal capital
market as a substitute for external finance normally supplied by banks. We show that
they do. Groups move capital from cash-rich to cash-poor firms, thereby benefiting firms
that otherwise would face binding external financial constraints. Group affiliated firms
also share financial resources obtained externally, but this mechanism weakens during the
years of banking distress. Thus, sharing of internal cash resources supplants external
finance during these years.
In our first set of tests, we show that affiliation with business groups helps firms
survive the recent financial and economic downturn. Using the non-parametric KaplanMeier estimate of survival probabilities, we show that firms in large business groups are
approximately 11 percentage points more likely to survive from 2006 to 2013, compared
with unaffiliated firms (50% survival probability for unaffiliated firms, versus 61% for
firms in large groups). Firms in small groups are also more likely to survive, although
the difference is smaller. To understand the role of internal capital markets, we report
results that condition on firm fundamentals in a discrete-time logit hazard model with
time-varying covariates. These models imply that the survival value of group affiliation
becomes stronger during the crisis years. Moreover, controlling for fundamentals has
only a small effect on the survival value of group affiliation, suggesting that such
affiliation provides benefits beyond factors that might improve firm sales or firm
profitability. Consistent with internal capital markets driving this difference, we show

2

that survival increases not only when own fundamentals are stronger, but also when
fundamentals of other group-affiliated fundamentals are stronger.
In our second set of results, we explore how access to the internal capital market
enhances the survival value of group affiliation. We show that firms substitute toward
the internal capital market when the banking system becomes distressed. Figure 2 shows
this pattern at an aggregate level: intra-group capital transfers increase sharply as the
Euro Crisis explodes in 2011, and this increase is mirrored by a drop in outside
borrowing (mainly from banks.) Analysis of firm-level data supports this substitution.
First, intra-group capital flows from firms with high cash flow to those with low cash
flow and also toward firms with high investment opportunities (proxied by sales
growth).1 Moreover, the marginal effect on transfers of negative shocks to a firm cash
flow is greater for high sales firms. Second, after combining the firm-level data with data
drawn from the Italian Central Credit Register, we are able to link the use of internal
capital markets to the relative distress of a firm’s own bank(s). In particular, we show
that the internal capital flows are more pronounced among firms with more distressed
banks. This is strong evidence that the internal capital substitutes in for the external
markets when those markets are distressed.
Two conditions are required for internal capital markets to matter for investment
and firm outcomes. First, external capital markets must be more costly than internal
ones, otherwise Miller-Modigliani propositions would hold in the sense that firms would
be able to exploit all positive net-present value (NPV) projects. Second, there must be
some variation in the availability of cash resources relative to investment opportunities
1

GDP does not change much during the first three quarters of 2008 and it starts declining substantially
only in the fourth quarter of 2008. See Figure 1.

3

across firms within the internal capital market. If all firms have excess cash, for example,
then all would be able to finance their own projects internally; that is, without the need
for internal (or external) capital. Similarly, if all firms within the internal capital market
face cash shortages relative to investment options, then there would be little scope for
reallocation across affiliated firms.
We develop our tests with these two conditions in mind. We need to measure the
degree of constraints from both the external and the internal capital markets. For the
former, identification comes from the shocks to the banking system starting in 2008 and
worsening over the subsequent years; these shocks made bank credit less available and
more expensive.2 We then improve the granularity of each firm’s exposure to external
financing constraints by conditioning on the health of their own set of bank lenders. For
the latter, we measure sales growth as a proxy for each firm’s investment opportunities
and free cash flow as a measure of each firm’s scope for internal capital transfers within
the internal capital market. Our data are sufficiently rich to allow us to control for
potentially confounding effects (such as variation in unobserved aspects of investment
opportunities) with granular fixed effects. In some specifications, we even control for
both firm, industry x time, region x time, and group x time effects. Our main results are
stable across a host of permutations of sets of these fixed effects.
The existing literature has not achieved consensus about the value of internal
capital markets. The theoretical literature has identified tradeoffs associated with internal
capital market use, relative to the external markets. On one hand, models such as Stein
(1997) emphasize that with external financial constraints, firms use internal capital
2

Interest rates on loans start decreasing from 2014 onward, but credit supply remains tight until the end of
2015.

4

transfers to move funds away from low-return projects and toward high-return ones.
Consistent with our results, that paper suggests more movements of capital across
affiliated firms with different investment opportunities during times when external capital
is especially expensive or hard to access. Other papers, however, have focused on
offsetting agency costs (e.g. divisional rent seeking) of internal capital markets in large,
diversified conglomerates (see, e.g., Lang and Stulz (1994); Scharfstein and Stein
(2000)). Subsequent empirical studies raise doubts about whether a large and welldiversified internal capital market creates or destroys value (e.g., Whited, 2001; Schoar,
2002; Villalonga, 2004).3
Our paper suggests that during periods when external capital markets are
constrained, the internal capital market likely increases firm value, as its use increases
and firms with access to large internal capital markets are more likely to survive the
crisis.4 This result is consistent with Kuppuswamy and Villalonga (2015), who find that
U.S. diversified conglomerates became significantly more valuable than otherwisesimilar single segment firms during the 2008 financial crisis. In addition, Matvos and
Seru (2014) report simulations based on the 2008 financial crisis which suggest
diversified conglomerates are more likely to share resources across the internal capital
market when external finance is costly. And, in a related study, Matvos, Seru and Silva
(2016) offer evidence that diversifying mergers are more likely during periods in which
external market constraints are more likely to bind.

3

Consistent with internal capital markets reducing firm value, Lamont (1997) provides evidence that oil
company investment in non-oil segments represented over-investing in low profit projects.
4

We do not explore valuation effects because almost all of our firms do not have publicly traded equity.

5

Our results also provide some evidence that internal capital markets do involve a
tradeoff between agency costs versus their ability to move capital to better uses. Large
groups consistently move capital toward higher sales-growth firms, regardless of
conditions in the external capital market. But among firms affiliated with small groups,
where agency problems may be more likely to be relevant, we find no correlation
between intra-group capital reallocation and sales growth during the non-crisis years.5
During the crisis, however, both large and small groups move capital across their
affiliates similarly – away from low-growth and toward higher growth firms.
Our study also supports earlier papers that find evidence that investment rates are
insulated from cash-flow shocks for firms with access to a wide internal capital market.
Schiantarelli and Sembenelli (2000), also studying Italian business groups, find that
investment is less sensitive to cash flow for firms owned by large business groups.
Similarly, Shin and Stulz (1998) find lower investment-cash flow sensitivities for U.S.
segments held by diversified conglomerates. Both of these studies are consistent with our
finding that there is an active internal capital market within business groups, but they
suffer from the well-known ambiguities that emerge in interpreting investment links to
cash flow (e.g., Alti (2003)).6 Because we study the actual movements of capital, rather
than investment itself, our approach does not suffer from these criticisms.
Our paper extends a small number of studies that test how business groups
circulate their internal capital market cash flow across affiliated firms. Gopalan et al.

5

Small groups are more likely to have family control and management, which has been associated with
greater agency problems (e.g., Bennedsen et al., 2007).

6

Shin and Stulz also show that the sensitivity to cash flow does not depend upon investment opportunities,
measured by ‘q’ of the segment a firm in a conglomerate belongs to. This result leads them to question
whether funds are efficiently allocated within a conglomerate.

6

(2007) exploit business groups in India and, like us, find that intra-group capital transfers
are used to help affiliated firms who are facing low cash flow, but their study does not
consider how the value of the internal capital market responds to shocks to the external
providers of capital, as we do. Unlike the earlier literature, our data allow us to measure
all sources of capital deployed by a given firm from group-affiliated firms, including
financial debt, trade credit and equity. Almeida et al. (2015) study how Korean Chaebolrelated firms move equity within their groups, but do not capture the full extent of the
internal capital market, as they focus only on investment opportunities but not cash flow,
which we find to be the most important variable driving intra-group transfers. Their
study also relies on a much smaller data set which does not allow them to address
potentially confounds with granular fixed effects of various types, as we do.
The next section provides a brief overview of the role of business groups in Italy.
Section III then describes our data, while Section IV discusses our empirical
methodology and results. Section V concludes.

II. Business Groups in Italy
Business groups remain a prevalent organizational form around the world, across
both developed and developing economies (e.g., La Porta et al. (1999); Khanna, (2000)).
Business groups are widely diffuse in Italy, and group affiliation appears to be a
persistent feature within the domestic corporate landscape (e.g., Cannari and Gola (1996);
Bianchi et al. (2005); Bianchi et al. (2008)). According to the Italian Civil Code, a
business group exists when a dominant influence on a firm is exerted through centralized
coordination. Such coordination may occur when control is performed on either a de jure

7

or a de facto basis, or when a firm’s capital is equally distributed among different owners,
or when corporate decisions are subject to any shareholders agreements.
Traditionally, a few key families and government entities played the central role
in shaping the ownership structure of major Italian business groups. Such families have
dominated the domestic corporate scene since the 1950s, initially benefiting from the
supportive role of the state and, later, from a revival of the stock market. The state’s role
– as well as the role of once-dominant families – has gradually decreased in the
governance structure of national groups, especially after the wave of privatization starting
in the 1990s. Indeed, after this phase, an internationalization process occurred during
which foreign groups increased their presence in Italy, especially in the large retail sector
and in telecommunications. Domestic groups also expanded their ownership structure
abroad, particularly in those countries that were experiencing fast economic development
(Santioni (2011)).
Business groups play a prominent economic role in Italy. In 2014, with 5.6
million employees, they represent about one-third of total employment in the industrial
and service sectors, and they produce about 55 percent of total value added. Most groups
have a fairly simple structure, with just one or two active firms based in Italy. Other
large groups have a more complex ownership structure, often with more than ten
domestic firms. These large groups are fewer in number but have a stronger economic
impact. Many small groups are likely to be family dominated, with less structured
professional management and governance, and a higher weight given to the nonpecuniary benefits from control.

8

The historical memory of bank failures in the 1920s and 30s, along with bank
reforms of 1936, generated a system in Italy with separation between banking and
industry, and between short-term and long-term lending institutions. While the latter
distinction disappeared in the 1990s, the separation between ownership of industry and
ownership of financial institutions still characterizes the Italian economy. For instance,
the 1993 banking law stipulates that entities with relevant industrial interests cannot
control more than 15% of voting shares of a banking institution. Moreover, banks are
restricted in their shareholding of non-financial firms to a maximum of 15% of bank
capital overall, and just 3% for shares in a single firm. Although some of these limits
were relaxed in 2008, there are no significant cross-ownership relationships between
banks and firms.7 Thus, business groups do not have special access to bank credit, as in
structures like the Japanese Keiretsu. Yet being a group member is likely to confer an
advantage in accessing external finance (Schiantarelli and Sembenelli (2000)).8

III. Data and Descriptive Statistics
We build a novel dataset that combines the structure of Italian groups with data on
both firm performance and measures of the health of their bank (or banks). In this
section we describe the data sources and present some basic descriptive statistics.
III.i. Data

7

The separation between banking and commerce in Italy is similar to the one that characterizes the US.

8

On the real consequences of credit supply shocks in Italy see Cingano, Manaresi and Sette (2016) and
Balduzzi, Brancati, and Schiantarelli (2016).

9

To build our data, we combine several sources. We rely on the Gruppi Italiani
data (produced by Cerved) for information on the ownership structures of the entire
universe of Italian groups (both financial and non-financial). We obtain the firm-level
balance sheet, income statement and statement of cash flows information from the
Centrale dei Bilanci data set (also from Cerved). We match these with firm-level
individual loan data from the Italian Credit Register and bank-level data from the Bank of
Italy Supervisory Reports to construct a firm-specific measure of the quality the bank (or
banks’) portfolio from which each firm borrows.
We focus our analysis of intra-group capital transfers between firms affiliated
with large and small domestic business groups, as transfer to firms outside of Italy –
relevant for Italian firms associated with foreign groups or holding companies – are not
observable in our data. While the definition of a large versus small group is a bit
arbitrary, we use a cutoff of 50 employees and no more than 10 million euros in sales or
total asset to draw a distinction between groups likely to be controlled by a family versus
large ones that are more likely to have a formal group structure and professional
management. This categorization, we admit, is imperfect, so we report all of our results
both with and without this separation of the sample. Moreover, we want to avoid linking
the group-size definition to ex post success of firms owned by a given group type.
Hence, we define each group based on its size in the first year in which it enters the
sample, and then we leave the definition constant across all subsequent time periods.
Thus, we would keep a group that starts with, say, 60 employees but shrinks to 45 due to
poor performance in the large-group category.

10

Although ours is the first study able to combine the comprehensive financial
statement data to time-varying measure of ownership structure, we are restricted in our
access to just three points in time: 2006, 2010 and 2014.9 In other words, we can only
merge the ownership connections to the year-by-year financial statements during these
three points in time. In our regression analysis, which we describe in more detail below,
we focus on annual panel data from 2004 to 2014. Hence, we need to assume that
ownership connections remain constant over periods longer than a single year. To
minimize classification error, we assign ownership as follows: we use the 2006
ownership data for all firms during the years 2004-2007; the 2010 ownership information
we assign to the years 2008-2011; and the 2014 ownership data we assign to the years
2012-2014. Our strategy works well because business group affiliation in Italy is
persistent over time.
After combining Cerved with the structural data from Gruppi Italiani, we apply
several filters to remove data that may be unreliable. First, we drop observations with
zero total assets or zero sales. Second, we include firms with financial statements
reported in abbreviated form, under the condition that financial or trade aggregates in the
balance sheet are recognized and fully disclosed. Third, we require the disclosure of the
full statement of cash flow. And fourth, we drop financial companies.
According to national rules, firms are required to indicate their lending or
borrowing positions within the group on their balance sheets (article 2424 of the Italian
Civil Code). We use this information to construct Intra-Group Net Financial
Position/Assets, which equals the total amount of financial debt owed by a given firm to
9

Santioni and Supino (2017) take a first step in this direction using ownership data for 2006 and 2014.
This paper contains a descriptive analysis of Italian groups and of the working of their internal capital
markets when credit becomes tight.

11

all other firms affiliated with the same group, net of loans provided, as a percentage of
the firm’s total assets. The variable represents non-arm’s length, net debt that, we argue,
provides the main tool used by groups to effect intra-group transfers of capital. Positive
values of Intra-Group Net Financial Position/Assets indicate that a firm is borrowing
(that is, demanding funds) from the internal capital market; negative values indicate that
the firm is lending (i.e., supplying funds) to the internal capital market. Hence, across all
firms in a given group, the variable averages to zero (appropriately weighted). We also
construct a second measure of intra-group transfers – the Intra-Group Net Position
(total)/Assets – that includes net trade debt as well as financial debt. Trade debt (Gross)
is less important quantitatively than financial debt, representing around 35% of gross
intragroup financial debt – the latter of which equals about 30% of total financial debt.
We do not include equity transfers because in the Italian context they are not a significant
method to transferring resources between group members. Disclosure on the details on
intragroup transactions, however, are not compulsory for those firms that prepare
abridged financial statements, so we drop those firms that do not report this item.
Finally, we use the Credit Register loan data and the bank balance sheet
information from the Bank of Italy Supervisory Reports to construct our firm specific
measure of the health of each firm’s bank(s). Italy’s Credit Register is an archive
providing lender-borrower level data on characteristics of loans extended by banks
operating in Italy. The data include information on loan type (credit lines, term loans),
size, maturity, the pledging of real collateral, personal guarantees, accounts receivable,
and ex post performance. From 2009 on, loans are reported when tranches exceed
€30,000 by the entire population of credit institutions, having been lowered from €75,000

12

before 2009. These data allow us to measure those banks from which each firm has
borrowed significant funds, which we in turn use to assess the average heath of each
firm’s banks. As such, we construct the variable Bad Loans, equal to the weighted
average of the banks’ ratio of bad loans to total assets, where the weights equal the
fraction of credit received by a given firm from each of its banks. This approach allows
us to exploit both the time series and cross sectional variation in a firm’s credit access.
As shown in Figure 3, Bad Loans has substantial variation both over time, rising on
average in the post-crisis years, and displaying an increased dispersion across firms.

III.ii. Summary Statistics
Table 1 reports summary statistics for large-group and small-group affiliated
firms, as well as for unaffiliated firms, with these data broken into non-crisis (2004-2008)
and crisis (2009-2014) years. Clearly the small-group and unaffiliated firms are more
similar to each other in terms of size, than either type is relative to large-group affiliated
firms. For small-groups, the median firm has just €908,000 in assets, compared to
€417,000 for unaffiliated firms (non-crisis years); these are clearly very small firms on
average. (And, by construction the small-group affiliated firms start in the sample with
fewer than 50 employees.) In contrast, firms associated with large groups are themselves
much larger – at the median these firms have €5.9 million in assets (pre-crisis). All three
types experienced large declines in operating performance from the non-crisis to the
crisis years, with sales growth falling across the whole distribution.
For the group-affiliated firms, Table 1 also shows how Intra-Group Net Financial
Position/Assets varies across firms and over time. As expected, the median value is near

13

zero, which follows from the fact that the measure nets up to zero within each group.
The aggregate growth in gross intra-group financial borrowing shows a sharp increase in
internal capital transfers in 2011, the year that the Euro crisis reached its nadir (recall
Figure 2). As the figure also shows, lending from external source shrinks sharply in 2011
as well and the contraction continues into 2014.10 These aggregate patterns suggest
substitution from the external to internal sources of financing, although these overall
growth rates are also affected by the overall economic conditions (i.e., by demand for
capital). But the patterns clearly show an overall rise in the importance of the internal
capital market relative to the external financial markets during the crisis years.
Table 2 reports transition probabilities for our firms over two, non-overlapping
periods: 2006 to 2010 and 2010 to 2014. Recall that these two periods (or, three points in
time) represent the only ones in which we have exact data allowing observation of firm
ownership. The transition matrix shows, first, that firms normally either remain in the
same category or they exit the sample. This general pattern holds in both periods.
Second, the rate of exit increases across all categories in the second period, which
represents most of the crisis years. Third, the increase in exit rates is higher for
unaffiliated and small-group affiliated firms than for firms affiliated with large groups.
For example, unaffiliated firms’ exit rates increase from 32.3% to 39.8%, an increase of
23%. Small group affiliated firms’ exit rates increase from 31.2% to 38%, as increase of
22%. In contrast, large-group affiliated firms’ exit rates increase much less, rising from
25.5% to 28.9% (or 13%). Although exit from the sample does not necessarily imply the
death of a firm, these simple comparisons suggest that affiliation with a large group may

10

The figure is constructed from continuing firms. Hence it does not reflect entry or exit of firms.

14

enhances the likelihood that a firm will survive the poor economy and associated
reductions in bank credit that have plagued Italy in recent years. We will make more
precise what we mean by a firm “failing” and discuss the issue of firm survival more
formally in the next section.

IV. Empirical Methods and Results
We now provide evidence on the importance of group membership before the
financial crisis and in the years that followed. These years include the sovereign debt
crisis and a steady deterioration of the health of Italian banks due to the accumulation of
bad loans on bank portfolios. The latter, in turn, reflected the poor overall performance
of the Italian economy. We first present an analysis of firm survival, comparing groupaffiliated and non-affiliated firms. We then investigate the determinants of intra-group
capital flows, focusing specifically on how these flows differ in the pre-crisis versus
crisis years, and how the health of the banking sector affects them.

IV.i Discrete-time hazard Analysis
Is group affiliation beneficial to firms? If so, is it particularly important during
crisis? To answer these questions, we test whether group affiliation raises firm survival
probabilities, using a discrete-time proportional hazard model with time-varying
covariates (Allison (1982) and Singer and Willett (1993)). The model defines the hazard
probability for a given firm i over discrete time intervals (=one year in our context), as
follows:

15

Pit = Prob (Ti=t | Ti>=t, Xit),
where Pit represents the probability that firm i fails in period t, conditional on having
survived until the beginning of the interval. This probability depends on a set of timevarying, firm-specific variables (Xit). So, for example, the hazard rate for 2011 would be
equal to the probability that the firm fails during the year 2011, conditional on its having
survived to the beginning of that year and conditional on its covariates at the beginning of
that year. Because time is measured in discrete intervals (years), these hazard rates are
proper probabilities and we model them using a standard logistic function. One major
advantage of this approach is that time-varying covariates can be introduced and their
coefficients estimated easily. With this formulation, the logistic function of the hazard
probability depends on time indicators and firm-specific, time-varying covariates, as
follows:
Pit=1/[1+exp(Xi,tβ - αt)]
The equation becomes linear when rewritten in the log odds ratio form:
Ln (Pi,t/(1-Pi,t)) = Xi,tβ + αt,
where Xi,t is the vector of k-covariates, β the associated vector of coefficients and αt year
indicator variables that we will allow also to vary by firm type.
Since we want to draw inferences about the utility of the internal capital market
(i.e., the role of capital transfers), we need to control for the economic environment, the
set of cost conditions and the state of demand conditions facing firms, as these will all
have a large effect on survival but might be correlated with group affiliation. In addition,

16

we need to account for firm size, as larger firms likely can absorb larger negative shocks
without failing compared to smaller firms. Similarly older firms may be less
informationally opaque than younger firms, more able to access external finance, and,
therefore, may have a higher probability of survival.11 Given these controls, we then
argue that any residual effect of group status on survival reflects advantages of the
internal capital market. Since all firms in Italy experience, to put it kindly, a challenging
economic downturn, this test should be quite powerful.
The cost of the logit model is that we need to make a specific assumption about
the shape of the hazard probability function, but by doing so we can estimate models with
substantial heterogeneity related to location, industry, and time varying firm
characteristics. As a preliminary exercise that avoids making parametric assumptions, we
also report below further evidence on survival rates by plotting the Kaplan-Meier
estimate of the survival function and hazard rates over time for various types of firms.
We parameterize the covariates in the logit hazard model, as follows:
Xi,tβ = β1Groupi + β2Groupi x Crisist + β3Sales Growthi,t -1+

(1)

β4Cash flowi,t-1/Assetsi,t-2 + β5log agei + Year, Size, Province and Industry
Indicators.

In some specifications, the year effects vary by industry, province and size. In
Equation (1), the coefficients of interest are β1 and β2, as they test whether group
affiliated firms have higher (or lower) failure rates relative to unaffiliated firms before
and after the crisis. The unaffiliated firms provide the comparison sample for the group11

Firm age may also proxy for hard-to-observe variables such as managerial risk aversion, which likely
affect failure rates. Note that our results linking failure rates to group states are not sensitive to whether or
not we control for age.

17

affiliated firms. We include only those firms that exist as of 2006, but we allow variables
that capture fundamental shocks – sales growth and cash flow – to change each year,
from 2006 to 2013. Group affiliation is allowed to change, while size and age are left at
their 2006 values. We also estimate models that separate the effect of group status based
on group size, as the aggregate data in Table 1 suggest that large group-affiliated firms
were more likely to survive during the crisis years.
Equation (1) ‘controls’ for the general economic environment with the year
indicators. As such, we do not need to control for the direct effect of the Crisis indicator
in Equation (1). To control for specific shocks faced by firms, we control for lagged
values of both Sales Growth and Cash Flow, in addition to log age.12 In the hazard
model, however, large sets of fixed effects cannot be absorbed, as they can in linear
models. Instead, we parameterize and estimate the effects of indicator variables to
account for industry, region and size differences. Variation in the overall macroeconomic
environment is captured by the time-varying baseline hazard rate (αt). And, in some
models, we interact time with industry, region, and size effects.
Our sample includes those firms that were present in the sample in 2006. Later
entrants are not considered. Moreover, we classify a firm as “failed” when it disappears
permanently from the sample. In some (few) cases, we miss the firm balance sheet for
one year, or even more, but then the firm reappears in the sample. In these cases we
delete the entire string of information for that firm. In the same spirit, we end our
survival analysis in 2013 and classify as failed in that year only firms that do not have a
balance sheet both in 2013 and 2014.
12

We draw the distinction between own v. other cash flow and sales growth later in the analysis, when we
analyze the effects of group affiliation.

18

The results for the Kaplan-Meier estimate of the survival function are reported in
Figure 4, while the estimates of the discrete-time hazard are contained in Table 3. The
simple results from the Kaplan-Meier analysis – which are no more than the raw survival
and hazard rates themselves – suggest that the survival of a large-group affiliated firm is
greater than that of both members of small groups or unaffiliated firms. For instance, the
probability that a firm belonging to a large group survives from 2006 until 2013 is 61
percent, while it is approximately 53 percent for the member of a small group and 50
percent for unaffiliated firms. These estimates, however, do not control for firm level
differences in growth opportunities or internal cash flow or for the industrial regional or
size characteristics (time invariant or time varying). As a result one cannot attribute the
differences in survival to a pure group effect, operating, for instance, through intra-group
transfers.
To address fundamentals, Table 3 (Panel A) presents four specifications in which
we allow the difference between unaffiliated and group members to vary between the
pre- and post-crisis period. In column 1, we control (in addition to log age) for a
common year effect and for industry, location and size effects. We allow for 25
industries, 20 regions and two firm-size categories (small firms have fewer than 50
employees and sales or asset less than €10 million, with others classified as large). In
column 2, we introduce a firm’s own cash flow and own sales growth as additional
regressors. In column 3 and 4, we replicate these two specifications, but allow the year
effects to interact with industry, region and size. In Panel B of Table 3, we then allow the
group effects to differ between small versus large groups.

19

Recalling that a negative coefficient on a variable means that it lowers the
probability of failing, we see that unaffiliated firms fail at greater rates than group
members in the pre-crisis period, and this difference becomes statistically significantly
larger during the crisis period. In terms of magnitude, the odds ratio (Pi,t/(1-Pi,t)) of
failing in the crisis years for a group member firm equals 77% of an independent firm,
keeping constant the other firm characteristics (= exp(-0.26), using column 4 of Table 3,
Panel A). The effect of cash flow, sales growth and age enter the model as expected,
with older firms, firms with greater sales growth or with greater cash flow less likely to
fail. While the coefficient on cash flow is roughly 10 times as large as that the coefficient
on sales growth, its standard deviation is roughly 1/10; hence, their economic magnitudes
are roughly equivalent. Also, adding sales growth and cash flow decreases somewhat the
quantitative impact of group affiliation, but not by much and the effect remains highly
significant. Thus, group affiliation’s positive effect on firm survival does not appear to
be mainly due to better fundamentals. Rather – as we show below – the differential
survival reflects access to the internal capital market.
Table 3, Panel B augments the model to allow differences related to both firm size
and group size. We do this in a simple way by constructing a set of mutually exclusive
and exhaustive indicator variables, as follows: Large Independent = 1 for large,
independent firms; Small Firm in Small Group = 1 for small firms in small groups; Small
Firms in Large Group = 1 for small firms in large groups; and Large Firms in Large
Group = 1 for large firms in large groups. Since small groups contain only small firms,
these indicator variables exhaust all configurations. Small independent firms serve as the

20

omitted category. We also allow the effect of each firm-group-type indicator to vary
between the pre-crisis and crisis years.
The coefficients suggest a sensible ordering of firm failure rates: small,
independent firms (the omitted category) are generally most likely to fail, as the
coefficients on all but one of the coefficients on the firm-group-type indicators sign
negatively. (The only exception: small firms in large groups during the pre-crisis years,
which fail at rates similar to unaffiliated, small firms.) Small firms affiliated with either
group type are next most likely to fail, followed by large independent firms, with large
firms affiliated with large groups being the least likely to fail. Hence, controlling for firm
size, group affiliation raises survival rates. The magnitudes suggest that large-group
affiliation has a much larger effect than small-group affiliation, and the difference in
these coefficients is statistically significant at any level of confidence. Moreover, the
value of group affiliation for survival increases during the crisis years for both small and
large firms, consistent with the more parsimonious specification in Panel A.
To understand magnitudes, consider the effect of group affiliation on large-firm
failure, which can be inferred from the difference in the coefficients on Large
Independent v. Large Firms in Groups. In the pre-crisis years, group affiliation lowers
the odds ratio of failure for large affiliated firms by 0.07, relative to the large unaffiliated
ones, based on the coefficients from column 4 (= exp( -0.85) - exp(-0.69)). During the
crisis years, the advantage of group affiliation increases, with the odds ratio of failure
being 0.34 lower for group-affiliated, large firms (= exp( -0.96) - exp(-0.32)).
Why do group-affiliated firms survive more than independent firms, especially
during the crisis years? Our specifications in Table 3 control for firm fundamentals, yet

21

the magnitude of group affiliation changes little when we leave these controls out. Thus,
some mechanism other than a firm’s own access to cash flow or investment opportunities
must explain the benefits of group affiliation. To test whether access to the internal
capital market at the group level helps firms, we estimate survival models for the groupaffiliated firms only, and test whether cash resource at other group-affiliated firms
reduces this firm’s failure rate. In particular, we modify equation (1) as follows:

Xi,tβ = β1Sales Growthi,t-1 + β2Other-Sales Growthi,t-1

(2)

+ β3Cash flowi,t-1/Assetsi,t-2 β4Other-Cash flowi,t-1/Assetsi,t-2
+ β5Crisist x Sales Growthi,t-1 + β6Crisist x Other-Sales Growthi,t-1
+ β7Crisist x Cash flowi,t-1/Assetsi,t-2 + β8Crisist x Other-Cash flowi,t-1/Assetsi,t-2
+ β9log agei, + β10log(asset ratio)i,t-1 + Year, Size, Province and Industry
Indicators.

In equation (2), we condition on the average sales growth and average cash flow
of the other members of the firm’s group (Other-Sales Growth and Other-Cash
flow/Assets). In addition, we add a measure of the asset size of the firm relative to the
sum of assets across all firms in its group (log(asset ratio)). As such, these models
include only group-affiliated firms.
Table 4 reports the results. Coefficients are separated into two blocks of rows,
with the first block reporting the effects of the firm’s own fundamentals and the second
reporting the effect of the fundamentals of other group-affiliated firms. As expected, a
firm’s own sales and cash flow shocks continue to affect failure rates very strongly (and
with similar magnitudes to the models in Table 3). In addition, shocks to other firms
affiliated with the group also have a statistically significant effect on this firm’s failure.

22

Thus, the potential to share resources across the group’s internal capital market is
associated with lower failure. When other group-affiliated firms have high sales and/or
substantial cash flow, this firm is less likely to fail. The magnitudes are substantially
smaller than that of own sales and cash flow, which makes sense because the firm’s own
fundamentals affect not only its access to funds, but also correlate with the firm’s
profitability and future business opportunities. In addition, the effect of shocks to both
other sales growth and other cash flow increase in magnitude during the crisis years.

IV.ii Intra-group Capital Transfers
Together, the results of Tables 3 and 4 suggest that group affiliation helps firms
survive by increasing their potential tor share funds across the group. Do firms actually
share financial resources? To answer this question, we analyze capital transfers across
group-affiliated firms. If internal capital markets explain group survival value, then
financial resource sharing ought to be more pronounced when external markets become
distressed. Hence, we first compare internal capital market transfers before versus after
the onset of crisis. Then, we construct a measure of constraints from the external markets
more precisely by exploiting firm-year variation in the health of a given firm’s banks in a
given year.
Crisis versus Non-Crisis Years
To provide tests over time, we regress capital transfers on investment
opportunities and cash flow – both own and other – allowing these relationships to shift
over time. Investment opportunities measure a firm’s demand for financial resources,

23

while cash flow measures a firm’s supply of internal financial resources. If the firm’s
relative demand exceeds its internal supply of cash, then it would need to fill a financing
gap either through a within-group transfer or by accessing the external market.
Given this conceptual framework, we report our baseline regression strategies, as
follows:

Net Transfer i,t =β1Sales Growthi,t + β2Other-Sales Growthi,t

(3)

+ β3Cash flowi,t/Assetsi,t-1 + β4Other-Cash flow/Assetsi,t-1
+ β5Crisis,t x Sales Growthi,t + β6Crisist x Other-Sales Growthi,t
+ β7Crisist x Cash flowi,t/Assetsi,t-1 + β8Crisist x Other-Cash flowi,t/Assetsi,t-1
+ Fixed Effects + εi,t ,
where i represents the firm and t the year. We report the two measures for Net Transfer i,t
described in Section III.i: the first includes intra-group net financial borrowing scaled by
the end of previous period assets (we call this the Intra-Group Financial Position); the
second adds the intragroup net trade position (accounts payable minus accounts
receivable) to the intra-group net financial position in the numerator (we call this the
Intra-Group Financial and Trade Position). To capture investment opportunities, we
again use real sales growth. In some models we also allow coefficients to vary based on
the type of business group (large or small).
The sample includes only group affiliated firms, as only these firms have access
to an internal capital market. We capture unobserved heterogeneity by including a series
of granular fixed effects: industry x year, province x year, and firm. We allow for 286
industrial sectors and 105 provinces, which generates much more detailed year effects in
our linear regression for intragroup transfers than in the non-linear survival models. In

24

some specifications, we also add a group-specific year effects. Finally, when we allow
the slope coefficients to differ between small and large groups, we also permit the
industry and location specific year effects to differ according to group size. By including
so many fixed effects, we are able to remove potential sources of bias related to economic
conditions at the industry and geographical levels. Since we allow these effects to vary
with time, they will account for the rapid deterioration in the Italian economy during our
sample period (recall Figure 1). To construct standard errors, we double cluster by firm
and by group-year.13
Equation (3) explicitly models the idea that relative demand for and supply of
funds is what motivates capital transfers. Other-Sales Growth captures the demand for
funds elsewhere in the group (i.e., in the internal capital markets), defined as in the
survival analysis. Other-Cash flow captures the availability of funds elsewhere in the
group, and is also defined as in the survival analysis. Conversely, Sales Growth captures
the effects of a firm’s own demand for funds and Cash Flow captures its own supply of
funds. We normalize each of the cash flow measures by the firm’s assets at the end of
the previous period; since the outcome is normalized with the same denominator, the
coefficients have a natural interpretation as the marginal effect of an additional unit of
cash flow on intra-firm transfers. In the most general specification, we incorporate group
x year fixed effects. This empirical strategy, by differencing out the group-time means, is
equivalent to re-defining the effects of investment opportunities and cash resources in a
relative sense within a given group in a given year.
13

Fixed effects help allay concern about omitted variables but not reverse causality. For example, perhaps
receiving more capital transfers allows firms to experience higher cash flow or sales. This source of
endogeneity cannot explain why cash flow effects would become so much greater during the crisis.
Nevertheless, we have also estimated the regressions of Table 5 after lagging both cash flow and sales
growth one year. These results are similar to those presented in Table 5.

25

Panel A of Table 5 reports the estimates for equation (3). We report each
regression first for Intra-Group Net Financial Positiont/Assetst-1 (columns 1 and 2), and
then for Intra-Group Net Financial and Trade Positiont/Assetst-1 (columns 3 and 4).14
Panel B allows the slope coefficients to differ between small groups and large ones. (The
group-type indicators are absorbed by fixed effects.) Positive coefficients indicate that an
increase in the explanatory variable leads a firm to use more funds from the internal
capital market, whereas negative coefficients mean that an increase in the explanatory
variable leads the firm to supply more funds to the internal capital market.
Both Panels A and B suggest that group-affiliated firms make greater use of
capital transfers during the crisis years, particularly with regard to the effects of cash flow
on transfers. Sales growth positively affects transfers in both periods, meaning that
groups move capital efficiently – toward high sales growth firms. For example, the
coefficient on Sales Growth is positive and significant in both crisis and non-crisis years
(in both column 1 and 2), so funds flow toward high investment opportunity firms. Cash
flow affects capital transfers strongly, with much larger magnitudes during the crisis
years. The negative coefficient on Cash Flow implies that firms with high cash flow
supply funds to other firms in the group.
These coefficients have a natural interpretation because they represent funds
available for investment (unlike sales growth, which acts as a proxy that helps capture
future investment opportunities). During the crisis years, for example, a 1-€ increase in a
firm’s own cash flow leads, approximately, to a 0.15€ decline in its borrowing from the

14

We report transfers from financial plus trade credit as a robustness test, but our focus is on the financial
transfers. Adding trade credit reduces the sample substantially, so the results between columns 1-2 versus.
3-4 are not directly comparable, although the core result is similar. In future work, we will explore
differences in transfers between financial and non-financial resources (i.e. trade credit).

26

internal capital market; whereas a 1-€ increase in average cash elsewhere in the internal
capital market raises borrowing by this firms of about 0.02-0.03€ (column 1). Thus, the
marginal effect of cash generated at the firm level is much larger than that of cash flow
generated by other firms in the same group; this reflects the fact that firms in a group are
distinct legal and economic entities over which the holding company does not exercise
unchecked control. As a result each unit has a degree of control over the use of their own
cash compared to their control over cash generated elsewhere in the internal capital
market. Prior to the crisis, however, we don’t see as strong a link between internal
capital transfers and own cash, presumably because external finance is relatively
available. The models with group x year effects suggest larger effects; these imply that a
1-€ increase in Cash Flow (relative to the group-level average) decreases a firm’s use of
internal transfers by 0.20€ (column 2). The effect of Cash flow also increases in
magnitude when we also incorporate trade credit (columns 3 and 4), while the coefficient
of cash flow of other group members becomes less significant.
Panel B allows the marginal effects of Sales Growth and Cash Flow to vary by
group size. These comparisons suggest, broadly, that large-group capital transfers
respond more strongly to Cash flow than smaller groups, whereas small groups are more
responsive to Other Cash flow than large groups.15 Moreover, the coefficients on Cash
flow and on Other Cash flow for small groups are more similar to each other. We also
find that small groups are unresponsive to Sales Growth in the pre-crisis period but this
pattern changes in the crisis. Large groups, in contrast, consistently transfer funds to
firms with high Sales Growth in both periods. These differences may reflect differences

15

Despite these differences, the results below in Table 6b suggest that the effects of own and other cash
flow on transfers do not differ robustly between large and small groups.

27

in the management of the internal capital market related to agency problems, likely to be
most prevalent in small, family-controlled groups. That said, exploring this dimension in
detail is beyond the scope of this paper.16 For our thesis, what matters most is that both
group types clearly increase the use of the internal capital market during the crisis, as the
(negative) magnitude for Cash flow increases sharply between during the crisis years.
Robustness across various permutations of fixed effects helps allay the concern
that omitted variables can explain our results. But, fixed effects do not address
endogeneity questions that might come from reverse causality. For example, perhaps
firms receiving more capital transfers are able to use the capital to generate higher sales
growth. However, if transfers indeed help promote sales, this would be an indication that
funds were not wasted in not sales enhancing expenditures. Nevertheless, we have also
estimated the regressions in Table 5 allowing sales growth to be endogenous and using its
own lagged values (once and twice) as additional instruments. These results are similar
in terms of sign, size and significance and are not reported here. 17 There is also a
potential endogeneity issue for cash flow, based on a parallel argument. The problem is
less worrisome because it would generate a positive coefficient on Cash Flow, not a
negative one as we find. Reverse causality also cannot explain why Cash Flow’s effect
would become so much greater in magnitude during the crisis.
We have also estimated models like those in Equation (3) that allow the effects of
Cash flow (along with the other variables) to vary in each year. This model thereby
measures the sensitivity of capital transfers to both investment opportunities (sales
growth) and cash flows on a year by year basis. Rather than report all of these
16

Our data do not allow us to identify groups that are family controlled.

17

Results are not reported here, but are available from the authors’.

28

coefficients, Figure 5 summarizes the main finding by graphing the coefficient on Cash
flow over time. The results suggest that the cash flow coefficient is not statistically
significant before 2009, is consistently negative thereafter, and increases in magnitude as
the banking problems in Italy grow worse over these years. Hence, firms seem to use the
internal capital markets more aggressively as the banking system ceases to function well.
Bank Health and Transfers
The results so far merely exploit time variation in coefficients, arguing (perhaps
loosely) that financial conditions deteriorate in the later years. While this is clearly true,
it is crude. To focus more precisely on bank credit availability (i.e., the availability of
external finance, as most is supplied by banks in Italy), we account for the health of each
firm’s bank(s), and we model this health directly in the capital transfer regressions. As
noted earlier, bank credit has declined sharply in Italy and earlier research suggests that
more distressed banks cut lending more than less distressed ones. Hence, we use Bad
Loans at the end of the previous year as a measure of bank health. Specifically, we
estimate models with the following structure:

Net Flowj i,t =β1Sales Growthi,t + β2Other-Sales Growthi,t

(4)

+ β3Cash flowi,t/Assetsi,t-1 +β4Other-Cash flowi,t/Assetsi,t
+ β5Bad Loansi,t-1 x Sales Growthi,t + β6Bad Loansi,t-1 x Other-Sales Growthi,t
+ β7Bad Loansi,t-1 x Cash flowi,t/Assetsi,t-1
+ β8Bad Loansi,t-1 x Other-Cash flowi,t/Assetsi,t-1 + β9Bad Loansi,t-1
+ Fixed effects + εi,t .
Equation (4) parallels Equation (3), but replaces the crisis interaction terms (which vary
only by time) with Bad Loansi,t-1 and its interactions, which vary both at the firm and

29

time level. Bad Loansi,t-1 equals the average ratio of bad loans to assets for firm i’s
bank(s) at the end of the previous year, where we weight by the amount borrowed from
each bank.
Panel A of Table 6 reports the results. Columns (1) and (2) contain data for the
full sample, and columns (3) and (4) contain data from just the post-crisis years. The
interaction between Cash Flow and Bad Loans consistently enters with a negative and
significant coefficient across all specifications, suggesting that firms with weak banks
substitute more into the internal capital market. This represents very convincing
evidence that the importance of internal markets increases when external debt markets
become more distressed. The interaction between Bad Loans and the Other Cash Flow
(as well as the Sales Growth measures), however, are typically not significant. The last
two columns, which use only the post-crisis sample, get identification only from variation
in bank distress, rather than from comparisons between pre- versus post-crisis years. The
coefficients of the interaction between own Cash Flow and Bad Loans are of similar
magnitude, and remain highly significant. Moreover, their economic significance is larger
because the variation in Bad Loans increases sharply during the crisis years (recall Figure
3).
Panel B of 6 reports models with the Bad Loans interaction effects, splitting by
group size as in Table 5 (Panel B). To understand the implications of these interactive
models (Table 6, Panel A and B), we report Figures 6 and 7 with marginal effects of
Cash Flow estimated from the pooled model (Figure 6) and again separately for large
versus small groups (Figure 7). We report the marginal effects across the distribution of
lagged Bad Loans, varying from 0.01 to 0.07. The marginal effect increases as the health

30

of the firm’s bank(s) worsens. At the overall mean for Bad Loans in the crisis years
(0.034), the marginal effect of cash flow is about -0.10 in the pooled model. For firms
whose banks are one standard deviation above the mean of Bad Loans, the marginal
effect approximately doubles (and it is cut in half for firms that are one standard
deviation below the mean). For firms whose banks are most distressed, therefore, each 1€ decline in internal cash brings 0.2€ transfer from other group members.
Finally, over most of the distribution of bank health, the marginal effect of Cash
Flow is greater for firms belonging to larger groups than for smaller ones (Figure 7).
This confirms that larger groups generally respond more strongly with internal transfers
when a firm suffers a negative cash flow shock. The effect becomes larger for smaller
groups only when a firm’s lending banks become very distressed (above the 90th
percentile).
Is the Internal Capital Market Efficient?
We have seen that group membership increases firm survival, that this effect is
stronger in groups with high cash flow, and that groups move capital across firms during
the crisis years. Are these actions efficiency enhancing? Or, are groups propping up
weak firms (perhaps for reasons related to agency problems)? Most of our results point
toward efficiency. For example, sales growth is a strong predictor of both firm survival
and also, in most cases, of intra-group capital transfers. Among large groups, we find a
consistent positive relationship between sales growth and capital transfers in both the precrisis and post-crisis years. For firms in small groups, this relationship is weak during the
non-crisis years, but becomes positive and significant during the crisis.

31

As a last test for efficiency, Table 7 reports the capital transfer models of Panel B
of Table 6, after adding an interaction between the two cash flow variables (own and
other) with an indicator variable equal to one for firms with above-median sales growth
for that year. Efficiency in the internal capital market would imply that low cash flow
firms with high sales ought to receive more intra-group transfers than low cash flow firms
with low sales. In other words, Above-Median Sales*Cash flow ought to enter
negatively. The opposite would be true for other cash flow, meaning that Above-Median
Sales*Other Cash flow ought to enter positively.
For large groups, we find precisely these effects, and they are significant (or
almost significant at conventional levels) for both dimensions of cash flow shocks (own
and other). The economic effect is large, suggesting that the incremental effect of a
firm’s own Cash flow on internal transfers rises in (absolute) magnitude by about 0.03 to
0.08 for high-sales firms, which represents between an 80% to 120% increase above the
effect of Cash flow for low sales growth firms belonging to a large group. The effect of
high sales on the marginal effect of cash flow for small groups, however, enters
significantly only for the Other Cash flow term in the specification without group-year
fixed effects. Taken together, our results suggest that large groups make better use of
their internal capital markets than small ones.18
Bank Debt and Intra-Group Transfers
Up to now we have focused on how cash is transferred within a group: the cash
earned by an affiliated firm can provide financing for other member firms and this effect
18

We have also tested whether capital transfers respond more to cash flow for the largest firm within
groups. The evidence, which might point toward agency-based explanations for transfers, does not suggest
that transfers are more sensitive to cash flow in the case of ‘dominant” firms. We do not report these results
here, but they are available from the authors.

32

intensifies when external financial markets are distressed. However there is another
source of funding for intra-group transfers: a firm may borrow externally and then extend
that credit internally, effectively sharing their debt capacity with affiliated group
members. Such sharing likely diminishes in times when credit markets are tight.
To investigate the role of external finance as funds for the internal capital market,
we add bank debt to assets (from the prior year) to our specifications. Because bank debt
is a dimension of firm financial policy (as are net transfers, the outcome in these models),
drawing a causal inference becomes less compelling than in our earlier models that focus
on operating variables (i.e., cash flow and sales growth). Hence, we introduce this
variable as part of our last set of tests, with the caveat that drawing clear causal
inferences is difficult. As before, we include both a firm’s own bank borrowing and also
bank debt to assets averaged across all other firms in the group. We focus on bank debt
because it acts as the main source of external finance in Italy. Table 8 reports those
specifications that allow coefficients to vary between the pre and crisis periods (as in
Table 5). In Table 9, we replace the crisis/non-crisis interaction terms with interactions
using Bad Loans (as in Table 6).
The results confirm, as expected, that a firm’s own borrowing enters significantly
with a negative sign, while that of other affiliated firms enters positively. Thus, an
increase in a firm’s own debt capacity increases its net transfers to other firms;
conversely, an increase in the average debt capacity of other firms in the group increases
net transfers to this firm. Moreover, the results in Table 8 show that these effects are
attenuated during periods of crisis, when credit tightens. Thus, when external finance is
less abundant – during the crisis years – group-affiliated firms actively share cash flow

33

(internal funds); in contrast, when external finance is more abundant, they actively share
debt capacity (external funds). These conclusions are confirmed by the results in Table 9.
When the health of the bank(s) a firm borrows from deteriorates, less of the external
funds are distributed to other firms in the group. Specifically, the interaction between a
firm’s own bank borrowing and the health of its lenders enters positively (significantly so
in most models), meaning that weakened banking mitigates the sharing of debt capacity.19

V. Conclusions
We have shown that group affiliation becomes very important for firm survival
during the economic and financial distress that has plagued the Italian economy in recent
years. This effect does not reflect differences in fundamentals or cash flow to firms.
Group affiliation is not strongly correlated with changes in firm’s fundamentals during
the crisis years, as both affiliated and unaffiliated firms’ fortunes deteriorated sharply.
But group-affiliated firms have access to internal capital markets, which allows them to
survive despite declining credit supplied by banks. As evidence, we show that the overall
use of internal capital transfers increases sharply during the crisis years, and that those
transfers move funds from relatively cash-rich to relatively cash-poor firms within the
internal capital market. Transfers also respond positively to better investment
opportunities. Moreover, the marginal effect of a drop in cash flow on transfers is greater
for high sale growth firms belonging to large groups. We also find that the ability to
19

We have also explored whether there is any evidence that lending becomes more concentrated during the
crisis is a very limited number of firms. There is no clear evidence supporting this, using the CR1 or CR2
concentration ratios. Moreover we did not find evidence that the holding or sub-holdings play a large and
increasing role in borrowing from the outside. For instance, the firm with the highest bank borrowing
relative to total bank borrowing of the group, are holdings or sub-holdings only in approximately 20% of
the cases and this percentage does not vary much over time.

34

borrow from banks provides additional funds that are shared with other group members,
but this mechanism loses its potency during the crisis period. This last finding highlights
the importance of internal sources of funds combined with an active internal capital
market as a substitute for banking and external finance.

35

References
Albertazzi, U. and D. J. Marchetti (2010), “Credit Supply, Flight to Quality and
Evergreening: an Analysis of Bank-Firm Relationships after Lehman”, Economic
Working Papers, 756, Bank of Italy, Economic Research and International Relations
Area.
Allison, P. D. (1982), “Discrete-Time Methods for the Analysis of Event Histories”, in
S. Leinhardt (Ed.), Sociological methodology (pp. 61–98), San Francisco, Jossey-Bass.
Almeida, H., C.-S. Kim, and H.B. Kim. (2015), “Internal Capital Markets in Business
Groups: Evidence from the Asian Financial Crisis”, The Journal of Finance, 70: 2539–
2586.
Alti, A. (2003), “How Sensitive Is Investment to Cash Flow When Financing Is
Frictionless?”, The Journal of Finance, 58: 707–722.
Balduzzi, P., E. Brancati, and F. Schiantarelli (2016), “Financial Markets, Banks’ Cost
of Funding, and Firms’ Decisions: Lessons from Two Crises”, Boston College Working
Paper 824.
Bennedsen, M., K. M. Nielsen, F. Perez-Gonzalez, and D. Wolfenson (2007), “Inside
the Family Firm”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122: 647–691.
Bianchi M., M. Bianco, S. Giacomelli, A. M. Pacces, and S. Trento (2005), Proprietà e
Controllo delle Imprese in Italia, Bologna, Il Mulino.
Bianchi M., M. Bianco, S. Giacomelli, P. Maggio, V. Novembre, L. Russo, P. Santella
and R. Signoretti (2008), “The Evolution of Ownership and Control Structure in Italy in

the Last 15 Years”, Convegno su “Corporate Governance in Italia: a 10 anni
dal Testo Unico della Finanza”, 11 dicembre 2008, Roma, Banca d’Italia.
Bofondi, M., L. Carpinelli, and E. Sette (2013), “Credit Supply During a Sovereign
Debt Crisis”, Economic Working Papers, 909, Bank of Italy, Economic Research and
International Relations Area.
Bolton, P., X. Freixas, L. Gambacorta, and P. E. Mistrulli (2013), “Relationship and
Transaction Lending in a Crisis”, Economic Working Papers, 917, Bank of Italy,
Economic Research and International Relations Area.
Cannari L., and Gola C. (1996), “La Diffusione dei Gruppi Industriali in Italia” in I
gruppi di società: Atti del Convegno internazionale di studi di Venezia, 16-18 novembre
1995, Milano, Giuffrè, 2: 813–35.
Cingano, F., F. Manaresi and E. Sette (2016), “Does Credit Crunch Investment Down?
New Evidence on the Real Effects of the Bank Lending Channel”, The Review of
Financial Studies, 29: 2737 – 2773.

36

De Marco, F. (2015), “Bank Lending and the Sovereign Debt Crisis”, Bocconi
University.
Gopalan, R., V. Nanda, and A. Seru. (2007), “Affiliated Firms and Financial Support:
Evidence from Indian Business Groups”, Journal of Financial Economics, 86: 759–795.
La Porta, R. L., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer (1999), “Corporate Ownership
around the World”, The Journal of Finance, 54: 471–517.
Lamont, O. (1997), “Cash Flow and Investment: Evidence from Internal Capital
Markets”, The Journal of Finance, 52: 83–109.
Larry H. P. Lang, and René M. Stulz (1994), “Tobin's Q, Corporate Diversification, and
Firm Performance”, Journal of Political Economy, 102: 1248–1280.
Khanna, T. (2000), “Business Groups and Social Welfare in Emerging Markets:
Existing Evidence and Unanswered Questions”, European Economic Review, 44:748–
761.
Kuppuswamy, V. and B. Villalonga (2015), “Does Diversification Create Value in the
Presence of External Financing Constraints? Evidence from the 2007–2009 Financial
Crisis,” Management Science, 62, 905–923.
Matvos, G. and A. Seru (2014), Resource Allocation within Firms and Financial Market
Dislocation: Evidence from Diversified Conglomerates, The Review of Financial
Studies, 2: 1143–1189.
Matvos, G., A. Seru, and R. Silva (2016), “Financial Market Frictions and
Diversification”, available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2857986
Popov, A. and N. van Horen (2013), “The Impact of Sovereign Debt Exposure on Bank
Lending: Evidence from the European Debt Crisis”, DNB Working Papers, 382,
Netherlands Central Bank, Research Department.
Santioni, R. (2011), “Corporate Groups in Italy: a Macro-Regions Analysis 1998-2006,
Workshop on Economic integration between the Mezzogiorno and the Centre North”,
Bank of Italy.
Santioni R., and I. Supino (2017), “The Internal Capital Markets Under Financial
Constraints”, mimeo, Bank of Italy.
Scharfstein David S, and Jeremy C Stein (2000), “The Dark Side of Internal Capital
Markets: Divisional Rent-Seeking and Inefficient Investment”, The Journal of Finance,
55: 2537–2564.
Schiantarelli, F. and A. Sembenelli (2000), “Form of Ownership and Financial
Constraints: Panel Data Evidence From Flow of Funds and Investment Equations”,
Empirica, 27: 175–192.

37

Schiantarelli, F., M. Stacchini, and P. Strahan (2016), “Bank Quality, Judicial
Efficiency and Borrower Runs: Loan Repayment Delays in Italy”, Economic Working
Papers, 1072, Bank of Italy, Economic Research and International Relations Area.
Schoar, A. (2002), “Effects of Corporate Diversification on Productivity”, The Journal
of Finance, 57: 2379–2403.
Shin, Hyun-Han and René M. Stulz (1998), “Are Internal capital Markets Efficient?”,
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113: 531–552.
Singer, J. D., and J. B.Willett (1993), “It’s About Time: Using Discrete-Time Survival
Analysis to Study Duration and the Timing of Events”, Journal of Educational
Statistics, 18: 155–195.
Stein Jeremy C (1997), “Internal Capital Markets and the Competition for Corporate
Resources”, The Journal of Finance, 52: 111–133.
Villalonga, B. (2004), "Does Diversification Cause the "Diversification Discount"?"
Financial Management, 33: 5–27.
Whited, Toni M. (2001), "Is It Inefficient Investment That Causes the Diversification
Discount?" The Journal of Finance, 56: 1667–1691.

38

Data appendix

Bank level variables – Source: Supervisory Reports, Bank of Italy
(Bank level) Bad loans: exposures to insolvent counterparties (even if not legally
ascertained or formally written off); thousands of euros.
.
Total assets: bank’s total assets; thousands of euros.
Bad loans ratio: bad loans/total assets; thousands of euros.

Loan quality and lending relationship – Source: Credit Register, Bank of Italy
(Firm-bank level) Bad loans (as explanatory variable) end of year weighted average of
the lending banks’ ratio of bad loans to total assets (bad loans ratio), where the weights
equal the fraction of credit received by a given firm from each of its banks.

,

, ,

∑

, ,

∗

,
,

Firm level variables – Source: Balance sheet register (Cerved)
Sales growth: the annual percentage change in real sales; industry GDP deflator used to
deflate nominal sales.
Cash flow: net income minus extraordinary items plus depreciation and amortization
divided by end of previous year total assets; firm, year-level.
Other sales growth: the annual percentage change in real sales of all other firms affiliated
with the same group.
Other cash flow: the average of cash flow for all other firms affiliated with the same
group divided by end of previous year total assets.
Total assets: firm’s total assets; thousands of euros.

39

Bank debt: total amount of financial debt owed by a given firm towards the banking
system; thousands of euros.
Total borrowing: total amount of financial debt owed by a given firm in thousands of
euros.
Gross intra-group financial debt: total amount of financial debt owed by a given firm to
all other firms affiliated with the same group; thousands of euros.
Intra-group net financial position: total amount of financial debt owed by a given firm to
all other firms affiliated with the same group divided by end of previous year total assets,
net of credit given.
Intra-group net trade position: total amount of trade debt owed by a given firm to all
other firms affiliated with the same group, net of credit given firm divided by end of
previous year total assets.
Intra-group net position (total): intra-group net financial position plus intra-group net
trade position divided by end of previous year total assets.
Employees: number of employees.
Age: the number of years from date of incorporation of the company.
Asset ratio: total assets of the firm/total assets of all firms affiliated with the same group.

40

Table 1: Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics for the Universe of Firms based in Italy. The description of variables and their data sources are provided in the
Appendix.
Mean

Small domestic groups
Std.
Percentiles
25th
50th
75th
Dev.

Mean

0.121
2,177
0.036
0.343
0.018

0.594
6,442
0.077
0.329
0.220

Intra-Group Net Positions (total) /Assets
Other Sales Growth
Other Cash Flow/Assets
Bad Loans/Assets
Number of firms
Panel B: During the Crisis
Sales Growth
Total assets
Cash Flow/Assets
Total borrowing/Assets
Intra-Group Net Fin. Position/Assets

-0.021
0.076
0.122
0.022

0.243
0.460
0.295
0.012

0.034
2,551
0.030
0.325
0.011

0.510
8,840
0.079
0.305
0.220

-0.218
339
-0.002
0.021
-0.084

-0.023
953
0.025
0.259
0.002

0.144
2,519
0.066
0.549
0.078

0.024
42,037
0.032
0.312
0.031

Intra-Group Net Position (total) /Assets

-0.030

0.244

-0.147

-0.020

0.061

Other Sales Growth

0.003

0.401

-0.207

-0.023

Other Cash Flow /Assets
Bad Loans/Assets
Number of firms

0.103
0.039

0.259
0.022

0.000
0.023
156,221

0.020
0.034

Panel A: Before the Crisis
Sales Growth
Total assets
Cash Flow/Assets
Total borrowing/Assets
Intra-Group Net Fin. Position / Assets

-0.159
326
0.000
0.009
-0.076

Large domestic groups
Std.
Percentiles
25th
50th
75th
Dev.

0.003
908
0.028
0.268
0.001

0.218
2,354
0.071
0.581
0.080

0.110
37,611
0.041
0.330
0.034

0.507
727,964
0.072
0.289
0.204

-0.090
1,499
0.006
0.057
-0.046

0.025
5,919
0.034
0.288
0.001

0.178
16,480
0.076
0.519
0.081

-0.134 -0.018
-0.159
0.000
0.001
0.023
0.013
0.019
116,727

0.069
0.202
0.105
0.027

-0.018
0.065
0.262
0.023

0.237
0.308
0.454
0.012

-0.127
-0.061
0.004
0.015
43,792

-0.019
0.037
0.047
0.020

0.070
0.146
0.279
0.029

0.455
771,877
0.076
0.278
0.209

-0.171
1,714
0.000
0.047
-0.051

-0.016
6,422
0.029
0.267
0.001

0.118
18,339
0.069
0.497
0.089

-0.017

0.242

-0.131

-0.019

0.078

0.131

-0.008

0.300

-0.143

-0.015

0.096

0.096
0.050

0.214
0.040

0.385
0.021

0.002
0.025
44,341

0.036
0.035

0.247
0.051

Unaffiliated
Percentiles
25th
50th
75th

Mean

Std.
Dev.

0.100
1,923
0.046
0.294

0.494
57,676
0.099
0.305

-0.144
149
0.001
0.000

0.013
417
0.036
0.207

0.214
1,165
0.091
0.499

-0.024
415
0.031
0.196

0.139
1,141
0.082
0.470

362,665
0.015
1,801
0.038
0.277

0.419
61,077
0.098
0.284

-0.202
151
-0.001
0.000

444,021

Notes: (1) All figures obtained after winsorizing at the 5th and 95th percentiles. (2) Total borrowing includes all forms of external and internal (gross) financial debt.
(3) Intra-group net financial position includes intra-group financial borrowing minus intra-group financial lending. (4) Intra-group net position (total) includes
intra-group financial borrowing minus lending plus intra-group net trade debt (accounts payable minus accounts receivable).

41

Table 2: Transition matrix for the Universe of Italian Firms
This table reports transition probabilities for the Universe of Firms based in Italy over two, nonoverlapping periods: 2006 to 2010 and 2010 to 2014. The description of variables and their data
sources are provided in the Appendix.
Unaffiliated
firms

Small
domestic
groups

Large
domestic
groups

Foreign
groups

No
balance
sheet

2010
Unaffiliated firms

59.49%

6.62%

1.43%

0.12%

32.34%

Small domestic
groups

13.90%

53.54%

1.18%

0.14%

31.23%

2006 Large domestic
groups

10.76%

4.59%

58.15%

0.96%

25.54%

Foreign groups

8.03%

3.69%

7.18%

50.99%

30.12%

72.24%

22.96%

4.37%

0.43%

0.00%

New firms

2014
Unaffiliated firms

54.55%

4.80%

0.82%

0.06%

39.77%

Small domestic
groups

10.26%

50.74%

0.94%

0.08%

37.97%

2010 Large domestic
groups

6.57%

4.16%

59.70%

0.70%

28.88%

Foreign groups

6.19%

3.19%

6.19%

55.34%

29.10%

72.07%

23.27%

4.22%

0.44%

0.00%

New firms

42

Table 3A: Firm Failure by Group Affiliation
This table reports a discrete-time logistic hazard model for firms existing in 2006, from that year
until 2013. Firms that exit the sample during this period are modelled as failures, while those that
survive are right-censored. Sample includes both group-affiliated and independent firms. Firms
that enter the sample after 2006 are excluded. Standard errors clustered by firm.
Dependent Variable
Group*No crisis
Group*Crisis
Cash flowt-1/Assett-2
Sales growtht-1
Log age

Year FE
Industry FE
Location FE
Firm size FE
Industry*Year FE
Location*Year FE
Firm size*Year FE
Observations

Firm Failure
(1)
-0.1001***
(0.0084)
-0.3137***
(0.0077)
-

-0.2733***
(0.0025)

(2)
-0.1069***
(0.0093)
-0.2452***
(0.0080)
-6.5068***
(0.0408)
-0.6347***
(0.0099)
-0.3279***
(0.0028)

-0.2730***
(0.0025)

(4)
-0.0892***
(0.0094)
-0.2578***
(0.0082)
-6.5117***
(0.0410)
-0.6377***
(0.0100)
-0.3278***
(0.0028)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
1,843,836

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
1,692,124

No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
1,843,836

No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
1,692,124

-

43

(3)
-0.0857***
(0.0085)
-0.3246***
(0.0078)
-

Table 3B: Firm Failure by Group Affiliation and Firm Size
This table reports a discrete-time logistic hazard model for firms existing in 2006, from that year
until 2013. Firms that exit the sample during this period are modelled as failures, while those that
survive are right-censored. Sample includes both group-affiliated and independent firms. Firms
that enter the sample after 2006 are excluded. Standard errors clustered by firm.
Dependent Variable
(1)

Log age

-0.2742***
(0.0025)

-0.6751***
(0.0356)
-0.3341***
(0.0277)
-0.1341***
(0.0103)
-0.2281***
(0.0088)
0.0211
(0.0187)
-0.2815***
(0.0171)
-0.8337***
(0.0313)
-0.9698***
(0.0284)
-6.5099***
(0.0409)
-0.6360***
(0.0099)
-0.3287***
(0.0028)

Year FE
Industry FE
Location FE
Industry*Year FE
Location*Year FE
Observations

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
1,843,836

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
1,692,124

Large Independent*No crisis
Large Independent*Crisis
Small Firms in Small Group*No crisis
Small Firms in Small Group*Crisis
Small Firms in Large Group*No crisis
Small Firms in Large Group*Crisis
Large Firms in Large Group*No crisis
Large Firms in Large Group*Crisis
Cash flowt-1/Assett-2
Sales growtht-1

-0.7494***
(0.0332)
-0.3689***
(0.0245)
-0.1156***
(0.0093)
-0.2908***
(0.0084)
-0.0102
(0.0168)
-0.3423***
(0.0166)
-0.9886***
(0.0301)
-1.2425***
(0.0281)
-

Firm Failure
(2)
(3)

-

44

(4)

-0.7619***
(0.0333)
-0.3553***
(0.0246)
-0.1079***
(0.0094)
-0.2963***
(0.0085)
-0.0032
(0.0169)
-0.3451***
(0.0166)
-0.9930***
(0.0302)
-1.2367***
(0.0282)
-

-0.2740***
(0.0025)

-0.6933***
(0.0356)
-0.3197***
(0.0277)
-0.1229***
(0.0104)
-0.2367***
(0.0089)
0.0317*
(0.0189)
-0.2864***
(0.0171)
-0.8501***
(0.0314)
-0.9567***
(0.0284)
-6.5165***
(0.0410)
-0.6389***
(0.0100)
-0.3283***
(0.0028)

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
1,843,836

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
1,692,124

-

Table 4: Firm Failure and Access to Group-Level Cash Flow and Sales Growth
This table reports a discrete-time logistic hazard model for firms existing in 2006, from that year
until 2013. Firms that exit the sample during this period are modeled as failures, while those that
survive are right-censored. Sample includes only group-affiliated firms. Firms that enter the
sample after 2006 are excluded. Standard errors clustered by firm.
Dependent Variable
(1)
Pooled

Firm Failure
(2)
Small Groups

-

-

-

-

(3)
Large Groups
-0.2521***
(0.0688)
-0.2014***
(0.0677)

-0.3926***
(0.0270)
-0.6204***
(0.0410)
-5.9441***
(0.1696)
-9.2577***
(0.1779)

-0.3689***
(0.0329)
-0.5213***
(0.0453)
-6.8633***
(0.2199)
-9.0209***
(0.2132)

-0.4296***
(0.0463)
-0.8680***
(0.0843)
-4.4648***
(0.2604)
-9.2279***
(0.3108)

-0.0073
(0.0295)
-0.1163***
(0.0327)
-0.1710***
(0.0326)
-0.4495***
(0.0458)

0.0185
(0.0325)
-0.0849**
(0.0357)
-0.2492***
(0.0497)
-0.5984***
(0.0658)

-0.1181*
(0.0682)
-0.2640***
(0.0733)
-0.1279***
(0.0425)
-0.2842***
(0.0628)

-0.2532***
(0.0067)
-0.2180***
(0.0080)
-0.2886***
(0.0115)
-0.2958***
(0.0103)

-0.2390***
(0.0097)
-0.3213***
(0.0123)
-0.3059***
(0.0141)
-0.2978***
(0.0124)

-0.2719***
(0.0099)
-0.1908***
(0.0119)
-0.2588***
(0.0192)
-0.2490***
(0.0182)

No Crisis
Crisis
Own Fundamentals:
Sales growtht-1*No Crisis
Sales growtht-1*Crisis
Cash flowt-1/Assett-2*No Crisis
Cash flowt-1/Assett-2*Crisis
Other Fundamentals:
Other Sales growtht-1*No Crisis
Other Sales growtht-1*Crisis
Other Cash flowt-1/Assett-2*No Crisis
Other Cash flowt-1 /Assett-2*Crisis
No Crisis*Log (asset ratio)t-1
Crisis*Log (asset ratio)t-1
No Crisis*Log age
Crisis*Log age
Industry * Year FE
Location * Year FE
Firm size * Year FE
Firm Clustered St. Errors
Observations

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
338,814

45

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
338,814

Table 5A: Intra-Group Capital Transfers
This table reports regressions of intra-group transfers as a function of sales growth and cash flow
at the firm-level and cash flow and sales growth for other firms affiliated with the same group.
Columns 1 and 2 include just net financial transfers, while columns 3 and 4 incorporate net trade
position. Increases in the dependent variable reflect increased borrowing from group-affiliated
sources.
Dependent Variable

Own Fundamentals:
Sales growtht*No Crisis
Sales growtht*Crisis
Cash flowt/Assett-1*No Crisis
Cash flowt/Assett-1*Crisis
Other Fundamentals:
Other Sales growtht*No Crisis
Other Sales growtht*Crisis
Other Cash flowt/Assett-1*No Crisis
Other Cash flowt /Assett-1*Crisis
Industry*Year FE
Location*Year FE
Group*Year FE
Firm FE
Group*Year & Firm Clustered St. Errors
Observations
R-squared

Intra-Group Financial
Positiont/Assetst-1

Intra-Group Financial and
Trade Positiont/Assetst-1

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.0087***
(0.0016)
0.0075***
(0.0011)
-0.0094
(0.0169)
-0.1483***
(0.0119)

0.0068**
(0.0034)
0.0112***
(0.0022)
-0.0194
(0.0283)
-0.2038***
(0.0195)

0.0055*
(0.0030)
0.0046**
(0.0019)
-0.0670**
(0.0262)
-0.2648***
(0.0179)

0.0073
(0.0051)
0.0057*
(0.0035)
-0.0687*
(0.0411)
-0.3222***
(0.0272)

-0.0020
(0.0016)
0.0013
(0.0011)
0.0330***
(0.0045)
0.0230***
(0.0043)
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
171,102
0.788

-0.0091
(0.0060)
0.0053
(0.0040)
0.0409***
(0.0062)
0.0188***
(0.0061)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
110,303
0.858

-0.0050*
(0.0027)
0.0028
(0.0020)
0.0111*
(0.0067)
0.0100
(0.0065)
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
100,459
0.789

0.0039
(0.0106)
0.0061
(0.0066)
0.0147*
(0.0089)
-0.0014
(0.0089)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
67,317
0.863

46

Table 5B: Intra-Group Capital Transfers, by group size
This table reports regressions of intra-group transfers as a function of sales growth and cash flow
at the firm-level and cash flow and sales growth for other firms affiliated with the same group.
Columns 1 and 2 represent one regression, and columns 3 and 4 represent the other. Increases in
the dependent variable reflect increased borrowing from group-affiliated sources.
Dependent Variable

Own Fundamentals:
Sales growtht*No Crisis
Sales growtht*Crisis
Cash flowt/Assett-1*No Crisis
Cash flowt/Assett-1*Crisis
Other Fundamentals:
Other Sales growtht*No Crisis
Other Sales growtht*Crisis
Other Cash flowt /Assett-1*No Crisis
Other Cash flowt /Assett-1*Crisis
Group size*Industry*Year FE
Group size*Location*Year FE
Group*Year FE
Firm FE
Group*Year & Firm Clustered St. Errors
Observations
R-squared

Intra-Group Financial Positiont/Assetst-1
(1)
Small
Groups

(2)
Large
Groups

(3)
Small
Groups

(4)
Large
Groups

-0.0003
(0.0021)
0.0058***
(0.0013)
0.0633**
(0.0275)
-0.0749***
(0.0166)

0.0141***
(0.0023)
0.0090***
(0.0017)
-0.0357*
(0.0207)
-0.1864***
(0.0157)

-0.0153
(0.0125)
0.0130***
(0.0046)
0.1200*
(0.0687)
-0.0679**
(0.0337)

0.0086**
(0.0036)
0.0124***
(0.0026)
-0.0430
(0.0314)
-0.2333***
(0.0231)

-0.0027
-0.0025
(0.0023)
(0.0022)
0.0007
0.0020
(0.0015)
(0.0018)
0.0432*** 0.0285***
(0.0097)
(0.0049)
0.0464*** 0.0174***
(0.0077)
(0.0049)
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
170,810
0.793

47

-0.0370**
-0.0109
(0.0174)
(0.0075)
0.0061
0.0079
(0.0070)
(0.0052)
0.0685*** 0.0357***
(0.0182)
(0.0067)
0.0678***
0.0130*
(0.0137)
(0.0067)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
109,552
0.864

Table 6A: Intra-Group Capital Transfers and Bank Health
This table reports regressions of intra-group transfers as a function of sales growth and cash flow at the
firm-level and cash flow and sales growth for other firms affiliated with the same group. Increases in the
dependent variable reflect increased borrowing from group-affiliated sources.
Dependent Variable

Intra-Group Financial Positiont/Assetst-1
All Years

Own Fundamentals:
Sales growtht
Sales growtht*Bad loanst-1
Cash flowt/Assett-1
Cash flowt/Assett-1*Bad loanst-1
Bad loanst-1
Other Fundamentals:
Other Sales growtht
Other Sales growtht*Bad loanst-1
Other Cash flowt /Assett-1
Other Cash flowt /Assett-1*Bad loanst-1
Industry*Year FE
Location*Year FE
Group*Year FE
Firm FE
Group*Year Clustered St. Errors
Firm Clustered St. Errors
Observations
R-squared

Post-Crisis Only

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.0060***
(0.0019)
-0.1206**
(0.0568)
-0.0064
(0.0197)
-2.6131***
(0.5096)
0.0948*
(0.0571)

0.0088**
(0.0039)
-0.1916*
(0.1085)
-0.0573
(0.0356)
-2.2147**
(0.8919)
0.1755*
(0.1045)

0.0082***
(0.0024)
-0.1756***
(0.0634)
0.0047
(0.0235)
-2.6281***
(0.5466)
0.0840
(0.0606)

0.0129***
(0.0050)
-0.2194*
(0.1245)
-0.0490
(0.0417)
-2.0822**
(0.9748)
0.2167*
(0.1181)

-0.0000
(0.0020)
-0.0007
(0.0590)
0.0236***
(0.0071)
0.1168
(0.1855)
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
127,450
0.780

0.0053
(0.0065)
-0.1275
(0.1692)
0.0258**
(0.0101)
-0.0661
(0.2443)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
70,524
0.865

-0.0007
(0.0025)
0.0501
(0.0663)
0.0230**
(0.0096)
0.0751
(0.2129)
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
84,652
0.834

-0.0019
(0.0075)
0.2041
(0.1858)
0.0286**
(0.0129)
-0.0316
(0.2809)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
46,896
0.893

48

Table 6B: Intra-Group Capital Transfers and Bank Health
This table reports regressions of intra-group transfers as a function of sales growth and cash flow at the
firm-level and cash flow and sales growth for other firms affiliated with the same group. Columns 1 and
2 represent one regression, and columns 3 and 4 represent the other. Increases in the dependent variable
reflect increased borrowing from group-affiliated sources.
Dependent Variable

Own Fundamentals:
Sales growtht
Sales growtht*Bad loanst-1
Cash flowt/Assett-1
Cash flowt/Assett-1*Bad loanst-1
Bad loanst-1
Other Fundamentals:
Other Sales growtht
Other Sales growtht*Bad loanst-1
Other Cash flowt /Assett-1
Other Cash flowt /Assett-1*Bad loanst-1

Intra-Group Financial Positiont/Assetst-1
(1)
Small
Groups

(2)
Large
Groups

(3)
Small
Groups

(4)
Large
Groups

0.0029
(0.0024)
-0.1091
(0.0706)
0.0851***
(0.0299)
-4.2366***
(0.8152)
0.1876**
(0.0882)

0.0082***
(0.0030)
-0.1112
(0.0903)
-0.0460*
(0.0252)
-1.9996***
(0.6437)
0.0706
(0.0732)

0.0007
(0.0086)
-0.1637
(0.2039)
0.0617
(0.0794)
-2.5242
(2.0713)
0.1813
(0.2350)

0.0104**
(0.0046)
-0.1824
(0.1343)
-0.0915**
(0.0406)
-2.0907**
(1.0217)
0.1950
(0.1190)

-0.0022
(0.0026)
0.0443
(0.0771)
0.0356**
(0.0157)
-0.1050
(0.4417)

0.0009
(0.0030)
-0.0141
(0.0905)
0.0198**
(0.0078)
0.1671
(0.2042)

-0.0094
(0.0117)
0.0869
(0.2642)
0.0673*
(0.0368)
-0.7921
(0.9149)

0.0107
(0.0088)
-0.2852
(0.2317)
0.0211*
(0.0108)
-0.0098
(0.2596)

Group size*Industry*Year FE
Group size*Location*Year FE
Group*Year FE
Firm FE
Group*Year Clustered St. Errors
Firm Clustered St. Errors
Observations
R-squared

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
127,094
0.787

49

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
69,572
0.872

Table 7: Intra-Group Capital Transfers and Bank Health with Above-Median Sales
Indicator
This table reports regressions of intra-group transfers as a function of sales growth and cash flow at the
firm-level and cash flow and sales growth for other firms affiliated with the same group. Columns 1 and
2 represent one regression, and columns 3 and 4 represent the other. Increases in the dependent variable
reflect increased borrowing from group-affiliated sources.
Dependent Variable

Own Fundamentals:
Sales growtht
Sales growtht*Bad loanst-1
Cash flowt/Assett-1
Cash flowt/Assett-1*Bad loanst-1
Bad loanst-1
Other Fundamentals:
Other Sales growtht
Other Sales growtht*Bad loanst-1
Other Cash flowt /Assett-1
Other Cash flowt /Assett-1*Bad loanst-1
Cash Flow Interactions:
Above-Median Sales Growth
Above-Median Sales*Cash flowt/Assetst-1
Above-Median Sales*Other Cash flowt/Assetst-1

Intra-Group Financial Positiont/Assetst-1
(1)
Small
Groups

(2)
Large
Groups

(3)
Small
Groups

(4)
Large
Groups

0.0016
(0.0025)
-0.1088
(0.0706)
0.0738**
(0.0317)
-4.2223***
(0.8129)
0.1891**
(0.0881)

0.0055*
(0.0031)
-0.1200
(0.0903)
-0.0337
(0.0264)
-2.0389***
(0.6434)
0.0717
(0.0731)

-0.0013
(0.0088)
-0.1716
(0.2039)
0.0690
(0.0849)
-2.4880
(2.0727)
0.1900
(0.2349)

0.0068
(0.0048)
-0.1987
(0.1343)
-0.0582
(0.0435)
-2.1756**
(1.0231)
0.1968*
(0.1189)

-0.0023
(0.0026)
0.0448
(0.0771)
0.0224
(0.0163)
-0.0820
(0.4361)

0.0009
(0.0030)
-0.0178
(0.0904)
0.0139*
(0.0084)
0.1889
(0.2046)

-0.0090
(0.0117)
0.0871
(0.2636)
0.0621*
(0.0374)
-0.8173
(0.9094)

0.0101
(0.0088)
-0.2826
(0.2314)
0.0127
(0.0114)
0.0237
(0.2593)

0.0012
(0.0017)
0.0167
(0.0217)
0.0247**
(0.0113)

0.0040***
(0.0014)
-0.0316*
(0.0178)
0.0101**
(0.0047)

0.0043
(0.0047)
-0.0273
(0.0626)
0.0126
(0.0207)

Group size*Industry*Year FE
Group size*Location*Year FE
Group*Year FE
Firm FE
Group*Year Clustered St. Errors
Firm Clustered St. Errors
Observations
R-squared

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
127,094
0.787

50

0.0055**
(0.0024)
-0.0745***
(0.0278)
0.0141**
(0.0059)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
69,572
0.872

Table 8: Intra-Group Capital Transfers and Bank Borrowing
This table reports regressions of intra-group transfers as a function of sales growth, cash flow and rating
at the firm-level and cash flow, sales growth and rating for other firms affiliated with the same group.
Columns 1 and 2 include just net financial transfers, while columns 3 and 4 incorporate net trade position.
Increases in the dependent variable reflect increased borrowing from group-affiliated sources.
Dependent Variable

Own Fundamentals:
Sales growtht*No Crisis
Sales growtht*Crisis
Cash flowt/Assett-1*No Crisis
Cash flowt/Assett-1*Crisis
Bank debt t-1/Assett-1*No Crisis
Bank debt t-1/Assett-1*Crisis
Other Fundamentals:
Other Sales growtht*No Crisis
Other Sales growtht*Crisis
Other Cash flowt/Assett-1*No Crisis
Other Cash flowt /Assett-1*Crisis
Other Bank debt t-1/Assett-1*No Crisis
Other Bank debt t-1/Assett-1*Crisis
Industry*Year FE
Location*Year FE
Group*Year FE
Firm FE
Group*Year & Firm Clustered St. Errors
Observations
R-squared

Intra-Group Financial Positiont/Assetst-1
(1)
Pooled

(2)
Pooled

0.0081***
(0.0018)
0.0071***
(0.0011)
-0.0216
(0.0191)
-0.1592***
(0.0132)
-0.0607***
(0.0062)
-0.0195***
(0.0062)

0.0053
(0.0035)
0.0124***
(0.0023)
-0.0540*
(0.0310)
-0.2222***
(0.0211)
-0.0802***
(0.0103)
-0.0364***
(0.0099)

0.0006
(0.0019)
0.0018
(0.0013)
0.0228***
(0.0047)
0.0172***
(0.0046)
0.0054***
(0.0008)
0.0048***
(0.0008)
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
146,225
0.787

-0.0029
(0.0065)
0.0115***
(0.0043)
0.0256***
(0.0070)
0.0084
(0.0069)
0.0059***
(0.0011)
0.0042***
(0.0011)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
96,140
0.854

51

(3)
Small
Groups
-0.0026
(0.0025)
0.0046***
(0.0014)
0.0529
(0.0333)
-0.0883***
(0.0192)
-0.0462***
(0.0089)
-0.0114
(0.0084)

(4)
Large
Groups
0.0134***
(0.0024)
0.0089***
(0.0017)
-0.0462**
(0.0226)
-0.1905***
(0.0168)
-0.0684***
(0.0075)
-0.0262***
(0.0074)

(5)
Small
Groups
-0.0312**
(0.0143)
0.0142***
(0.0049)
0.0747
(0.0922)
-0.1203***
(0.0403)
-0.0638***
(0.0219)
-0.0470**
(0.0189)

(6)
Large
Groups
0.0077**
(0.0037)
0.0130***
(0.0026)
-0.0743**
(0.0335)
-0.2392***
(0.0243)
-0.0817***
(0.0115)
-0.0315***
(0.0112)

0.0001
(0.0028)
0.0005
(0.0017)
0.0273***
(0.0104)
0.0391***
(0.0083)
0.0072***
(0.0015)
0.0076***
(0.0014)

-0.0006
(0.0026)
0.0030
(0.0020)
0.0192***
(0.0052)
0.0120**
(0.0052)
0.0049***
(0.0009)
0.0041***
(0.0009)

-0.0535***
(0.0203)
0.0188**
(0.0077)
0.0532*
(0.0273)
0.0269
(0.0171)
0.0101***
(0.0024)
0.0117***
(0.0023)

-0.0039
(0.0078)
0.0102*
(0.0055)
0.0239***
(0.0075)
0.0086
(0.0075)
0.0050***
(0.0012)
0.0030**
(0.0012)

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
145,872
0.793

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
95,304
0.860

Table 9: Intra-Group Capital Transfers and Bank Borrowing
This table reports regressions of intra-group transfers as a function of sales growth, cash flow and rating
at the firm-level and cash flow, sales growth and rating for other firms affiliated with the same group.
Columns 1 and 2 represent one regression, and columns 3 and 4 represent the other. Increases in the
dependent variable reflect increased borrowing from group-affiliated sources.
Dependent Variable

Own Fundamentals:
Sales growtht
Sales growtht*Bad loanst-1
Cash flowt/Assett-1
Cash flowt/Assett-1*Bad loanst-1
Bad loanst-1
Bank debt t-1/Assett-1
Bank debt t-1/Assett-1 * Bad loanst-1
Other Fundamentals:
Other Sales growtht
Other Sales growtht*Bad loanst-1
Other Cash flowt/Assett-1
Other Cash flowt /Assett-1*Bad loanst-1
Other Bank debt t-1/Assett-1
Other Bank debt t-1/Assett-1 * Bad loanst-1
Industry*Year FE
Location*Year FE
Group*Year FE
Firm FE
Group*Year & Firm Clustered St. Errors
Observations
R-squared

Intra-Group Financial Positiont/Assetst-1
(1)
Pooled

(2)
Pooled

0.0055***
(0.0021)
-0.1098*
(0.0621)
-0.0185
(0.0220)
-2.4270***
(0.5692)
-0.0539
(0.0795)
-0.0474***
(0.0077)
0.6070***
(0.1857)

0.0086**
(0.0040)
-0.1782
(0.1097)
-0.0782**
(0.0367)
-2.0858**
(0.9196)
0.0171
(0.1355)
-0.0594***
(0.0137)
0.5909*
(0.3341)

0.0011
(0.0022)
-0.0115
(0.0677)
0.0157**
(0.0079)
0.1080
(0.2181)
0.0068***
(0.0014)
0.0279
(0.0328)
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
111,643
0.781

0.0076
(0.0066)
-0.1404
(0.1729)
0.0159
(0.0111)
-0.2291
(0.2795)
0.0086***
(0.0018)
0.0453
(0.0423)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
67,982
0.866

52

(3)
Small
Groups
0.0005
(0.0027)
-0.0588
(0.0803)
0.0734**
(0.0351)
-3.9212***
(0.9394)
0.0958
(0.1269)
-0.0338***
(0.0110)
0.5133*
(0.2741)

(4)
Large
Groups
0.0088***
(0.0031)
-0.1311
(0.0941)
-0.0568**
(0.0274)
-1.8797***
(0.7000)
-0.0938
(0.0967)
-0.0543***
(0.0097)
0.6471***
(0.2333)

(5)
Small
Groups
-0.0004
(0.0090)
-0.0605
(0.2095)
0.0497
(0.0836)
-2.8087
(2.1789)
-0.1889
(0.3040)
-0.0689**
(0.0275)
0.8494
(0.6323)

-0.0001
(0.0030)
-0.0217
(0.0895)
0.0220
(0.0167)
0.0108
(0.4781)
0.0103***
(0.0028)
0.0033
(0.0645)

0.0009
(0.0034)
0.0243
(0.1030)
0.0135
(0.0088)
0.1213
(0.2457)
0.0058***
(0.0016)
0.0345
(0.0374)

-0.0035
(0.0121)
0.0464
(0.2716)
0.0216
(0.0394)
-0.4582
(1.0205)
0.0067
(0.0041)
0.1868*
(0.0970)

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
111,215
0.788

(6)
Large
Groups
0.0108**
(0.0047)
-0.1957
(0.1356)
-0.1116***
(0.0416)
-1.9199*
(1.0506)
0.0671
(0.1502)
-0.0524***
(0.0157)
0.5079
(0.3879)

0.0115
(0.0089)
-0.2589
(0.2365)
0.0141
(0.0120)
-0.1695
(0.3015)
0.0081***
(0.0019)
0.0345
(0.0471)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
67,010
0.873

Figure 1: Italian GDP growth rate and Aggregate Bad loans Ratio
This figure reports Italian GDP growth rate and the aggregate bad loan to total loan ratio for
the Italian banking system from 2003 to 2015.

Figure 2: Gross Intra-Group Financial Debt
This figure reports the growth in aggregate Gross Intra-Group Financial Debt, bank debt for
continuing firms. Values in 2004 normalized to 100. The description of variables and their
data sources are provided in the Appendix.

53

Figure 3: Bad loans ratio
This figure reports the time-series and cross-sectional variation of the median and 5th and 95th
percentile range for the firm-bank’s bad loans-to-assets ratio, from 2004 to 2014. The
description of variables and their data sources are provided in the Appendix.

Figure 4: Kaplan-Meier survival estimates
This figure plots the Kaplan-Meier survival estimates for firms that exist in 2006 over the subsequent
seven years (until 2013). The vertical axis equals the fraction of firms that remain in the sample in that
year.

54

Figure 5: Cash flow coefficients by year
This figure reports the coefficient on firm cash flow in regressions of Net Intra-group Capital
Transfers like those of Table 5, allowing the marginal effect to vary in each year in the sample.

Figure 6: Marginal effect of own cash flow
This figure plots the marginal effect of own cash flow on intra group transfer (vertical axis) as a
function of the bad loans ratio (horizontal axis), based on the models of Table 6A.

55

Figure 7: Marginal effect of own cash flow, by group size
This figure plots the marginal effect of own cash flow on intra group transfer (vertical axis) as a
function of the bad loans ratio (horizontal axis), for small and large groups. The regression
coefficients are based on the models of Table 6B.

56

