                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE DISAPPOINTING RECOVERY OF OUTPUT AFTER 2009

                                       John G. Fernald
                                        Robert E. Hall
                                       James H. Stock
                                       Mark W. Watson

                                      Working Paper 23543
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23543


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2017




We thank Laurence Ball, Vasco Curdia, David Romer, Glenn Rudebusch, John Williams, and
Jonathan Wright; the seminar and conference participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and the
Brookings Institution; our editor, Janice Eberly; and discussants Robert Barro and Lucrezia
Reichlin. We also thank John Coglianese and Neil Gerstein for excellent research assistance. The
views in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as
reflecting the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, or the Business Cycle Dating Committee of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Hall's research was supported by the Hoover Institution. This paper will
appear in the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity; some of the authors received honorariums
from the Brookings Institution in connection with the paper. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by John G. Fernald, Robert E. Hall, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Disappointing Recovery of Output after 2009
John G. Fernald, Robert E. Hall, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson
NBER Working Paper No. 23543
June 2017
JEL No. E22,E24,E32,J21

                                           ABSTRACT

U.S. output has expanded only slowly since the recession trough in 2009, even though the
unemployment rate has essentially returned to a pre-crisis, normal level. We use a growth-
accounting decomposition to explore explanations for the output shortfall, giving full treatment to
cyclical effects that, given the depth of the recession, should have implied unusually fast growth.
We find that the growth shortfall has almost entirely reflected two factors: the slow growth of
total factor productivity, and the decline in labor force participation. Both factors reflect powerful
adverse forces that are largely unrelated to the financial crisis and recession—and that were in
play before the recession.

John G. Fernald                                   James H. Stock
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco             Department of Economics
Economic Research Department                      Harvard University
Mailstop 1130                                     Littauer Center M26
101 Market Street, 11th floor                     Cambridge, MA 02138
San Francisco, CA 94105                           and NBER
fernaldjg@gmail.com                               James_Stock@harvard.edu

Robert E. Hall                                    Mark W. Watson
Hoover Institution                                Department of Economics
Stanford University                               Princeton University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010                           Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER                                          and NBER
rehall@gmail.com                                  mwatson@princeton.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23543
        Why did U.S. output grow so slowly in the post-2009 recovery, especially relative to

recovery in unemployment? The unemployment rate fell at a pace within the range of the

previous three cyclical expansions—see Figure 1, left panel, where the dashed arrows show

changes in the unemployment rate from the troughs of recent recessions. In contrast, the right

panel shows that the growth of output after 2009 has fallen far short. Output per person—the

solid black line, in logs—fell sharply in the recession and, as of this writing, remains below any

reasonable linear trend line extending its pre-recession trajectory.

       The dashed red line provides an alternative output path that removes the normal cyclical

effects of the deep recession in a simple way, using Okun’s Law, as described later. The picture

is striking: this line is nowhere close to a straight-line projection from the 2007 peak. Rather,

cyclically adjusted output per person rose only slowly after 2007 and then plateaued.

       We argue for taking this dashed red line seriously as the counterfactual path of output in

the absence of the recession. Viewed relative to this path, what appears to be a slow recovery of

output reflects something quite different: The U.S. economy suffered a deep recession

superimposed on a sharply slowing trend.

       We use Solow-style growth accounting to tease out the various components underlying

the flattening of the red line. Two components explain nearly all the growth gap: slow growth in

total factor productivity growth (TFP) and falling labor force participation. The participation

decline causes cyclically adjusted hours worked per person to fall sharply. Slowly rising TFP and

falling hours per person together imply flat cyclically adjusted output per person.

       We do not focus directly on the collapse of demand that began at the end of 2007 and that

worsened a great deal after the financial crisis at the end of 2008. This is not because we believe

that the demand effects were small. In our estimates, the collapse in demand led to a very large

cumulative loss in output, as measured by the area between the dashed, cyclically adjusted line
and the solid line in the figure. But by 2016, the economy had returned to full employment, so

the disappointing level of output at that point reflected non-demand factors.

        The crucial question that arises from the growth accounting is whether the factors

explaining the shortfall in some way reflect lasting effects of the recession on output—hysteresis,

in other words. Three channels are the leading candidates for hysteresis: TFP, labor-force

participation, and the capital stock. We examine these three channels in detail to understand

whether the endpoints of the corresponding variables in 2016 were influenced by the post-2007

experience of recession and slow recovery. Our answer is no. Instead, these factors reflect

powerful adverse forces largely (if not entirely) unrelated to the financial crisis and recession.

        The forces of slow growth of the labor force and of TFP were in play before the

recession. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO, 2006) and Aaronson and others (2006)

forecasted declines in participation as the baby boom retired and the 1960s to 1980s surge of

women into the labor force plateaued. And Oliner, Sichel, and Stiroh (2007) and Jorgenson, Ho,

and Stiroh (2008) noted before the recession that TFP growth had slowed, though that slowdown

is now more easily seen with the benefit of subsequent data as well as data revisions.

        This said, it took time for these slow-growth trends to be appreciated. Figure 2 shows

that, during the recovery, professional forecasters regularly over-predicted output growth even

while being too pessimistic about the recovery of the unemployment rate. These forecasts are

representative of other real-time forecasts by the CBO, the Federal Open Market Committee

(Lansing and Pyle, 2015), and the Council of Economic Advisers. These overoptimistic GDP

forecasts constitute an alternative framing of the disappointing recovery of output.

        Although the broad trends in both participation and TFP appear to be essentially

exogenous to the business cycle, investment is inherently endogenous. Capital accumulation was,

as many have noted, lower than in previous recoveries. But we attribute this shortfall to the

forces responsible for slower trend output growth. By mid-2016, the capital-output ratio was

close to its pre-recession trend line.

                                                      2
       Under standard growth theory, slower TFP growth and falling participation should raise

the capital-output ratio, since less investment is needed simply to keep pace with technology and

the labor force. This higher capital-output ratio reduces the marginal product of capital and

lowers the equilibrium real interest rate. By 2016, the cyclically-adjusted capital-output ratio had

returned to its trend growth path, but not above that path as growth theory would suggest.

Possibly, additional capital deepening lies ahead. Or, other factors might have depressed the

steady-state capital-output ratio. Gutierrez and Philippon (2016) argue that investment has been

held back by rising market power, which lowers the marginal revenue product of capital and thus

discourages capital formation. Alexander and Eberly (2016) attribute part of the decline in

investment to the relocation of capital-intensive manufacturing industries outside the U.S.

Importantly, neither of these hypotheses is obviously related to the recession.

       Although our account leaves little room for demand-side explanations of persistently

slow growth, we do investigate demand-side forces. Two quantitatively important factors are the

unusually slow growth of federal government purchases during 2012 through 2014, which we

associate in part with the sequester; and the delay in the usual rebound of state and local

government purchases, which we associate with the housing market collapse and the financial

crisis. Absent such delays, output growth would have been higher early in the recovery. The

black line in Figure 1 would have intersected the red line sooner, implying less cumulative loss

in output (and employment). But, looking over the entire recovery, the seeds of the disappointing

growth in output were sown prior to the recession in the form of a declining participation rate

and slow TFP growth. Indeed, the scaling back of consumption and investment plans in response

to slowing TFP growth could induce its own recessionary pressures beyond those from the

financial crisis alone. Blanchard, Lorenzoni, and L’Huillier (2017) show that this effect could be

large, especially with interest rates at the zero lower bound.

       Turning now to the details of our analysis, we use counterfactual “cyclically adjusted”

paths that variables would have followed, absent the recession. We use two methods of cyclical

                                                      3
adjustment. The first, used for the counterfactual output path in Figure 1, measures the cycle

using the unemployment rate and adjusts the variables in the growth accounting identity using a

version of Okun’s law. The second, which we use primarily for our analysis of sources of slow

demand growth and the timing of the recovery, conditions instead on the state of the economy at

the cyclical trough in 2009 to compute a baseline forecast from a dynamic factor model. The first

method measures slow growth, relative to the recovery in the unemployment rate; the second

measures slow growth, relative to a “normal recovery” forecast made at the trough. As discussed

in Section 3, after adjusting for these differences, the two methods provide similar estimates of

the growth decomposition, so our growth accounting analysis focuses on the Okun’s law method.

       The Okun method implies that growth of business output per person in the recovery fell

short of its average in the three prior recoveries by 1.8 percentage points (pp) per year,

cumulating to a total shortfall over the recovery of 13.5 percent. The TFP shortfall contributed

nearly 1 pp per year, or 7 pp of the cumulative output shortfall. The participation shortfall

accounted for 0.9 pp per year of the output shortfall, or 6.1 pp of the cumulative shortfall.

       The centrality of the decline in TFP growth and the fall of the labor force participation

rate leads us to examine them in greater detail in Sections IV and V.

       Total factor productivity. Time series methods date the slowdown in cyclically adjusted

TFP growth before the recession. Regime-shift detection methods estimate a break date in early

2006. Alternative Bayesian estimates and standard low-pass filtering, neither of which assumes a

sharp break, place the slowdown even earlier. The timing matters: If the slowdown in TFP

growth occurred before the recession, the recession cannot be its cause.

       In addition, weak investment and capital growth were not important independent

contributors to weak output growth over this recovery. Actual investment was almost exactly in

line with our simulated forecast at the beginning of the recovery. Furthermore, as noted above,

by 2016, the capital/output ratio was in line with its long-term trend. As a result, the shortfall in

labor productivity is almost entirely explained by weak TFP growth.

                                                      4
       Given the importance for the recovery of the pre-recession slowdown in TFP growth, we

review a number of candidate explanations for the mid-2000s TFP slowdown and provide some

new evidence against one, namely changes in regulations. We lean toward the hypothesis that the

slowdown reflects a slowdown in the broad-based, transformative effects of information

technology—a productivity boom that began in the mid-1990s ended in the mid-2000s.

       The labor force participation rate. In 2016, the participation rate, at 62.7 percent, was

three percentage points below its value at the trough. Although different methods for estimating

the cyclical component of the participation rate provide different estimates of its cyclical decline

early in the recovery, by 2016 that cyclical contribution was small.

       Baby-boom retirements are an important factor behind the decline in participation. Less

widely recognized is that other factors partially push the other way, notably the increasing

education levels of the newly older workers. We construct an annual index that allows for

shifting population shares in age, education, gender, and marital status. These demographic

effects account for 0.6 pp of the overall decline of 1.8 pp from 2010 to 2016. Changes in

participation rates within detailed demographic groups account for the remaining 1.2 pp, or

nearly two-thirds, of the decline.

       There is no consensus about the sources of the persistent unexplained component of

participation. We argue that it is not plausibly just a consequence of the increase in

unemployment in the 2007-2009 recession. For example, the twin recessions of the early 1980s

did not lead to a comparable decline in participation relative to trend. Our review of the evidence

supports the less optimistic view that the non-demographic part of the decline represents a

continuation of pre-existing trends that have a variety of sources which are likely to persist.

       Timing of the recovery and demand considerations. In our story, the economy’s

underlying growth rate would have slowed sharply even without the deep recession.

Nevertheless, it took some nine years from the beginning of the recession for the unemployment

rate to return to normal. Deficient demand in the recovery (including from the zero lower bound)

                                                     5
plausibly slowed the return to its sharply slowing trend. The dynamic factor model sheds light on

the sources of deficient demand. As in our earlier analysis, we calculate a simulated forecast as

of 2009 and study its subsequent errors. The errors are stated as percentage-point contributions to

an overall forecast error of 0.57 percent of GDP per year (close to the Okun’s law shortfall, after

adjusting for slower trend growth and normal cyclical movements).

       Weak government spending restrained the expansion. The shortfall in government

purchases explains more than half of the forecast error (0.31 pp per year, of which 0.20 is federal

and 0.12 state-local). Government consumption expenditures plus transfer payments would

normally have grown by 2.9 percent per year, but in fact grew by only 0.7 percent per year.

       Total household consumption—by far the largest component of total spending—

contributed 0.26 pp per year to the shortfall in output growth. Durable and non-durable goods

behaved almost exactly as forecast during the expansion. Roughly half of the shortfall arose from

housing and financial services, consistent with the view that housing and finance were key

sectors for understanding the special features of the recession and recovery. The real value of

financial services, however, is a particularly poorly measured component of output. The shortfall

in this sector and in the even more-poorly measured sector of nonprofit institutions serving

households, contributes fully 0.10 pp to the 0.57 pp under-forecast of output. So a small part of

the slow measured growth could be due to mismeasurement.

       These forecasts suggest little role for some weak-demand explanations. The absence of

any significant shortfall in consumption growth outside housing is evidence against deleveraging

and increasing inequality contributing to the slow recover. Weak exports exerted a small drag on

output growth, mainly during 2011-2013. And business investment was as forecast based on

earlier recoveries, consistent with our view that business investment, a highly cyclical

endogenous variable, was not an exogenous contributor to the weakness of the recovery.




                                                     6
I   Growth Decomposition and Data
       Section I.A describes our general objective and our data. Section I.B then lays out the

Solow-style growth-accounting framework we use to analyze the slow recovery in output.

    I.A        Focus and Data
       We focus on understanding the disappointingly slow recovery that started in mid-2009,

when the National Bureau of Economic Research dates the end of the recession. We end seven

years later, in mid-2016. When we make comparisons to the preceding three recoveries, we use

the comparable seven-year periods following the troughs, except following 2001, when we

truncate at the business-cycle peak at the end of 2007 (six years).

       The slow recovery in output can be examined through the lens of production (output is

produced) or expenditure (output is purchased). Here we discuss growth-accounting identities

related to production. The production framework is natural for addressing the role of structural

trends such as productivity and the labor force. We apply this accounting to the business sector.

Growth accounting is less applicable to government, household, and non-profit production,

where output is often not measured independently of inputs.

       Our measure of output is the geometric average of income and expenditure side

measures, as recommended by the recent literature—see the data appendix. Both sides of the

accounts provide information about true growth but are subject to measurement error, so a

combination improves the signal-to-noise ratio. At an economy-wide level, we refer to this

average of gross domestic product and gross domestic income as gross domestic output (GDO)

or, where the context is clear, just output. Unless noted otherwise, we scale output by the

population eligible for employment, aged 16 and above, denoted Pop.

       Fernald (2014) describes our quarterly business-sector growth-accounting data. Broader

output data come from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA); additional labor-market data

come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The data appendix provides further details.


                                                     7
    I.B        Accounting for Growth
       Although our growth accounting focuses on the business sector, we need to consider the

overall economy because labor market indicators, such as the unemployment rate, are economy-

wide. An identity links economy-wide gross domestic output, GDO, and business output, Yt Bus :

                     GDOt   GDOt        Yt Bus 
                             Bus                                                               (1)
                     Popt   Yt          Popt 

The identities in this section are sometimes in ratios of levels, sometimes in growth rates,

depending on which is clearer. Empirical estimation is in growth rates.

       Growth accounting decomposes output growth into a set of components that help to show

how the second term on the right-hand-side of equation (1) evolves. Modern growth accounting

follows Jorgenson and Griliches (1967) which, in turn, expanded and clarified Solow (1957).

Growth in business output, Yt Bus , depends on growth in capital, K, and labor input, Labor. Labor,

in turn, depends on Hours and labor quality, LQ:  log Labort Bus   log LQt   log HourstBus .

Labor quality LQ captures the contribution of rising education and experience. Our measure of

LQ assumes that relative wages capture relative productivities of workers with different

attributes—see Bosler and others (2016). In per-person terms, we write:

                   Y Bus                       K                              LQt  HourstBus 
             log  t    log TFPt  t  log  t           (1   t )  log                     (2)
                   Popt                        Popt                                Popt       

The time series  t is capital’s share of income.

       It is useful to rewrite equation (2) in order to separate endogenous and exogenous factors.

For example, suppose hours growth falls because of demographics. Equation (2) multiplies that

change by labor’s share. But if the same force leads to an endogenous reduction in capital, we

may want to incorporate that effect. We consider an alternative decomposition of Yt Bus / Pop t

as business-sector hours per person times labor productivity (output per hour of work):



                                                        8
                      Yt Bus     HourstBus  Yt Bus 
                                                 Bus 
                                                                                                   (3)
                      Popt       Popt  Hourst 

The first term on the right-hand side, business hours per person can be expanded as:

                      HourstBus   HourstBus   EmptBus       EmptCPS   LabForcet 
                                     Bus  
                                                     CPS                                   (4)
                      Popt   Empt   Empt                    LabForcet   Popt 

The terms on the right-hand side of (4) are as follows:

        HourstBus 
              Bus 
                        is business-sector hours per employee.
        Empt 
        EmptBus 
            CPS 
                      is the ratio of business employment, measured (primarily) from the
        Emp  t    
       establishment survey, to household employment, measured from the Current Population
       Survey (the household survey).
        EmptCPS 
                      is employment relative to the labor force, and is by definition equal to 1-
        LabForcet 
       Ut, where Ut is the unemployment rate. Over the long run the contribution of the U term
       is zero because the unemployment rate reverts to a mean value.
        LabForcet 
                      , the final term, is the labor force participation rate.
        Popt 

       Now consider labor productivity, the second term on the right-hand side of equation (3).

With some manipulation, the growth-accounting equation (2) yields the useful expression:

                    Yt Bus   log TFP  t                    Kt 
              log                                  log    Bus 
                                                                            log LQt .            (5)
                           Bus
                    Hourst       (1  t )  1  t           Yt 

In this expression, output per hour depends on the capital-output ratio, and labor quality, both

expressed in labor-augmenting form. It is useful because capital deepening is endogenous.

Slower growth in technology and labor lead to a lower path of capital—but a roughly stable

capital/output ratio. Thus, the capital-output ratio is useful in assessing whether there are special

influences on capital from, say, unusual credit constraints or heightened uncertainty.

       In the one-sector neoclassical growth model, the capital-output ratio is pinned down by

an Euler equation. If trend technology were constant, the steady-state ratio is stationary. In

                                                        9
models with investment-specific technical change—and in the data—that ratio has a relatively

slow-moving trend—see the online appendix to Fernald (2015).

        Of course, the capital-output ratio is not necessarily dispositive. Slower trend growth

tends to raise the steady-state capital/output ratio. Other factors, such as an increase in market

power (e.g., Gutiérrez and Philippon, 2016) could work in the other direction. Nevertheless, in

cyclically-adjusted data, the trend capital/output ratio has been remarkably smooth since the

1970s, despite the mid-1990s speedup in growth and the mid-2000s slowdown. Thus, we

interpret the capital/output ratio as informative about the possibility of a capital shortfall.

II Estimation of Cyclical Components and Low-Frequency Trends
        As the unemployment rate declines during an expansion, output grows faster than it

would with constant unemployment. The deeper the recession, the greater is the recovery in the

labor market and the greater is the cumulative above-normal growth of output. Thus, in

determining whether the recovery from the 2007-2009 recession was slow, we need to control

for the depth of the recession. Moreover, the calculation needs to control for underlying

systematic changes in the U.S. economy, such as changes in workforce demographics, that affect

the underlying mean growth rate of employment and output.

        In this paper, we use two complementary methods for controlling for the depth of the

2007-2009 recession and thus for assessing the speed of the recovery. The first method

conditions on the path of the unemployment rate. This method asks: What would the normal

cyclical path of output and the other variables in the growth decomposition have been, given the

2009-2016 recovery in the unemployment rate? In practice, this amounts to estimating the

normal cyclical movements using Okun’s Law, extended to variables in addition to output.

        The second method controls for the depth of the recession by conditioning on the state of

the economy at the 2009 trough, as measured by a large number of time series. This method

asks: What would the normal cyclical path of macroeconomic variables have been, given the


                                                      10
depth of the recession? Calculating the normal path entails simulating forecasts of multiple time

series, given data through 2009, for which we use a large dynamic factor model.

       Both methods allow for low-frequency changes in mean growth rates, that is, for trends in

the growth rates. We adopt a statistical decomposition of the growth rate of a given time series

into a trend, cycle, and irregular part. Let yt be the percentage growth rate of a variable at an

annual rate, computed using logs (e.g., for GDO, yt = 400 Δlog GDOt). The decomposition is,

                    yt = t + ct + zt,                                                                (6)

where t is a long-term trend, ct is a cyclical part, and zt is called the irregular part—it describes

the higher-frequency movements of the variable that are not correlated with the cycle.

       Following convention in the time series literature, we refer to equation (6) as a trend-

cycle-irregular decomposition. Because yt is a growth rate, the trend t is the long-term mean

growth rate of the series. In the special case that this mean is constant, in log-levels the series

would have a linear time trend, with a shifting intercept that depends on ct and zt. As explained

below, we estimate the long-term trend as the long-run average of y, after subtracting the cyclical

part. This long-run average typically evolves for reasons such as changing demographics.

       The irregular term, zt, is the variation in yt net of the trend and cyclical fluctuations. This

irregular term represents the growth in a given variable, above and beyond what would be

expected given low-frequency changes in the economy and the normal cyclical movements. We

find large negative irregular parts play important roles in the weak recovery.

    II.A       Method 1: Using Okun’s Law to Account for the Cycle
       The first method uses Okun’s Law to estimate the cyclical component. Because we

consider many series, and those series can lead or lag the unemployment rate, we extend Okun’s

relationship to include leads and lags. The Okun’s Law definition of ct thus is,
                              q
                     ct    
                            j  p
                                     j   U t  j   (L) U t ,                                      (7)



                                                                   11
where Ut is the unemployment rate and (L) is the distributed lag polynomial with q leads and p

lags in the summation. Choice of p and q and other estimation details are discussed in the next

subsection. The sum of the lag coefficients, (1), measures the cyclical variability of yt. Note that

because EΔUt = 0 over the long run, our cyclical part has long-run mean zero.

       Okun’s original relationship was the reverse of (7), regressing changes in the

unemployment rate on changes in output with only contemporaneous movements. However,

subsequent researchers have often used the specification with unemployment on the right-hand

side. Moreover, for output growth and many other series, the leads and/or lags are statistically

significant. Also, while one could add other measures of labor market slack to equation (7), using

the standard unemployment rate (as we do) has several virtues. It is well-measured and has been

measured using essentially the same survey instrument since 1948. Over the long run, it has

essentially no trend. And in any event the other measures of the state of the labor force are highly

correlated with the unemployment rate, once one incorporates leads and lags.

       Cyclically adjusted trend. A practical problem in estimating the trend t is that persistent

cyclical swings can be confused with lower frequency trends. This problem is particularly acute

in estimating trend terms towards the end of our sample given the severity of the recession and

length of the recovery. To address that problem, our estimate of the trend controls for normal

cyclical movements implied by Okun’s Law.

       Substitution of equation (7) into equation (6) yields

                               yt  t   (L)U t  zt                                      (8)

The Okun’s Law “residual” (including  t ), yt  ct  yt   (L)U t is a measure of what growth

rate would have been consistent with an unchanged unemployment rate. To estimate t, we adopt

the framework of the partially linear regression model, which treats t as a nonrandom smooth

function of t/T; see Robinson (1988), Stock (1989), and Zhang and Wu (2012). In this approach,

 is estimated as a long-run smoothed value of y, after subtracting the estimated cyclical part:


                                                     12
                                      
                          ˆ t   (L) yt  ˆ (L)  ut                                               (9)

where κ(L) is a filter that passes lower frequencies and attenuates higher frequencies. Because

the estimated cyclical part is subtracted prior to smoothing, we will refer to the estimated trend

ˆt as a cyclically-adjusted trend. The use of a cyclically adjusted trend with a long bandwidth

for κ(L) helps avoid attributing the recent slow growth mechanically to a declining trend. The

online supplement compares the partially linear regression approach to Gordon’s (2014)

cyclically adjusted state space (unobserved components) method, and discusses computation of

the heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-robust standard errors.

        Estimation. We estimate (L) by regressing yt on leads and lags of ΔUt with p = q = 2.

For some left-hand variables, using only contemporaneous ΔUt suffices, but for others additional

leads and lags are justified statistically. Our estimation period starts at the 1981 peak and ends in

the second quarter of 2016. Sensitivity to these choices is discussed below.

        For the low-pass filter κ(L), we use a biweight filter with truncation parameter of 60

quarters. Tukey’s biweight filter κ(L) is two-sided with  j = d(1—(j/B)2)2 for |j|  B and = 0

otherwise, where B is the bandwidth and d is chosen so that κ(1) = 1. End points are handled by

truncating the filter outside the range of the data and renormalizing. The long truncation

parameter was chosen so that changes in ˆt reflect slow multi-decadal swings. If there are sharp

breaks this filter will oversmooth, an issue we return to in Section IV.

        Additivity. The foregoing method for estimating the trend, cycle, and irregular parts has

the useful property that it preserves additivity when applied to additive decompositions.

Specifically, suppose that yt = y1t + y2t. This additivity is preserved for the estimated cyclical,

trend, and irregular parts: ˆt  ˆ1t  ˆ2t and cˆt  cˆ1t  cˆ2t , where the subscripts refer to the parts

of yt, y1t, and y2t. This property is a consequence of using the same cyclical regressors and same

filter κ(L) for all series, and the property that regression is linear in the dependent variable.



                                                              13
    II.B       Method 2: Dynamic Factor Model Estimates of the Cycle
       The second method uses a six-factor dynamic factor model to produce forecasts of the

variables under study, where the forecasts are made using data through the 2009 trough. These

projections provide an alternative estimate of the cyclical component, specifically the normal

cyclical rebound that would have been expected given the depth of the recession.

       The 123 series used to estimate the factor are summarized in Table 1. The dataset omits

high-level aggregates to avoid aggregation identities and double-counting—for example GDP is

omitted, because its components are included, consumption of goods is omitted because durables

and nondurables consumption are included separately, and total employment is omitted because

its components are included. The 123 series are transformed to growth rates (for activity

variables; see the online supplement for details other series), low frequency trends are extracted

as discussed above, and six factors are then estimated by principal components.

       These six factors are forecasted through the second quarter of 2016 using a vector

autoregression with 4 lags, with the 2009 trough as the jumping off point. Forecasts for a given

variable are then computed using the factor loadings from a regression of that variable on the

factors. The forecasting regressions are estimated using data from 1984 through the 2009 trough.

       Stock and Watson (2016) discuss factor methods and provide empirical results for closely

related model and dataset. The online supplement has additional detail, including measures of fit.

       With one exception, the simulated forecast approach freezes the growth rate trends in

each series at their trough values. The exception is that we allow demographic changes to affect

labor force participation. It was clear before the recession that baby-boom retirements would

depress participation. Here, we use the Divisia-Tørnqvist index developed in Section V to project

the effect of evolving demographics. This demographic trend in participation feeds through, with

share weights as appropriate, into the trends in employment, hours, and output. We leave the

trends in capital, the ratio of business to household employment, and hours per employee

unchanged. The result is a projected output trend that incorporates aging and other demographic

                                                    14
effects on employment as understood at the trough, with other component trend growth rates

frozen at their trough values. Trend growth rates for expenditure components of output are

computed as the component’s time series trend as of the trough, plus the share-weighted

difference between the output trend (inclusive of the participation aging trend) and the trough

value of the output trend. This final adjustment, which ensures that share-weighted trend growth

rates are additive, is numerically negligible because the trough-quarter participation adjustment

to the trend value of output is small.

       In the notation of (6), the factor model forecast of yt is the sum of the trend projection t

and the projection of ct computed using the detrended factors. Thus the forecast error is an

estimate of the irregular part zt; minus this forecast error measures the growth shortfall of y.

       The DFM method, like the Okun method, preserves additivity of components.

III Results: Accounting for Slow Growth
       We are now ready to quantify the sources, in a growth-accounting sense, of the slow

growth in output. We begin with a brief discussion of the cyclical properties of the component

variables in the growth-accounting decomposition.

    III.A      Cyclical Properties of the Growth-Decomposition Variables
       Table 2 provides three summary measures of the cyclicality of the variables entering the

growth decomposition and additional broad measures of output. The first column shows the

generalized Okun’s Law coefficient, which provides a natural measure of cyclicality.

Specifically, it is the sum of the coefficients, (1), in equation (8); the units are chosen so that

the coefficient is the percent change in each variable per percentage point change in the

unemployment rate. The sum of the Okun’s law coefficients on the components equals the

Okun’s law coefficient on the sum of the components. For example, the coefficients in lines 7 to

9 add to -2.02, which is the coefficient in line 6 for real business output per capita.

       Of the total cyclical variation of business hours per capita (line 10), as measured by the

generalized Okun’s law coefficient of -2.3, nearly half (-1.08) comes from the employment rate
                                                      15
(one minus the unemployment rate), one-sixth (-0.35) comes from variations in hours per

worker, and a small amount (-0.16) comes from labor-force participation. These results reflect

the small procyclicality of the participation rate, which falls as unemployment rises. Of course, a

large reduction in participation occurred before and during the recovery. Section V examines the

extent to which the recent decline in participation is related to the slack labor market.

       One-third of the cyclical variation in business output (-0.71) comes from procyclical

variation in the ratio of business employment to household-survey employment. Differences in

coverage and concept help explain this variation. In terms of coverage, the household survey is

broader, covering the entire civilian economy; and the business sector is much more procyclical

than the non-business sector (e.g., government and non-profits). In terms of concept, a worker

holding two jobs counts twice in the establishment survey but just once in the household survey.

If that worker loses one of those jobs when the unemployment rate rises, then establishment-

survey employment falls more than household-survey employment. (After adjusting for

coverage, Fernald and Wang (2016) find that hours worked—workers, times hours per worker—

has almost the same cyclicality in the two surveys.)

       Labor productivity, line 15, is weakly and insignificantly countercyclical. It combines

strongly procyclical TFP (line 7 or, rescaled, line 16) with the strongly countercyclical capital-

output ratio (line 17). Research on TFP has discussed the roles of labor hoarding, cyclical

changes in capital utilization, and other non-technological factors that account for the pro-

cyclicality of productivity (see Basu and Fernald, 2001). Investment is pro-cyclical, but the

cumulated stock of capital changes only slowly; so the capital-output ratio is strongly

countercyclical because of output in the denominator. Finally, the countercyclicality of labor

quality (0.13, row 18) supports the hypothesis that when unemployment rises, lower skilled

workers differentially become unemployed.

       The remaining columns of Table 2 quantify the variation in each variable that is cyclical,

as measured first by the standard deviation of the Okun’s law estimate of ct and second by the

                                                     16
fraction of the variance of the series explained by the factors (that is, the R2 of the common

component in the dynamic factor model). By both measures, the most cyclical variable is the

employment rate—by construction for the Okun’s law estimate and as a result of the factors

explaining variation in employment for the factor-model estimate. Although cyclical variation in

TFP accounts for one-fourth of the cyclical variation in business output per capita, cyclical

variation only accounts for a fraction of the variation in TFP growth. TFP growth has a large

amount of high-frequency variation, including measurement noise.

    III.B       Growth Components: Trend and Cyclical Parts
        Table 3 summarizes the results of the growth accounting decomposition, where Okun’s

Law is used to estimate the cyclical component conditional on the unemployment rate path. The

table compares the mean values of these components in the recent recovery to their mean values

in the three previous recoveries. For this table, the three previous recoveries are defined as the

first 28 quarters of the recovery (the number of quarters from the first one after the trough to the

end of our sample) or the trough-to-peak period, whichever is shorter. The left panel of three

columns in the table presents actual average historical growth rates, and contributions to growth

rates, at annual rates. The right panel, the remaining four columns, provides the decomposition

after cyclically adjusting these variables using the Okun’s-law method.

        Figure 3, Figure 4, and Figure 5 show (in black) the log levels of the series in Table 3.

These figures also plot the cyclically adjusted series, using Okun’s Law (red), and the cyclically

adjusted trend (blue). The black and red lines in the right panel of Figure 1 and in Figure 3(a) are

the same, but with different time scales and normalizations (see the figure notes).

        Table 4 is the counterpart of Table 3, in which the cyclical component is computed using

the factor-based method, conditional on the state of the economy in mid-2009. The first column,

the forecast, is the sum of the cyclical component of the forecast and the trend, averaged over the

2009-2016 forecast period. The second column is the actual average growth of the variable, and

the third column is the factor estimate of the irregular part z, which is the shortfall, that is, the
                                                       17
gap between the forecast and the actual. The standard error of the cyclical component (that is, of

the common component of the dynamic factor model) is given in the final column.1

     III.C        NIPA Expenditure Components: Trend and Cyclical Parts
         Many proposed explanations for the slow recovery appeal to deficient demand or to

deficiency in a component of demand. To shed light on these explanations, we undertake the

same trend/cyclical/irregular decomposition for variables in the GDP expenditure identity.

         Table 5 shows these decompositions using (share-weighted) contributions to growth. The

first column of numbers shows the average growth contributions from 2009-2016. Because the

forecasts and forecast errors are additive, the trend values, forecasts and forecast errors in the

remaining columns also add to their respective aggregates. The second block of columns presents

results using the Okun’s Law cyclical adjustment, and the right-hand block presents results using

the dynamic factor model; the shortfall is the negative of the forecast error.

          Figure 6 presents plots of selected dynamic factor model forecasts, their actual value,

and their trend. For these plots, series that appear as components in Table 4 and Table 5 are not

share-weighted. Plots for all Table 4 and Table 5 variables are given in the online supplement.

     III.D        Discussion
         A key difference between our two methods concerns the counterfactual cyclical path of

labor market variables. The Okun method conditions on the unemployment rate path, so by

construction there is no irregular part for the unemployment rate, and the irregular part for

closely related labor-market variables is small. In contrast, the forecasting exercise projects a

normal cyclical path for all the variables, conditional on the state of the economy at the trough in

2009; in principle, the actual path of any variable, including labor market variables, can depart

         1
          The shortfall in the third column is the negative of the usual definition of a forecast error. In addition, the
standard error of the conditional mean in the fourth column is not the forecast standard error (which incorporates
uncertainty associated with future values of the factors and shocks), but rather is the sampling standard error arising
from estimating the vector autoregression and other regression coefficients.


                                                                18
arbitrarily from its forecast path. The factor forecasts capture two key features of the recovery, in

that they under-predict the labor-market recovery and over-predict output growth. We return to

this and other implications of the factor forecasts at the end of this section.

       Aside from this major difference in forecasts of output and unemployment in the

recovery, the two methods generally yield quantitatively similar estimates of the irregular part,

and lead to similar conclusions about the behavior of the components of output growth over the

recovery. For clarity, we therefore focus primarily on results using the Okun method.

       We begin with the first block of columns in Table 3, which summarizes the shortfall of

output and the growth decomposition components without cyclical adjustment. GDO grew 3.57

percent per year in the previous three recoveries (column a), but only 2.20 percent in the current

recovery (column b), for a shortfall of 1.37 percentage points (column c). Similarly, business

output per capita grew 2.92 percent in the previous three recoveries, but only 1.72 percent per

year in the current one, for a shortfall of 1.21 percentage points. Looking down column c, many

of the rows are non-zero but a few stand out. These include a decline in the growth of capital per

person (capital shallowing, row 8), a decline in the growth rate in TFP (rows 7 and 16), and a

decline in the participation rate (row 14).

       This comparison of actual growth rates understates the output shortfall, however, since it

does not account for how deep the recent recession was relative to the three previous ones on

average. The second block of estimates presents the same decomposition after removing the

cyclical component using Okun’s Law, that is, conditioning on the unemployment rate.

       This cyclical adjustment creates a different, starker picture of the slow growth. The

shortfall in business output per person is much larger, at 1.81 percentage points, reflecting the

depth of the 2007-9 recession. The cumulative shortfall in output is 13.5 percent (final column).

After cyclical adjustment, the only element that is quantitatively important for explaining hours

is labor-force participation (row 14), and the only element that is quantitatively important for




                                                      19
labor productivity is TFP (row 16). Shortfalls in the direct contribution of capital input per

person are also large (row 8), but when scaled by output (row 17) the contribution is small.

        We now discuss selected elements of the accounting.

        Business output. Figure 3, which shows the cumulative parts of the growth of business

output per capital, conveys a basic finding of this paper. For the period of the recovery from the

crisis recession, the consistent improvement in the labor market should have been associated

with a dramatic recovery in output, based on historical cyclical patterns. But two powerful forces

opposed the cyclical part—the low-frequency trend and the high-frequency irregular part.

Moreover, the downward slopes of the two parts are almost the same, and our breakdown of the

non-cyclical behavior of output gives equal roles to the high- and low-frequency parts.

        Hours per worker. Figure 4 shows the levels of the three statistical parts of weekly hours

per worker. Consistent with the coefficient of -0.35 in Table 2, the cyclical part of hours rose

smoothly during the recovery, as in the three earlier recoveries. The slope of the low-frequency

trend plotted in the figure, t, rose slightly, while the high-frequency irregular part fell slightly.

Unlike many other indicators, weekly hours behaved fairly normally in the post-crisis recession.

        Labor force participation. Figure 4 shows that the low-frequency trend in participation

grew at a declining rate until 1998 and began to shrink thereafter. The rate of shrinkage declined

slightly in the last years shown. The cyclical part grew during the recovery, but both the high-

and low-frequency parts declined. The net effect was a substantial decline in participation during

the recovery, in contrast to the pattern of low but positive growth in recoveries through the

1990s. Section V pursues explanations of the recent anomalous behavior of the labor force.

        Labor quality. Although labor quality contributes to low-frequency growth in

productivity (Figure 5), it explains little of the post-2009 cyclically adjusted growth shortfall.

        Capital input. At first glance, capital input (Table 3, row 8) appears to contributes a

moderate amount to the shortfall in output. However, as we noted earlier, capital input is jointly

determined with TFP, the labor force, employment, and other endogenous variables. Row 17 of

                                                      20
Table 3 shows that when measured relative to output, there was essentially no shortfall in the

cyclically adjusted growth rate of capital. Figure 5 shows that the low-frequency part, and to a

lesser extent the high-frequency part, started to decline somewhat before the crisis.

       Sensitivity analysis. In the online supplement, we report results for Table 3 estimated

using different number of lags in the Okun’s law equation (8) and using different estimation

samples. Most of the Okun’s law coefficients in Table 2, including the headline coefficients on

GDP, GDO, and business output, are insensitive to these changes. For the labor force

participation rate, the generalized Okun’s coefficient increases from -.16 to -.37 when 12 lags are

used, but using 12 lags somewhat reduces this coefficient for TFP. Importantly, the overall

cyclically adjusted shortfall is quite robust to these changes, as is our decomposition. The reason

for this robustness is that although the Okun’s law coefficients change somewhat for some series,

by mid-2016 decline in the unemployment rate had slowed down as the economy approached full

employment, so the net cyclically adjusted contributions did not change substantially.

       Comparing Okun’s law and factor model estimates. Table 4 shows that compared to

what would have been expected based on the data through 2009, actual GDP growth fell short by

0.57 percentage points, GDO growth by 0.43 percentage points, and business output by 0.35

percentage points. These cyclically-adjusted shortfalls are smaller than their counterparts in

Table 3 because the recovery in employment was stronger than expected based on the factor

forecasts: The Okun’s law method in Table 3 conditions on the unemployment rate path, but the

factor model forecast has a shortfall in the CPS employment rate of -0.42, i.e., the factor model

predicts a less rapid fall in the unemployment rate. This feature of the factor forecasts—an

unexpectedly strong recovery in the labor market and an unexpectedly weak recovery in

output—is consistent with the real-time errors of professional forecaster in Figure 2. As a back-

of-the-envelope comparison, using the per-capita business output shortfall from the factor model

of 0.27 percentage points, the negative shortfall in the employment rate of 0.42, and the Okun’s

law coefficient of 2.02 for business output per capita, yields an adjusted estimate of 1.12 (=

                                                    21
2.020.42 + 0.27) of the shortfall in business output per capita from the factor model, adjusted

for the fact that factor model underpredicts employment. This is roughly comparable to the 0.91

sum of the irregular component computed using Okun’s Law (0.63) plus the error forecasting the

trend growth rate. As another example, while the factor model overpredicts the average growth

rate of the capital-output ratio (see Table 4), this ratio is countercyclical, and its growth rate

exceeds the factor model forecast after adjustment the forecast error in employment.

        In summary, this section documents that slow growth since 2009 is essentially entirely

accounted for by slow TFP growth and declining participation. The crucial issue for interpreting

these results is the extent to which the slowdown in TFP and the fall of participation were

independent of, or alternatively a consequence of, the recession and its aftermath.

IV Why Have Capital Accumulation and Productivity Fallen Short?
        Why has cyclically adjusted productivity growth been slow and, relatedly, has there has

been an unusual shortfall in capital deepening? We reach two conclusions.

        First, in both aggregate and industry-level data, the decline in productivity occurred

before the recession. This observation strongly suggests that the recession was not the cause of

the slowdown in cyclically-adjusted productivity growth. Upon considering several candidate

explanations for the productivity slowdown, including mismeasurement and an increasing

regulatory burden, we are left concluding that productivity growth slowed after the early 2000s

because of a pause or end to the broad-based, transformative effects of information technology.

        Second, weak capital formation was not an important independent contributor to weak

output growth. Although investment was low during this recovery relative to earlier recoveries,

capital growth was not low relative to output growth: By 2016, the capital/output ratio was in

line with its long-term trend. If investment had been as strong as in the prior three recoveries, the

capital/output ratio would have grown by an improbably large amount. Using the capital/output

ratio as the benchmark recognizes that businesses acquire capital to produce output. A long line


                                                      22
of research using the investment accelerator recognizes this principle. This output benchmark

inherently incorporates the fall of the underlying growth rate of output from the decline in

cyclically adjusted productivity growth and the decline in labor-force participation.

    IV.A        When Did Productivity Growth Slow?
        Even before the financial crisis, professional forecasters had noticeably lowered estimates

of trend labor-productivity growth. Figure 7 plots the median forecasts from the Survey of

Professional Forecasters for productivity growth over the next 10 years. The forecasts broadly

track the lagging 10-year average growth of actual labor productivity computed using both real-

time and finally revised data. Forecasts rose sharply between 1999 and 2000. They remained

close to 2.5 percent through the 2006 survey. They have since fallen by about a percentage point.

Half of that decline occurred before the financial crisis, between 2006 and (early) 2008.

        The slowdown is also evident in the time-series data on TFP. Figure 5(a) shows that TFP

growth picked up in the mid-1990s and slowed prior to the recession. The statistical question is

whether those were persistent changes in trend growth, or more transient variations.

        We undertake two sets of analyses of the timing and persistence of the slowdown in

productivity growth. The first entails computing tests for a break or for slower time variation in

the mean of cyclically-adjusted productivity growth. The second provides Bayes posterior

inference on whether the decline in the mean occurred before the 2007-2009 recession began.

        Table 6 summarizes five tests for the null hypothesis that there is no time variation in the

mean growth rate of TFP. Let ytca denote the cyclically adjusted growth rate of productivity, so

that, following equation (6), ytca = t + zt, where t is the local mean (or trend) value of ytca , and

zt is the mean-zero irregular component. Table 6 shows results for two sample periods: the 35-

year sample from 1981 through 2016 that has been the primary focus of this paper, and, to

increase power, a 60-year sample from 1956 through 2016. The first three tests are the sup-Wald

(the autocorrelation-robust Quandt Likelihood Ratio) break test of a constant mean against the


                                                      23
alternative of, respectively, one, two, or three breaks. Along with the test statistic, this test yields

estimates of the break dates themselves. The remaining two tests are the Nyblom (1989) tests

that focuses power on small martingale variation in t, and the LFST test (Müller and Watson

(2008)), a low-frequency point-optimal test for martingale variation.

        All five tests reject the null hypothesis that t is constant using 1956 through 2016

sample, but not using the shorter 1981 through 2016 sample. This primarily reflects the inclusion

of the early 1970s productivity slowdown in the longer sample. The three-break full-sample test

identifies break dates in 1973, 1995, and 2006, with a p-value (for the null of no breaks) of 0.01,

which accords with the conventional view of a high-growth period before 1973, a lower growth

period until 1995, and the high growth period of the tech boom. Notably for our purposes, the

test does not find a break during or after the 2007-2009 recession.

        To gain additional insight into possible persistent changes in cyclically adjusted

productivity growth, we use a latent variable state-space model for the trend and irregular

components t and zt, in which t is modeled as a Gaussian random walk and zt is modeled as

Gaussian white noise. By adopting a Bayesian framework, we are able to undertake posterior

inference on the timing of a peak in trend productivity growth and the magnitude of its decline

prior to the recession. Details are given in the online supplement.

        The results are summarized in Figure 8 and Figure 9. Figure 8 shows the 4-quarter

growth rate of cyclically-adjusted TFP growth and three different estimates of t: the cyclically

adjusted biweight estimate (equation(9)), the three-regime estimate with estimated break dates in

1995 and 2006, and a 67 percent posterior interval for t from the Bayesian implementation of

the random walk-plus-noise model. Figure 9 provides the posterior distribution of the date of the

maximum of the local mean of productivity growth between 1981 and 2016.

        Taken together, we interpret Table 6, Figure 8, and Figure 9 as providing coherent

evidence that the decline in productivity growth started before the recession. The posterior

distribution in Figure 9 dates the peak of t in the late 1990s or early 2000s, with little of the

                                                       24
mass after 2006. The frequentist tests do not provide strong evidence of a break post-1981, but to

the extent they do suggest breaks, they occurred before the 2007-09 recession. Using the

Bayesian approach, we can compute the posterior probability of the magnitude of the decline

between the peak of t around 2000 and its value in 2007: this calculation yields a posterior

median estimate of 0.72 percentage points using the full sample, and a 67 percent posterior set of

(0.32, 1.27). These estimates, which suggest a significant decline prior to the cyclical peak, are

also consistent with the decline in the biweight estimate and the Bayes posterior sets in Figure 8.

       The discussion above focuses on measured TFP growth. A complementary perspective

comes from looking at inputs to innovation, where a change in trend is apparent around 2000—

even earlier than for productivity. Productivity grows as the economy accumulates better ways to

produce output. The national accounts measure some investments in innovation, namely, in

intellectual property products (IPP, which includes software; R&D spending by businesses,

universities, and nonprofits; and the production of books, movies, TV shows, and music). IPP

investment grew at an annual rate of 8.1 percent from 1975 to 2000. After the tech collapse in

2000, that high growth rate slowed precipitously to only 3.5 percent from 2000 to 2007, close to

its post-2007 pace of 3.0 percent. Recent research adds additional intangible investments in

innovation, training, reorganizations, and the like. Estimates of these additional intangible

investments from Corrado and Jäger (2015) also show a slower pace of growth after 2000.

       In sum, in U.S. data since the early 1970s, the unusual period for productivity growth was

roughly the ten years from 1995 to 2005, when growth was faster than before or since. Measured

spending on innovation also shows a slowdown much earlier than the recession.

    IV.B       Why Has Capital Fallen Short?
       On its face, concerns about weak investment seem appropriate: after cyclical adjustment,

nonresidential investment growth contributed 0.47 percentage points to GDP growth during the

previous three recessions, but only 0.13 percentage points during the recent recovery (Table 5).


                                                    25
This apparent shortfall in capital formation could reflect special features of the recession and

recovery such as tighter credit, increased financial frictions, and heightened uncertainty;

potential longer-term factors include heightened regulatory barriers, increased market power, and

shifts in industry composition.

       Understanding this apparent shortfall requires a model of capital formation. The core of

such a model is a demand function for productive capacity, which in turn depends on demand for

output as well as the cost of capital. Jorgenson (1963) refined the principle by deriving the

capital demand function from business optimization, conditional on the level of output and

proportional to output. Tobin refined the theory by incorporating adjustment costs.

       Capital-demand theory suggests benchmarks that would allow us to diagnose the role of

special crisis-recession factors. Line (8) of Table 3 shows that using only population as a

benchmark—in effect, treating investment as exogenous—implies a substantial

capital/population shortfall in the recent recovery compared to the three earlier recoveries.

However, line (17) of the same table and Figure 5(d) shows that using output as the benchmark

reverses the impression of a shortfall—the capital/output ratio in the recent recovery behaved in

line with its average in the earlier recoveries. By the output benchmark, the shortfall in

investment is the natural companion of the shortfall in output. Investment theory assigns a major

role to the demand for output as a driver of capital demand and therefore of investment.

       Investment theory does include other determinants beside output. One is the return to

capital, a measure that Jorgenson brought into formal investment theory. An important

determinant of business investment is the payoff to owners of capital. Some accounts of weak

investment imply that capital was not earning as much as in normal times. Others imply that the

return would be above normal, because a force limiting investment resulted in extra profitability

for the smaller amount of capital. But, as Figure 10 shows, the earnings of capital, measured as

the sum of business profits, interest paid, and depreciation, have been remarkably steady since

the crisis. Earnings per dollar of capital fell in 2009, but rebounded to normal in 2010 and have

                                                     26
remained normal since. The behavior of the return to capital supports our finding that investment

was behaving normally, given the shortfall in output.

       Gutierrez and Philippon (2017) use Tobin’s q theory of adjustment cost to provide a

benchmark. q, a normalized measure of the value of firms recorded in the stock and bond

markets, has risen to high levels in the recovery. So why hasn’t investment been stronger?

Jorgenson’s optimization model implies that firms invest until the marginal revenue product of

capital equals its rental price. Gutierrez and Philippon cite evidence such as rising concentration

ratios to argue that rising market power has increased the gap between the average and marginal

revenue products. Market power rationalizes weak investment with a strong stock market.

       Gutierrez and Philippon consider only the relation with adjustment cost—Tobin’s q

equation—not the investment function. In the investment-q plane, the q equation slopes upward

(the “supply” of investment), the demand for investment function slopes down, and their

intersection determines investment and the value of q. An increase in market power shifts the q

equation to the left, riding up the demand function, with lower investment and a higher value of

q. Higher market power would reduce the capital/output ratio.

       Alexander and Eberly (2016) find a shortfall in plant and equipment investment relative

to a standard investment model. But the shortfall began in 2000, long before the recession of

2007-2009, so their work supports our view that the capital/output ratio was not depressed by the

recession itself. They attribute the shortfall to a shift toward investment in intellectual property

and other intangibles. In manufacturing, firms tend to relocate physical production and its

associated capital offshore, while retaining the intellectual property in the U.S. Our measure of

capital includes (some) intangible capital, so our finding of stability of capital input relative to

output is consistent with Alexander and Eberly’s findings.

       Stability of the capital/output ratio is not conclusive evidence that there was no shortfall

in capital resulting from the recession itself. Productivity growth has been low and the labor-

force participation rate fell, so trend output growth fell. Accordingly, the capital-output ratio

                                                      27
should have risen, according to standard growth theory. Because, in fact, it did not rise, there has

been a shortfall in the ratio. On the other hand, rising market power would be a source of a

decline in the capital/output ratio. It is beyond the scope of our paper to sort out quantitatively

which effect dominates for the capital/output ratio. Our empirical evidence that the capital-output

ratio is on its previous trend is consistent with the two forces roughly offsetting. In any case, in

terms of investment, they point in the same direction—the level of investment itself should, at

least for a time, be unusually weak for reasons unrelated to the recession or slow recovery, but

rather from lower productivity growth, declining participation, and possibly rising market power.

    IV.C       Explanations for Slow Productivity Growth
       Why has productivity growth been so slow if it is not the result of the financial crisis?

Our conclusion is that the slowdown is plausibly a pause in—if not an end to—the information-

technology revolution. Our related conclusion is that the slowdown was not mainly the result of

the recession. In this section, we review several hypotheses about the productivity slowdown.

We begin with three non-recession explanations then return to the recession story.

   1. Mismeasurement. Perhaps the problem of slow growth in both productivity and output is

illusory? Plausibly, we miss many of the gains of from tech-related hardware, software, and

digital services? But for mismeasurement to explain the productivity slowdown and its timing,

growth must be mismeasured by more since the recession than in the previous ten years.

       Neither Byrne, Fernald, and Reinsdorf (2016) nor Syverson (2016) find evidence that, on

balance, the mismeasurement of tech-related real output growth has in fact worsened since the

early 2000s. In addition, the steady shift of economic activity towards poorly measured, slow-

productivity-growth services, such as health care, does not change the picture, since the mid-

2000s slowdown in productivity growth spread broadly across industries. Hence, changes in

weighting matters relatively little. Aghion and others (2017) find a modest increase after the

early 2000s in missing growth from creative destruction and increases in varieties. But the

increase in bias is small relative to the measured slowdown in productivity growth.
                                                     28
    2. Rising regulation and loss of dynamism. A rising regulatory burden could have slowed

productivity growth (e.g., Barro, 2016), and differing regulatory barriers do seem to matter

across countries (e.g., Fatas, 2016; Cette, Fernald, and Mojon, 2016). Indeed, regulation could be

a reason why, by many measures, dynamism in the U.S. economy has declined over time

(Decker and others, 2016a, b). Job creation and destruction has slowed; the business startup rate

has fallen; and young firms have grown less in recent years. Decker and others (2016b) suggest

that the character of declining dynamism changed after 2000, which would match the view that

there were structural shifts in trend growth independent of the 2007-2009 recession. S lack of

dynamism could be a symptom of lack of available or exploitable ideas. But some observers

assert that its source is regulatory burdens, so we examine the regulatory-productivity link.

        In the U.S., a rising Federal regulatory burden does not appear to explain the medium-

frequency variations in productivity. First, although some commentators have pointed

specifically to post-2008 federal regulatory changes, the timing does not fit because the peak in

productivity growth occurred before that time.

        Second, even for the post-2008 period, the industries where regulation increased the most

did not for the most part show a decline in productivity growth. Al-Ubaydli and McLaughlin

(2015) apply text-analysis methods to the Code of Federal Regulations to construct industry-

level indices of regulations from 1970 through 2014. Their “RegData” database covers 42 private

industries that match industries for which we have BLS productivity data (1987 through 2014).

(The appendix describes the data further.) Industries with substantial increases in regulation after

2008 include, most notably, (i) finance, (ii) energy (pipelines, oil and gas extraction, and

utilities), (iii) construction, and (iv) transportation (especially trucking, water, and rail).

        Table 7 presents selected cuts of the BLS’s industry TFP data. The slowdown for the

entire private business economy (line 1) after 2004 is marked. Finance slows sharply after 2004

and shows no further slowdown after 2007, the period of Dodd-Frank and other regulatory

restrictions. With fracking, energy industries experienced faster productivity growth after 2007,

                                                       29
so recent regulatory restraints on energy do not explain slow productivity growth. Construction

also has experienced less negative productivity growth. Of heavily regulated industries, only

transportation (2.5 percent of value added) has seen lower TFP growth.

        Finance could matter, of course, as an intermediate provider of services. Using the input-

output tables, we divided industries into finance-intensive (row 8) and non-finance-intensive

(row 9) industries, defined by the expenditure share on financial services in industry gross

output. Both groups slow sharply after 2004, but the finance-intensive grouping actually improve

after 2007, despite increasing finance regulation. Over the entire post-2004 period, the slowdown

is larger for non-financial-intensive industries. Thus, it does not appear that post-2008 financial

restrictions were a major impediment to productivity growth.

        Third, we find little evidence of a broader regulatory effect. Table 8 shows panel

regressions of industry productivity growth on current and lagged values of growth in industry

regulatory restrictions. All regressions include industry fixed effects; the second column includes

year effects. Columns (1) and (2) show that, with one and two lags, growth in regulatory

restrictions is statistically insignificant and the explanatory power is tiny. Columns (3) and (4),

which average lagged values, also show small and statistically insignificant effects. These

(negative) findings are consistent with Goldschlag and Tabarrok (2014), who find that changes in

U.S. federal regulations have little or no effect on industry entrepreneurial activity or dynamism.

        The lags might be long and uncertain; the data could be too noisy; or the regulations that

matter could mainly be at the state and local level (e.g., land-use restrictions and occupational

licensing). But at a first cut, we find no evidence that federal regulation is a first-order issue.

    3. A pause in the information technology (IT) revolution. The hypothesis that IT was the

culprit is natural. A large literature links the mid-1990s speedup in productivity growth to the

exceptional contribution of computers, communications equipment, software, and the Internet. IT

has had a broad-based and pervasive effect on the economy through its role as a general purpose

technology (Bresnahan and Trajtenberg, 1995; David and Wright, 2003; Basu, Fernald, Oulton,

                                                      30
and Srinivasan, 2004). Businesses throughout the economy became more efficient by

reorganizing to take advantage of an improved ability to manage information. But, by the early

2000s, industries like retailing had already been substantially reorganized, so the gains from

further innovation might have become more incremental (Gordon, 2016; Fernald, 2015).

       Table 7 suggests some evidence consistent with this hypothesis. IT-producing industries

(line 5) grew much slower after 2000 and even slower after 2007. Industries that use tech

intensively show a larger slowdown after 2007 relative to the period from 2000 through 2004.

But it is fair to say that the slowdown is broad-based. All industries use IT, and increasingly so.

If that is the story, we might see another such period in the future, perhaps reflecting artificial

intelligence, cloud computing, the Internet of things, and the radical increase in mobility from

smartphones. But we have not yet seen those gains in the data.

       This story rings true in a number of ways. First, it is consistent with the large literature on

the role of IT in the productivity acceleration in the late 1990s. Second, it is consistent with the

view in the general-purpose-technology literature that the gains are, essentially, a series of

drawn-out levels effects. The gains might ebb and flow (Syverson, 2013), and it is hard ex ante

to know when the transformative gains will cease.

   4. Fallout from the recession and financial crisis. Our use of cyclically adjusted

productivity growth corrects for normal cyclical movements in productivity and allows us to

focus on the magnitude and timing of the more persistent, secular slowdown that has been the

focus of this section so far. But a long literature argues that deep recessions, and especially

financial crises, might reduce the level or growth rate of TFP; see Fatas, 2000, for an early

review, and Adler et al., 2017, for a recent survey. For example, a crisis might reduce investment

in innovation or raise capital misallocation. If these channels are important, then a high-pressure

economy might help reverse those effects and lead to faster growth in innovation (Yellen, 2016)

       Nevertheless, theory suggests effects could go in either direction. For example,

reallocation effects could raise higher productivity in a credit crisis (Petrosky-Nadeau, 2013), as

                                                      31
could the cleansing effects described by Caballero and Hammour, 1994). Bloom (2013) points

out that higher uncertainty can stimulate longer-run innovation.

       Overall, there is limited empirical evidence for the United States that historical business-

cycle downturns, financially related or otherwise, permanently cut the level or growth rate of

productivity. An obvious counter-example is the depressed 1930s which were, by all accounts,

an extraordinarily innovative period (Field, 2003, Alexopoulos and Cohen, 2011, and Gordon,

2016). More broadly, Huang, Luo, and Starts (2016) find that the level of TFP bounces back

quickly from recessions, including after 2009. This evidence is consistent with the view that

lower frequency swings in growth rates are largely exogenous to the business cycle.

       The biggest challenge for explaining recent U.S. data is the timing: Productivity growth

slowed prior to the recession. Anzoategui and others (2016) suggest that there might have been a

pre-recession shock to exogenous growth followed by the large shock from the recession. Yet as

noted above, measured U.S. investments in R&D and other intellectual property slowed

markedly after 2000, with a much smaller effect in the recent recession.

       In sum, it is difficult to measure counterfactual productivity growth absent the recession,

or absent the regulatory tightening. But we find that the weight of the evidence suggests that the

slow pace since the mid-2000s is real, contributed substantially to the disappointing recovery,

and–with roots in the temporary IT-spurred productivity boost of the 1990s–may well continue.

V Changes in the Labor market
       The trends in labor force participation for men and women were very different in earlier

years, with women rising and men falling. As shown in Figure 11, however, both moved together

since 2006 and both fell sharply starting in 2008. This decline exerted a large negative force on

output growth. Table 3 shows that the contribution of participation to output, after cyclical

adjustment, was -0.69 percentage points per year (column e), compared to an increase of 0.15

points per year averaged over the three previous recoveries (column d), for a shortfall of 0.85


                                                    32
points per year (column f). Cumulated over the recovery through 2016, the shortfall was 6.11

percentage points (column i), almost as large as for TFP.

       Prior to the crisis, recessions depressed participation, though there were forces on both

sides. Higher unemployment discouraged participation since it took longer to find a job. On the

flip side, declines in income and wealth raised participation by inducing more people to seek and

take jobs. The cyclical coefficient in Table 2 is small, -0.16, over a sample period that includes

the rise in unemployment and fall in participation during and after the recession. This

generalized Okun’s coefficient increases in specifications allowing for slower adjustment: with

three years of lags it is -0.37. Regardless of the lag specification, however, by 2016 the normal

cyclical component of the participation rate was essentially zero.

       Our estimate of the cyclical sensitivity of participation is larger if we end our sample

before the crisis. Although the period of rising unemployment saw declines in participation, the

recovery involved falling unemployment and falling participation, and that experience

outweighed the contribution from the contraction. Key to our conclusions about participation is

the fact that, until recently, participation continued to fall as unemployment fell from its peak of

10 percent to normal levels below 5 percent. This episode would be hard to understand if cyclical

developments dominated participation towards the end of the recovery.

       Many authors ascribe part of the decline in participation to demography, specifically to

the rising fraction of the population aged 55 and above. Older individuals are more likely to

retire. But adjusting for age composition alone, or just age and sex, misses countervailing

demographic forces that reduce the propensity to retire. In particular, the people who moved into

the 55-plus age group during the recovery are better educated than their predecessors, and better-

educated workers tend to retire later than less-educated workers. Estimates of pure-aging

declines in participation, which use historical rates for older workers, could overstate the

contribution of aging during the recent recovery. Instead, we calculate indexes that adjust for five

demographic dimensions of heterogeneity in the working-age population.

                                                     33
        The measured overall labor-force participation rate can be written as L  i si Li , where

si is the population share and Li is the participation rate of demographic group i. The change in

the overall participation rate thus satisfies

                    L  i si Li  i Li si                                                   (10)

to a high degree of accuracy, especially if si in the first term and Li in the second are measured as

equally weighted values from the earlier and current periods. The cumulation of the first term is

the component of the level of participation attributable to changes in participation within

demographic groups and the cumulation of the second term is the component attributable to

composition changes in the population. We call these the rate and share effects. Indexes

calculated this way are named after Divisia and the refinement of measuring shares as equally

weighted averages is named after Tørnqvist. The variation in the rates over the period is large

enough to make any share index with fixed rates misleading. Counterfactual calculations based

on holding rates at, say, the 2006 or 2016 levels are effectively fixed-rate indexes.

        We implement the decomposition in (10) with annual data from the CPS for about 6,100

detailed cells defined by 67 age categories; two sexes; four education groups; four race groups;

and three marital status groups. A few hundred of the cells in each year are empty. Figure 12

shows the overall participation rate and our rate index. The difference between the two indexes

is effectively our index of the share effect, that is, the effect of changing demographics. During

the recovery, from 2010 through 2016, the reported participation rate, across the population aged

16 and older, fell by 1.8 percentage points. Of this, 1.2 points came from the rate effect—the

result of lower participation, on average, within demographic groups—and 0.6 points came from

compositional change. In other words, forces other than demography accounted for about two-

thirds of the overall decline during the recovery, and for about one-half of the decline since the

cyclical peak in the fourth quarter of 2007.




                                                     34
       The key question is, what explains the large non-demographic decline in the participation

rate? Some specifications suggest the cyclical component of the participation rate is larger than

in our specification here (e.g. Erceg and Levin (2014) or our longer-lag results reported in the

online supplement). Even with a large cyclical coefficient, however, by the middle of 2016, the

unemployment rate had had returned to a normal or near-normal range, leaving only a very small

normal cyclical component by mid-2016.

       If the non-demographic participation gap as of 2016 is not part of a normal cyclical

pattern, could it reflect unusual features of this recession and recovery? We think not. The 5.5 pp

increase in the unemployment rate from its 2006 trough to its 2009 peak was comparable to the 5

pp increase from its 1979 trough to its 1982 peak spanning the twin recessions of the early

1980s. As shown in Figure 1, the unemployment rate initially fell more sharply in the first 18

months following its peak in 1982 than following its 2009 peak; but the rate then plateaued. Over

the 5 years following its 2009 peak, the unemployment rate fell by 0.9 percent per year, nearly as

fast as the 1.0 percent per year decline following the 1982 peak. Because the cyclical movements

of the early 1980s are part of the data used to estimate the Okun’s law coefficients, explanations

that appeal to hysteresis must therefore argue that the correlations from previous cycles do not

translate to the current cycle. It is not possible to estimate these coefficients precisely using only

the current cycle; but, if anything, the unemployment coefficients are smaller when the current

cycle is included in the data set. Finally, a related concern could be that the Okun coefficients are

different for increasing than decreasing rates of unemployment, so that our cyclical estimate is

misspecified; but we find no evidence of such an asymmetry.

       Aaronson and co-authors (2014) report a variety of results on participation. They find that

their forecasts of participation published in 2006 were remarkably accurate as of 2014,

suggesting that the entirely unforeseen recession and recovery that began at the end of 2007 had

little net effect on participation. Their overall conclusion is that the sources of the decline in

participation are partly demographic and partly a change not much related to conditions in the

                                                      35
labor market. Though they do not discuss the post-2009 expansion specifically, it appears that

their results (and others’ they cite) confirm our conclusion that the dramatic improvement in the

labor market during the recovery had little net effect on participation.

        Our conclusion is that the roots of the non-demographic participation gap as of 2016 lie

somewhere other than in the recession. Research has so far been inconclusive about the sources.

        Figure 13 shows participation rates for people aged 25 through 54 by family income.

Between 2004 and 2013, participation rose among members of the poorer half of families, and

fell substantially in the upper half, the third and fourth quartiles. Essentially all the decline in

participation occurred in families with higher incomes. This finding contradicts the hypothesis

that the decline in participation reflects labor-market marginalization of poorer families.

        Table 9 investigates how people spent the time freed up by reduced work and job search.

It compares time allocations in 2015 to 2007. Market work, including job search, fell by 1.6

hours per week for men and by 1.4 hours for women. The two categories with increases were

personal care and leisure, which includes a large amount of TV and other video-based

entertainment, especially for men. The decline in hours devoted to other activities included a

decline in housework for women. Basically, time use shifted toward enjoyment and away for

work-type and investment activities. There was no substitution from market work to either non-

market work or investment in human and household capital.

        The surprising, large, and persistent decline in labor-force participation is a phenomenon

that deserves and will receive intensive study. While there is room for disagreement about the

extent to which the early-recovery decline in participation reflected a weak labor market, that

cyclical component was gone by mid-2016. Similarly, although demographic shifts are and will

continue to be an important part of the decline in the participation rate, demographics provide

only a partial explanation. The successful explanation will also consider changes in family

structure, real wages, taxes, benefits, and the value of time spent outside the labor market.




                                                       36
VI Other Explanations for Slow Output Growth
       So far, our discussion has highlighted the non-cyclical role of slow TFP growth and

declining participation in explaining slow output growth. Our forecasting model, however,

provides some evidence on the large number of other explanations that have been proposed.

       Our analysis takes demand into account through the use of unemployment as a cyclical

indicator and through the use of a factor model with a multivariate statistical characterization of

the cycle. If unemployment rates below five percent imply an economy in a cyclically normal

condition, then that rules out explanations based on permanent or highly persistent weak

demand. Moreover, explanations based on temporary demand deficiency need to reconcile them

to the fact that the recovery of the unemployment rate was not abnormally slow, indeed was

faster than expected (Figure 2). Sponsors of explanations based on weak demand need to couple

their explanations with a parallel explanation of the behavior of labor-market indicators.

    VI.A       Empirical Evidence from the Forecasting Exercise
       Figure 6, complemented by the full set of factor model forecasts shown in the online

supplement, shows three periods in the history of the recovery. From mid-2009 through 2010,

the economy grew vigorously, with output, consumption, private fixed investment, and

employment all growing at or above the forecast path. From 2011 through 2013, employment

growth, though strong, was below its predicted path, and the associated predicted strong growth

in output failed to materialize. This large growth gap reflected the lack of sustained output

growth in the 3 to 4 percent range typical of earlier recoveries. After an initial surge, the growth

of productivity was well below its predicted path. In the third period, since 2014, growth in many

aggregates, including output and especially employment, has been stronger than the forecast

path, and—notably—the slow productivity growth over this period is consistent with the cyclical

prediction. This picture is one of a recovery delayed: the slow-growth puzzle is largely the

absence of strong growth in productivity and output in 2011 through 2013.


                                                     37
       The demand decomposition in Table 5 indicates that most of the demand components

tracked their forecast paths on average. Although exports were unexpectedly weak, so were

imports: After share-weighting their contributions to the average shortfall in output growth is

negligible, 0.03 and -0.01 pp per year, respectively. Table 5 indicates that the average forecast

error in GDP of 0.57 pp is largely attributable to three sources: consumption of services (0.18

pp), federal government expenditures (0.15), and state and local government expenditures (0.10).

       For federal government purchases, the main shortfall occurred in 2013 and 2014 (Figure

6). This period coincides with the fiscal drag associated with unwinding Recovery Act

expenditures and with the sequester. For state and local expenditures, the period of negative

contributions was longer, from 2010 through early 2014.

       Consumption growth over the recovery was slightly weaker than predicted—a 0.26 pp

contribution to the output shortfall. Much of this weakness is attributable to two service sectors:

housing and utilities (0.07 pp) and financial services and insurance (0.07 pp). The forecast error

in residential investment averaged -0.08 pp over the full period, but this masks the delayed

recovery in the housing sector. Through 2011, the normal cyclical recovery in housing did not

materialize, and housing investment growth did not stabilize around the forecast path until 2012.

The strength of the housing market since 2014 accounts for the negative contribution of

residential investment to the output shortfall.

    VI.B       Discussion
       These forecast errors sheds light on some of the explanations for the slow recovery.

       Explanations in which aggregate demand is held back by unusually retarded growth of

consumption—increasing inequality, policy uncertainty, or consumer deleveraging—do not

square with the fact that contribution of consumption growth to the shortfall in output growth

was only 0.26 pp; rather, consumption growth largely tracked its predicted path over the

recovery. Moreover, the largest shortfall in consumption is in services, mainly housing services

and financial services and insurance, and in the latter case, for only three aberrant quarters in
                                                     38
2011 and 2012. This pattern does not seem to align with any explanation that focuses on

shortfalls in aggregate demand that operate through consumption broadly.

       Similarly, the evidence does not support theories that operate through slow investment.

Nonresidential investment growth was, in fact, unexpectedly strong early in the recovery, and

otherwise largely tracked its predicted path, apart from a slow spell in 2013 (Figure 6).

       That growth of consumption and investment largely tracked their historical cyclical

patterns suggests that unusual features of the current recovery that might have restrained

aggregate demand are not, in fact, key drivers of the slow recovery. Moreover, one would expect

slow aggregate demand to be reflected in sluggish revival of employment and the unemployment

rate, but that is evidently not the case because employment growth exceeded the 2009 prediction

on average. Growth was strong early and late in the recovery.

       Our examination of the expenditure components revealed one part of demand that made a

contribution to the slow recovery: weakness in both federal and state and local government

purchases. The timing of the forecast errors suggests that the unwinding of the Recovery Act

spending combined with the sequester provided substantial headwinds to the recovery. In

addition, the persistently slow growth of state and local government purchases through 2013,

along with the slow growth over this period of state and local government employment, points to

unusually severe fiscal drag imparted by restrained state and local purchases associated with

balanced budget requirements and the prolonged effect on real estate tax receipts of the fall in

house prices during the recession. These measures do not include transfers which, unlike direct

government purchases, were growing; thus transfers may have somewhat supported

consumption. Nevertheless, as shown in addendum line to Table 5, there was a large shortfall in

government expenditures plus transfers. This composite category was forecasted to grow by 2.86

percent per year, but in fact it only grew at a 0.66 percent pace.

       Finally, we find some room for explanations associated with poor or missed measurement

of real output. Gross domestic income growth averaged 2.34 percent over 2009 through 2016,

                                                     39
while GDP grew at 2.06 percent. Table 5 suggests that some of this difference may come from

unexpected sources. In particular, half of the unexpected decline in services consumption in 2013

is attributable (in a national accounting sense) to a decline in one of the most poorly measured

sectors of consumption: financial services and insurance. Additional investigation of these

measurement issues is warranted.

VII Concluding Remarks
       Output grew substantially less in the recovery from the 2007-2009 recession than would

normally have accompanied the healthy decline in the unemployment rate. It grew less than it

would have given its normal relation to an index derived from many macro indicators. And it

grew less than professional forecasters predicted, both at the time of the trough and throughout

the recovery. An explanation for poor output growth needs to start with two key facts:

Productivity grew substantially less than its historical growth rate, both in expansions and in

general. and labor-force participation shrank an atypical and unexpected amount. Research on

both topics is active today. We conclude in this paper that the large movements in both factors

were in train prior to the recession, and cyclical effects contributed at most modestly to them.

       Will growth pick up in the future or slow further? The median respondent in the Survey of

Professional Forecasters for 2017, first quarter, forecasts growth in the next three years, and the

next 10, to exceed its average pace over the recovery so far. Although changes in technology

trends are hard to predict, the analysis in our paper does not support such optimism. The

disappointing average pace since 2009 included a large cyclical component that has, as of this

writing, largely gone away. The remaining slow underlying pace of growth reflected underlying

non-cyclical trends that predated the recession. To date, those trends have been persistent, and

are not a mismeasurement mirage. While a turnaround in productivity growth could happen

again, such a turnaround does not appear to be on the horizon. This observation, combined with

labor force participation that is persistently declining for both demographic and non-

demographic reasons, suggests subdued steady-state output growth for the foreseeable future.
                                                    40
       Data Appendix
        Growth and expenditure-side decompositions of output
        Our main growth-accounting data for the U.S. business sector are described in detail in
Fernald (2014). Those data are available quarterly, in growth rates, from 1947:Q2 on at
http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/economists/jfernald/quarterly_productivity.xls. The
version used in this paper were prepared on December 30, 2016.
        For the overall economy, output is measured by real gross domestic product (GDP) and
the geometric average of GDP and real gross domestic income (GDI) (see Nalewaik (2010),
Greenaway-McGrevy (2011), and Aruoba et al (2012)). We refer to the average as gross
domestic output (GDO). Business sector output is also GDO using Fernald’s measure.
        Per-person values are formed using the civilian noninstitutional population 16 years of
age and older from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Current Population Survey (FRED
series CNP16OV). Other BLS-CPS variables include employment (CE16OV), labor force
(CLF16OV) and the civilian unemployment rate (UNRATE). Quarterly data were constructed by
averaging the monthly data for each quarter.
        Expenditure variables (Table 5) are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis NIPA
accounts.

        Industry level TFP, finance intensity, and regulation data,
        BLS multifactor productivity (MFP) data and industry capital data were downloaded
from http://www.bls.gov/mfp/mprdload.htm (accessed September 6, 2016). Growth-rate data run
1988-2014. The industry classification system is NAICS. See the online appendix to Fernald
(2015) for details on how the data were manipulated and aggregated.
        IT intensity is based on factor shares, i.e., payments for IT as a share of income. “IT
intensive” is the set of industries with the highest IT shares that constitute 50 percent of the
value-added weight (averaged 1987-2014) for the business sector excluding finance and direct IT
production. For finance intensity, we aggregated industries from annual BLS I-O tables
(accessed February 23, 2017) from http://www.bls.gov/emp/ep_data_input_output_matrix.htm.
The finance share was nominal purchases of intermediate financial services as a share of industry
gross output. “Finance intensive” is set of business (excluding finance) industries with the
highest finance shares constituting roughly half the value-added weight.
        Al-Ubaydli and McLaughlin (2015) produced the regulation data, available at
regdata.org. The website summarizes the data as “RegData is a database that quantifies the
number of individual restrictions in the Code of Federal Regulations and…determines which
industries are targeted by those regulatory restrictions.” They match regulations to BEA
industries, which we then matched with BLS industries. Not all industries have reliable measures
of regulation, and those industries are omitted. The included industries cover more than 80
percent of private value added and, when aggregated, have a similar TFP pattern to overall
private business.

        Labor force participation rates
        The data underlying the demographic and family income decompositions for labor force
participation are from the 2005-2016 monthly CPS microdata, accessed via IPUMS.




                                                   41
References
Aaronson, Stephanie, Bruce Fallick, Andrew Figura, Jonathan Pingle, and William Wascher.
      2006. “The Recent Decline in the Labor Force Participation Rate and its Implications for
      Potential Labor Supply.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, issue no.: 69-154.
Aaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and
      William Wascher. 2014. “Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future
      Prospects.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 45 (2 fall): 197-275.
Adler, Gustavo, Romain A Duval, Davide Furceri, Sinem Kiliç Çelik,Ksenia Koloskova, and
       Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro, 2017. “Gone with the Headwinds: Global Productivity.” IMF
       Staff Discussion Note, SDN/17/04.
Aghion, Philippe, Antonin Bergeaud, Timo Boppart, Peter J. Klenow, and Huiyu Li. 2017.
      “Missing Growth from Creative Destruction.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
      Working Paper 2017-04.
Alexander, Lewis and Janice Eberly. 2016. “Investment Hollowing Out” presented to the IMF’s
      Jacques.Polak conference.
Al-Ubaydli, O. and McLaughlin, P.A. 2015. “RegData: A Numerical Database on Industry-
      Specific Regulations for all United States Industries and Federal Regulations, 1997-
      2012.” Regulation & Governance, 11: 109–123.
Anzoategui, Diego, Diego Comin, Mark Gertler, and Joseba Martinez. 2016. “Endogenous
      Technology Adoption and R&D as Sources of Business Cycle Persistence.” NBER
      Working Paper No. 22005.
Barro, Robert J. 2016. “The Reasons behind the Obama Non-Recovery.” The Wall Street
       Journal, September 20.
       http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/barro/files/wsj_published_version_092116.pdf
Basu, Susanto and John G. Fernald, 2001. "Why Is Productivity Procyclical? Why Do We
       Care?" in: New Developments in Productivity Analysis, 225-302. National Bureau of
       Economic Research, Inc.
Basu, Susanto, John G. Fernald, Nicholas Oulton, and Sally Srinivasan. 2003. “The Case of the
       Missing Productivity Growth: Or, Does Information Technology Explain Why
       Productivity Accelerated in the United States but Not the United Kingdom?” NBER
       Macroeconomics Annual.
Blanchard, Olivier, Guido Lorenzoni, and Jean-Paul L’Huillier. 2017. “Short-run Effects of
      Lower Productivity Growth: a Twist on the Secular Stagnation Hypothesis.” NBER
      Working Paper 23160.
Bloom, Nicholas. 2014. “Fluctuations in Uncertainty.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (2):
      153–76.
Bosler, Canyon, Mary C. Daly, John G. Fernald, Bart Hobijn. 2016. “The Outlook for U.S.
        Labor-Quality Growth.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2016-14.
        http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/working-papers/wp2016-14.pdf.


                                                  42
Bresnahan, T. F., and M. Trajtenberg. 1995. “General-Purpose Technologies: Engines of
      Growth"? Journal of Econometrics 65(Special Issue, January): 83-108.
Byrne, David M., John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorft. 2016. “Does the United States
       have a Productivity Slowdown or a Measurement Problem?” Brookings Papers on
       Economic Activity, Fall: 109-157.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Mohamad L. Hammour 1994. "The Cleansing Effect of Recessions."
       American Economic Review84(5): 1350-68.
Cette, Gilbert, John G. Fernald, and Benoît Mojon. 2016. "The Pre-Great Recession Slowdown
        in Productivity." European Economic Review 88(C): 3-20.
Congressional Budget Office (CBO) 2006. “The Budget and Economic Outlook: Fiscal Years
      2007 to 2016.” https://www.cbo.gov/publication/41661.
Congressional Budget Office. 2012. “What Accounts for the Slow Growth of the Economy After
      the Recession?” November 2014.
Congressional Budget Office. 2014. “The Slow Recovery of the Labor Market” Congressional
      Budget Office. February 2014.
Council of Economic Advisers. 2016. “The Long-Term Decline in Prime-Age Male Labor Force
      Participation.”
Corrado, Carol, and Kirsten Jäger. 2015. “Wealth and Investment in Mature Societies.”
      Presentation given at Milestone 3: Midterm Conference, Smart Public INTANgibles
      (SPINTAN), London, April 23–24.
Council of Economic Advisers. 2015. “A Better Measure of Economic Growth: Gross Domestic
      Output (GDO).” Council of Economic Advisers Issues Brief, the White House, July 2015.
David, Paul and Gavin Wright 2003. “General Purpose Technologies and Productivity Surges:
       Historical Reflections on the Future of the ICT Revolution.” In Paul A. David and Mark
       Thomas (eds.), The Economic Future in Historical Perspective.
Daly, Mary C., John G. Fernald, Fernanda Nechio, and Oscar Jorda. 2017. “Shocks and
       Adjustments.” FRBSF Manuscript.
Decker, Ryan A., John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2016. “Declining
      Business Dynamism: What We Know and the Way Forward.” American Economic
      Review 106, no.5: 203–7.
Decker, Ryan A., John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2016. “Where Has All
      the Skewness Gone? The Decline in High-Growth (Young) Firms in the U.S.” European
      Economic Review 86: 4-23
Elsby, Michael W.L., Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin. 2015. “On the Importance of the
       Participation Margin for Labor Market Fluctuations,” Journal of Monetary Economics
       72: 64--82.
Erceg, Christopher J. and Andrew T. Levin. 2014. “Labor Force Participation and Monetary
       Policy in the Wake of the Great Recession,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 46
       (S2): 3–49.


                                                 43
Fatas, Antonio. 2000. “Do business Cycles Cast Long Shadows? Short-Run Persistence and
        Economic Growth.” Journal of Economic Growth 5:147-162.
Fatas, Antonio. 2016. “The Agenda for Structural Reform in Europe.” Forthcoming in Growth
        and Reform: European Economies in the Wake of the Economic Crisis. Oxford
        University Press.
Fernald, John G. 2007. “Trend Breaks and Contractionary Technology Improvements.” Journal
       of Monetary Economics.
Fernald, John G. 2014. “A Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Productivity.”
       Working Paper no. 2012-19. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Fernald, John G. 2015. “Productivity and Potential Output Before, During, and After the Great
       Recession.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 29: 1–51.
Fernald, John G. and J. Christina Wang. 2016. “Why Has the Cyclicality of Productivity
       Changed? What Does It Mean?” Annual Review of Economics.
Field, Alexander J. (2003). "The Most Technologically Progressive Decade of the Century."
        American Economic Review 93(4): 1399-1413.
Goldschlag, Nathan and Alexander T. Tabarrok. 2014. “Is Regulation to Blame for the Decline
      in American Entrepreneurship?” GMU Working Paper in Economics No: 15-11.
Gordon, Robert J. 2014. “A New Method of Estimating Potential Real GDP Growth:
      Implications for the Labor Market and the Debt/GDP Ratio.” Working Paper no. 20423.
      National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gordon, Robert J. 2016. “The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living
      Since the Civil War.” Princeton University Press.
Gutiérrez, Germán and Thomas Philippon. 2016. “Investment-less Growth: An Empirical
       Investigation.” NBER Working Paper 22897.
Hall, Robert and Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau. 2016. “Changes in Labor Participation and
       Household Income,” Economic Letter, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,
Hall, Robert E. 2016. “Macroeconomics of Persistent Slumps.” Working Paper no. 22230,
       National Bureau of Economic Research.
Huang, Yu-Fan, Sui Luo, and Richard Startz 2016. “Are Recoveries All the Same: GDP and
      TFP?” Manuscript, University of California Santa Barbara.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Zvi Griliches 1967. “The Explanation of Productivity Change.” The
       Review of Economic Studies 34(3): 249–283.
Jorgenson, Dale W., Mun S. Ho, and Kevin J. Stiroh. 2008. "A Retrospective Look at the U.S.
       Productivity Growth Resurgence." Journal of Economic Perspectives 22(1): 3–24.
Kahn, James and Robert Rich 2007. “Tracking the New Economy: Using Growth Theory to
       Identify Changes in Trend Productivity.” Journal of Monetary Economics:1670-1701.
Lansing, Kevin J. and Benjamin Pyle. 2015. “Persistent Overoptimism about Economic
       Growth.” FRBSF Economic Letter, 2015-03.


                                                  44
Müller, Ulrich.K. and Mark W. Watson. 2008. “Testing Models of Low-Frequency Variability,”
       Econometrica 76(5): 979–1016.
Nalewaik, Jeremy J. 2010. “The Income- and Expenditure-Side Measures of Output Growth.”
      Brookings Papers on Economic Activity vol. 1: 71–106.
Nyblom, J. 1989. “Testing for the Constancy of Parameters Over Time. ” Journal of the
      American Statistical Association 84: 223–230.
Okun, Arthur M. 1962. “Potential GNP: Its Measurement and Significance.” Proceedings of the
      Business and Economics Statistics Section of the American Statistical Assoc.: 98–104.
Oliner, Stephen D., Daniel E. Sichel, and Kevin Stiroh, 2007. “Explaining a Productive
        Decade.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Petrosky-Nadeu, Nicolas 2013. “TFP during a Credit Crunch.” Journal of Economic Theory
       148(3).
Reifschneider, Dave, William Wascher, and David Wilcox 2015. “Aggregate Supply in the
       United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary
       Policy.” IMF Economic Review vol. 63, no. 1: 71–109.
Robinson Peter M. 1988. “Root-N-consistent Semiparametric Regression.” Econometrica 56:
      931-954.
Solow, Robert M. 1957. “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function.” The
       Review of Economics and Statistics 39 (3): 312–320.
Stock, James H. 1989. “Nonparametric Policy Analysis.” Journal of the American Statistical
        Association 84(406): 567-575.
Stock, J.H., and M.W. Watson 1998. “Median Unbiased Estimation of Coefficient Variance in a
        Time Varying Parameter Model.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 93:
        349-358.
Stock, J.H. and M.W. Watson 2016. “Factor Models and Structural Vector Autoregressions in
        Macroeconomics.” Forthcoming, Handbook of Macroeconomics, v. 2.
Syverson, Chad 2013. “Will History Repeat Itself? Comments on ‘Is the Information Technology
       Revolution Over?’” International Productivity Monitor, vol. 25: 37-40.
Syverson, Chad. 2016. “Challenges to Mismeasurement Explanations for the U.S. Productivity
       Slowdown.” Working Paper no. 21974. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic
       Research.
Yellen, Janet L. 2016. “Macroeconomic Research After the Crisis.” At "The Elusive 'Great'
       Recovery: Causes and Implications for Future Business Cycle Dynamics" 60th annual
       economic conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts, October
       14.
Zhang, Ting and Wei Biao Wu. 2012. “Inference of Time-Varying Regression Models,” Annals
       of Statistics 40(3): 1376-1402.




                                                  45
                                                                           Figure 1: Unemployment and Output
                                                                                                                                         Business output per capita
                                                                                                                0.5

                                                                                                                0.4

                                                                                                                0.3

                                                                                                                0.2                                                              actual
                                                                                                                                                                                 cyclically adjusted
                                                                                                                0.1

                                                                                                                    0

                                                                                                               -0.1
                                                                                                                 1990                1995              2000               2005              2010              2015

          Notes: In the left panel, arrows connect the unemployment rate at the NBER-dated troughs with the rate
          28 quarters later (or at the next peak, whichever comes first). In the right panel, the black line is the log of
          business output per person (normalized to 0 in 1991); the red line cyclically adjusts those data using
          Okun’s Law as described in the text (normalized to equal the black line in 2007Q3).




             Figure 2. SPF Forecasts of GDP and the Unemployment Rate, made in 2010 through 2015
Unemployment: Actual and SPF Projections                                                                     GDP: Actual and SPF projections
Annual                                                                                             Percent   Annual                                                                                                            Trillions 2009 $
                                                                                                      11                                                                                                                                   18

                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2013
                                                             2011                                      9                                                                                                                     2014          17
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2011      2012             2015
                                                                                                       8
                                                                                  2012
                                                               2010                                    7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                           2013
                                                                                                       6
                                                                                           2014
                        Actual
                                                                                            2015       5                                                   2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                 Actual
                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                       2      2006       2007      2008       2009       2010      2011       2012      2013       2014       2015      2016        2017
 2006      2007      2008       2009      2010       2011   2012    2013   2014   2015   2016   2017         Source: CBO, BEA, Survey of Professional Forecasters forecasts for annual growth (from first quarter of year shown).
Source: BLS and Survey of Professional Forecasters




          Notes: Median forecasts from the Survey of Professional Forecasters are from the first quarter of year
          indicated for annual averages of unemployment and GDP growth in that and subsequent years. The GDP
          figure on the right assumes the previous year’s (revised) level is known and then projects using the
          published forecasts for annual growth rates. For example, the line for 2010 starts at 2009 actual, and uses
          2010Q1 forecasts for annual growth in years 2010 on. The GDP figure follows Lansing and Pyle (2015).



                                                                                                             46
            Figure 3: Data and Okun’s Law Filtered Data: Output and Labor Productivity


                      (a) GDO per capita                              (b) Business GDO per capita
   0.6                                                   0.7

                                                         0.6
   0.5
                                                         0.5
   0.4
                                                         0.4
   0.3
                                   actual                0.3
   0.2                             cyclically adjusted
                                   trend                 0.2
   0.1
                                                         0.1
        0
                                                           0
   -0.1
             1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015          -0.1
                                                                1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

                (c) Labor hours per capita, business                 (d) Ouput per hour. business
0.15                                                     0.7

                                                         0.6
 0.1
                                                         0.5

0.05                                                     0.4

                                                         0.3
   0                                                     0.2

                                                         0.1
-0.05
                                                           0

 -0.1                                                    -0.1
            1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                  1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


Notes: Plots of cumulated growth rates. Black lines are raw data, red lines are residuals (including
constant terms) from Okun’s Law regressions. Blue line is biweight filtered trend (bandwidth 60 quarters)
fitted to the Okun’s Law residuals. Levels are normalized to have the same means over the sample shown.




                                                          47
                 Figure 4: Data and Okun’s Law Filtered data: Labor Market Variables


              (a) Hours per worker, business                 (b) Ratio of business to CPS employment
  0.01                                              0.05
                                                    0.04
        0
                                                    0.03
  -0.01
                                                    0.02
  -0.02                                             0.01
  -0.03                                                0
                actual
  -0.04         cyclically adjusted                 -0.01
                trend
                                                    -0.02
  -0.05
                                                    -0.03
  -0.06
            1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015      -0.04
                                                            1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                    (c) CPS employment rate                      (d) Labor force participation rate
0.06                                                0.05

0.05                                                0.04

0.04                                                0.03

0.03                                                0.02

0.02                                                0.01

0.01                                                   0

   0                                               -0.01

-0.01                                              -0.02

-0.02                                              -0.03
            1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015              1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

   Notes: See Figure 3.




                                                    48
                                Figure 5: Data and Okun’s Law Filtered Data:
                                Productivity, Capital Ratios, and Labor quality

                            (a) TFP                                        (b) Labor quality
  0.35                                                   0.16

   0.3                                                   0.14
                actual
                cyclically adjusted                      0.12
  0.25
                trend
                                                          0.1
   0.2
                                                         0.08
  0.15
                                                         0.06
   0.1
                                                         0.04
  0.05
                                                         0.02
       0
                                                           0
  -0.05
            1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015          -0.02
                                                                1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

                     (c) Capital-labor ratio                            (d) Capital-output ratio
0.7                                                      0.15

0.6
                                                          0.1
0.5

0.4                                                      0.05
0.3

0.2                                                        0

0.1
                                                        -0.05
  0

-0.1                                                     -0.1
           1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                   1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


Notes: See Figure 3.




                                                         49
       Figure 6. Forecasted and Actual Paths from the Factor Model: Selected Variables

                      (a) GDO per capita                                           (b) Business GDO per capita
       6                                                           10

       4
                                                                    5
       2

       0
                                                                    0
      -2
                                        actual
      -4                                trend forecast              -5
                                        total forecast
      -6
                                                                   -10
      -8

     -10
       2004   2006    2008   2010   2012       2014      2016      -15
                                                                     2004   2006    2008    2010     2012       2014    2016

                              (i) TFP                                                 (k) Capital-labor ratio
6                                                                  12

4                                                                  10

                                                                    8
2
                                                                    6
0
                                                                    4
-2
                                                                    2
-4
                                                                    0
-6                                                                 -2

-8                                                                 -4
2004       2006      2008    2010       2012     2014       2016   2004     2006    2008    2010     2012       2014    2016

                             (b) PCE                                                   (x) Fixed Priv Inv.
5                                                                  20

                                                                   10

                                                                    0

0                                                                  -10

                                                                   -20

                                                                   -30

-5                                                                 -40
2004       2006   2008       2010   2012        2014       2016      2004   2006    2008    2010    2012     2014      2016




                                                                    50
                                                      Figure 6, continued


              (t) PCE Financial serv. & and ins.                                           (y) FPI Nonres
10                                                                     20


 5                                                                     10

                                                                        0
 0
                                                                       -10
                                                                                                       actual
 -5                                                                                                    trend forecast
                                                                       -20
                                                                                                       total forecast

-10                                                                    -30

                                                                       -40
-15                                                                      2004   2006    2008   2010   2012    2014      2016
  2004     2006     2008    2010    2012       2014        2016

                           (ag) Gov Fed                                                 (ah) Gov State & Local
15                                                                6
                                               actual
                                               trend forecast
10                                             total forecast
                                                                  4

                                                                  2
 5
                                                                  0
 0
                                                                  -2
 -5
                                                                  -4

-10                                                               -6

-15                                                               -8
  2004     2006     2008    2010    2012       2014        2016   2004       2006      2008    2010    2012      2014      2016

                    (a) Employment - total                                   (c) Employment - state & local government
      4                                                           3


      2                                                           2

      0                                                           1

      -2                                                          0
                                          actual
                                          trend forecast
      -4                                  total forecast          -1

      -6
                                                                  -2

      -8
      2004   2006    2008    2010   2012      2014     2016       -3
                                                                  2004       2006      2008     2010    2012         2014      2016




Notes Black line is the actual growth rate of the variable, red line is its forecast based on the six
factors, and the blue line is the long-term growth trend.




                                                                   51
                 p p Estimates of Prospective 10-year
    Figure 7: Real-Time                       gg      Growth in Labor Productivity
               Annual average growth                                                                                                             Percent
                                                                                                                                                   3.5


                                                                                                                                                   3

                        Lagged 10-year
                      growth rate (revised)                                                                                                        2.5


                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                          SPF Forecast
                                                                                         for next 10 years                                         1.5


                                                                                                                                                   1

                         Lagged 10-year                                                                                                            0.5
                      growth rate (real time)

                                                                                                                                                   0
              1990                  1995                    2000                   2005                   2010                   2015
               Source: Survey of Professional Forecasters, ALFRED (FRB St. Louis), and BLS. Revised actual data are from Feb. 2, 2017..
               Output per hour is for the non-farm business sector. Surveys are from the first quarter of the year, and are the annual average
               over the next 10 years.




     Figure 8: Cyclically-Adjusted TFP Growth and Estimated Low-Frequency Means




Notes: TFP is cyclically adjusted. The thin black line is its four-quarter growth rate. The blue line is the
cyclically-adjusted trend using a biweight filter (60-quarter bandwidth). The shaded area is a 67% Bayes
posterior set. The dark black line are the means estimated within the three regimes estimated by break
tests, with break dates in 1995Q4 and 2006Q1 from Table 6.




                                                                                        52
    Figure 9: Posterior Density of Date of Maximum Trend Growth in TFP, 1981-2016
                          0.1
                                      1956-2016 Posterior
                                      1981-2016 Posterior
                         0.08


                         0.06


                         0.04


                         0.02


                           0
                           1980          1990            2000        2010            2020

Notes: TFP growth is cyclically adjusted. Computed using Bayes implementation of the random walk-
plus-noise model for productivity growth, as discussed in the text.

                   Figure 10. Business Earnings as a Ratio to the Value of Capital




                Figure 11: Labor-Force Participation Rates by Sex, 2006-2016
                            74




                                                                                      60
                            73




                                                                                      59
                            72




                                                            Female
                                                                                      Female
                          Male
                           71




                                                                                        58
                            70




                                               Male
                                                                                      57
                            69




                                                                                      56




                             2006q1   2008q1    2010q1    2012q1   2014q1   2016q1




                                                             53
Figure 12. Labor-Force Participation Rate, Actual and Adjusted for Changing
                     Demography, Annual 2006-2016




          Figure 13. Role of Family Income in Participation Rates




                                       54
          Table 1. Categories of Quarterly Time Series Used to Estimate the Factors


                                      Category                             Number of series
           (1)    NIPA                                                          12
           (2)    Industrial Production                                          7
           (3)    Employment and Unemployment                                   30
           (4)    Orders, Inventories, and Sales                                 8
           (5)    Housing Starts and Permits                                     6
           (6)    Prices                                                        24
           (7)    Productivity and Labor Earnings                                5
           (8)    Interest Rates                                                 9
           (9)    Money and Credit                                               5
           (10)   International                                                  9
           (11)   Asset Prices, Wealth, Household Balance Sheets                 9
           (12)   Oil Market Variables                                           6

                  Total                                                           123

Notes: For the full list of series and data transformations see the supplemental data appendix.




                                                         55
                       Table 2. Cyclicality of Real Output and its Components

                                                                           Standard deviations of components         2
                                             Generalized Okun's law                                                 R from
                                             coefficient and std. error                                          regressing on
                                                                          cycle (c)    trend(μ)    irregular (z)
                                                                                                                    factors
  (1) GDP                                         -1.49 (0.18)             1.90          0.58         1.77          0.66
  (2) GDO (Average of GDP, GDI)                   -1.53 (0.17)             1.92          0.57         1.61          0.72
  (3) Business GDO                                -2.03 (0.21)             2.53          0.59         2.11          0.73

  (4) GDP per capita                              -1.48 (0.17)             1.88          0.52         1.84          0.60
  (5) GDO per capita                              -1.52 (0.17)             1.89          0.51         1.63          0.67

  (6) Business GDO per capita                     -2.02   (0.20)           2.51          0.54         2.12          0.70
  (7)    Total factor productivity                -0.50   (0.19)           1.24          0.24         2.27          0.38
  (8)    α*Capital/Pop.                           -0.09   (0.06)           0.20          0.19         0.32          0.37
  (9)    (1-α)*(Lab Qual * Hours/Pop.)            -1.43   (0.14)           1.54          0.26         1.24          0.57

 (10)   Bus. labor hours per capita               -2.30   (0.19)           2.54          0.36         1.51          0.74
 (11)    Hours per worker, business               -0.35   (0.1)            0.55          0.04         1.05          0.25
 (12)    Ratio of bus.empl to CPS empl            -0.71   (0.09)           0.73          0.08         1.20          0.24
 (13)    CPS employment rate                      -1.08   (0.01)           1.36          0.00         0.10          0.89
 (14)    Labor-force participation rate           -0.16   (0.10)           0.32          0.33         0.87          0.02

 (15)   Bus. output per hour (labor prod.)         0.28   (0.22)           0.77          0.37         2.23          0.24
 (16)     TFP / (1 -α)                            -0.75   (0.29)           1.88          0.35         3.41          0.39
 (17)     Capital-Output ratio × α/(1-α)           0.90   (0.09)           1.30          0.07         1.09          0.75
 (18)     Labor quality                            0.13   (0.05)           0.37          0.05         0.99          0.06

Notes: The Okun's law coefficients are (1)/4, so they are measured in quarterly percentage points of
growth per percentage point change in the unemployment rate. The standard deviations of the components
are for quarterly growth rates reported in percentage points at an annual rate. The R2 is from the
regression of the variable on the factors used in factor model.




                                                                   56
            Table 3: Shortfall of the Post-Crisis Recovery Relative to Earlier Recoveries:
            Growth Accounting Decomposition Using Okun's Law Cyclical Adjustment

                                                 Historical values                                 Cyclically adjusted
                                              (not cyclically adjusted)                                   Annual shortfall
                                                                                                    Cyclically
                                             Three                 Annual       Three
                                                       2009Q2-                           2009Q2-    adjusted Shortfall    Residual     Cumul.
                                            previous              shortfall   previous
                                                       2016Q2                            2016Q2     shortfall in smooth   shortfall    shortfall
                                            recovs.                (a)-(b)     recovs.
                                                                                                     (d) - (e)   trend     (f) - (g)
                                              (a)        (b)        (c)         (d)        (e)          (f)        (g)        (h)         (i)
 (1) GDP                                     3.60       2.06       1.54        2.95       0.96        1.99      1.26         0.73      14.94
 (2) GDO (Average of GDP, GDI)               3.57       2.20       1.37        2.92       1.11        1.81      1.24         0.57      13.54
 (3) Business GDO                            4.04       2.76       1.29        3.18       1.29        1.89      1.31         0.58      14.14
 (4) GDP per capita                          2.48       1.02       1.45        1.84       -0.07       1.91      1.13         0.78      14.30
 (5) GDO per capita                          2.45       1.16       1.29        1.80        0.07       1.73      1.11         0.62      12.90
 (6) Business GDO per capita                 2.92       1.72       1.21        2.07        0.26       1.81      1.18         0.63      13.49
 (7)    Total factor productivity            1.30       0.89       0.42        0.99        0.28       0.71      0.36         0.35       5.12
 (8)    α*Capital/Pop.                       0.79       0.24       0.55        0.77        0.24       0.53      0.40         0.13       3.78
 (9)    (1-α)*(Lab Qual * Hours/Pop.)        0.83       0.59       0.24        0.30       -0.27       0.57      0.41         0.15       4.04
(10)   Bus. labor hours per capita           0.81        0.63      0.18        -0.06      -0.76        0.70      0.55      0.14         5.00
(11)    Hours per worker, business           0.07        0.24     -0.17        -0.10      -0.07       -0.03     -0.06      0.03        -0.24
(12)    Ratio of bus.empl to CPS empl        0.12        0.37     -0.25        -0.11       0.01       -0.12      0.06      -0.18       -0.83
(13)    CPS employment rate                  0.43       0.68      -0.25         0.00       0.00        0.00      0.00       0.00        0.02
(14)    Labor-force participation rate       0.19       -0.66      0.85         0.15      -0.69        0.85      0.56       0.29        6.11
(15)   Bus. output per hour (labor prod.)     2.11       1.09      1.03        2.12       1.01        1.11      0.62        0.49        8.09
(16)     TFP / (1 -α)                         1.95       1.44      0.51        1.48       0.51        0.96      0.48        0.48        6.98
(17)     Capital-Output ratio × α/(1-α)      -0.26      -0.69      0.42        0.16       0.07        0.08      0.11       -0.02        0.59
(18)     Labor quality                        0.43       0.33      0.09        0.49       0.43        0.06      0.03        0.03        0.44


 Notes: Entries are average annual percent changes or percentage point differences. Indented rows sum to
 next level of aggregation. Post-crisis recovery period is 2009Q2 through 2016Q2 (28 quarters). The three
 previous recoveries are the averages during the first 28 quarters from the troughs of 1982 and 1991, and
 the 24 quarters of the expansion after the 2001 trough. Cyclically-adjusted entries in columns (d) and (e)
 are residuals from Okun’s Law regressions.
          Table 4. Shortfall of the Post-Crisis Recovery Relative to 2009IV Forecasts:
         Growth Accounting Decomposition Using Forecast-Based Cyclical Adjustment
                                                         Forecast      Actual     Shortfall (std. error)
   (1) GDP                                                 2.63         2.06           0.57 (0.07)
   (2) GDO (Average of GDP, GDI)                           2.63         2.20           0.43 (0.07)
   (3) Business GDO                                        3.11         2.76           0.35 (0.08)

   (4) GDP per capita                                         1.51      1.02             0.48 (0.09)
   (5) GDO per capita                                         1.51      1.16             0.35 (0.07)

   (6) Business GDO per capita                                1.99      1.72             0.27   (0.09)
   (7)    Total factor productivity                           1.40      0.89             0.52   (0.09)
   (8)    α*Capital/Pop.                                      0.43      0.24             0.19   (0.01)
   (9)    (1-α)*(Lab Qual * Hours/Pop.)                       0.15      0.59            -0.44   (0.05)

  (10)    Bus. labor hours per capita                      -0.08         0.63           -0.72   (0.06)
  (11)     Hours per worker, business                      0.08          0.24           -0.16   (0.03)
  (12)     Ratio of bus.empl to CPS empl                   -0.16         0.37           -0.53   (0.06)
  (13)     CPS employment rate                             0.26          0.68           -0.42   (0.02)
  (14)     Labor-force participation rate                  -0.27        -0.66            0.40   (0.03)

  (15)    Bus. output per hour (labor prod.)               2.07          1.09            0.98   (0.08)
  (16)      TFP / (1 -α)                                   2.15          1.44            0.72   (0.12)
  (17)      Capital-Output ratio × α/(1-α)                 -0.43        -0.69            0.26   (0.03)
  (18)      Labor quality                                  0.34          0.33            0.01   (0.04)

Notes: The first two numerical columns are forecasted and actual values of the variable in the first
column, where the forecasts are computed using the factor model and the values of the factors through
2009q2. The third column is the shortfall (the negative of the forecast error), and the final column gives
the standard error of the shortfall arising solely from sampling error in the estimated model parameters.




                                                         58
                          Table 5. Expected and Unexpected Contributions to GDP growth:
                                            NIPA Demand Components

                                                                      Okun's Law Cyclical Adjustment
                                    Growth                                                                                   DFM Forecast
                                                                                     CA Growth Rate
                                     Rate, Average    Okuns law
                                                                    Three                                    Irregular
                                   2009Q2- Share      coefficient            Post-crisis Total     Trend
                                                                   previous                                     (z)    Forecast Shortfall   SE
                                   2016Q2               (SE)                  recovery Shortfall shortfall
                                                                  recoveries                                 shortfall
Real gross domestic product         2.06      1      -1.49 (0.18)   2.95       0.96      1.99       1.26      0.73      2.63      0.57      0.07
 Personal consump. Expend.          1.54     0.68    -0.74 (0.14)   2.00       1.04       0.96      0.70       0.26     1.80      0.26      0.04
  Goods                             0.78     0.23    -0.44 (0.08)   0.80       0.48       0.32      0.24       0.08     0.86      0.08      0.03
    Goods, durable                  0.47     0.07    -0.25 (0.06)   0.43       0.28       0.15      0.12       0.03     0.50      0.03      0.03
      Motor vehicles & parts        0.11     0.02    -0.09 (0.04)   0.10       0.04       0.06      0.09      -0.03     0.10      -0.01     0.02
      Furn. & dur. HH eqpt          0.11     0.02    -0.06 (0.01)   0.08       0.06       0.02      0.02       0.00     0.10      0.00      0.00
      Recreat. goods & vehicles     0.20     0.02    -0.06 (0.01)   0.21       0.15       0.06      0.02       0.04     0.24      0.04      0.01
      Other durables                0.05     0.01    -0.03 (0.01)   0.05       0.03       0.02      0.00       0.01     0.06      0.01      0.00
    Goods, nondurable               0.32     0.15    -0.19 (0.03)   0.38       0.20       0.18      0.13       0.05     0.37      0.05      0.01
      Food & beve. off premises     0.06     0.05    -0.03 (0.02)   0.08       0.03       0.04      0.03       0.01     0.08      0.02      0.00
      Clothing & footwear           0.06     0.02    -0.05 (0.01)   0.12       0.03       0.09      0.07       0.02     0.08      0.02      0.01
      Gasoline & energy             0.00     0.02    -0.03 (0.01)   0.03      -0.02       0.04      0.02       0.02     0.00      0.00      0.01
      Other nondurable goods        0.19     0.06    -0.07 (0.01)   0.15       0.15       0.00      0.00       0.00     0.19      0.00      0.01
    Services                        0.76     0.46    -0.30 (0.08)   1.21       0.57       0.64      0.46       0.18     0.93      0.18      0.02
      Housing & utilities           0.13     0.13    -0.06 (0.02)   0.28       0.10       0.18      0.12       0.07     0.20      0.07      0.01
      Health care                   0.31     0.11     0.00 (0.03)   0.23      0.31       -0.08     -0.07      -0.01     0.31      0.00      0.01
      Transportation services       0.04     0.02    -0.08 (0.01)   0.07       0.00       0.07      0.06       0.01     0.03      -0.01     0.00
      Recreational services         0.04     0.03    -0.04 (0.01)   0.09       0.02       0.07      0.05       0.03     0.06      0.02      0.00
      Food serv. & accomm.          0.11     0.04    -0.06 (0.02)   0.09       0.08       0.01      0.01       0.00     0.11      0.00      0.01
      Fin. services & insurance     0.00     0.05    -0.02 (0.04)   0.18      -0.03       0.21      0.16       0.05     0.06      0.07      0.01
      Other services                0.10     0.06    -0.06 (0.02)   0.15       0.06       0.09      0.07       0.02     0.11      0.01      0.01
      NPISH                         0.03     0.02     0.02 (0.01)   0.12      0.05       0.07       0.05       0.02     0.06      0.03      0.01
 Gross priv. dom. investment        0.91     0.15    -1.11 (0.14)    0.63      0.03      0.60       0.45       0.15     0.89      -0.02     0.04
  Fixed private investment          0.70     0.15    -0.94 (0.07)    0.53      0.09      0.43       0.41       0.03     0.59      -0.11     0.03
    Nonresidential                  0.50     0.12    -0.69 (0.08)    0.47      0.13      0.34       0.26       0.08     0.48      -0.02     0.02
       Structures                   -0.01    0.03    -0.19 (0.03)   -0.01     -0.06      0.05       0.02       0.03     0.00      0.01      0.01
       Equipment                    0.38     0.06    -0.44 (0.05)    0.30      0.09      0.20       0.17       0.03     0.33      -0.05     0.02
       Intell. property products    0.14     0.04    -0.06 (0.01)    0.19      0.11      0.07       0.06       0.02     0.15      0.01      0.01
    Residential                     0.20     0.03    -0.25 (0.05)    0.07     -0.03      0.10       0.15      -0.05     0.12      -0.08     0.02
       Structures                   0.20     0.03    -0.25 (0.05)    0.07     -0.03      0.10       0.15      -0.05     0.11      -0.08     0.02
       Equipment                    0.00      0       0.00 (0.00)   0.00      0.00       0.00       0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00
 Government expenditures            -0.19    0.19     0.10 (0.06)   0.45      -0.11      0.56       0.31      0.25      0.12      0.31      0.03
  Federal                           -0.09    0.08     0.11 (0.05)   0.18      -0.04      0.22       0.07      0.15      0.11      0.20      0.02
  State & local                     -0.10    0.12    -0.01 (0.03)   0.26      -0.07      0.34       0.24      0.10      0.02      0.12      0.01
 Exports                            0.58     0.13    -0.27 (0.08)    0.60      0.36       0.24      0.10       0.14      0.60      0.03     0.04
 Imports                            -0.76   -0.16    0.54 (0.09)    -0.70     -0.34      -0.36     -0.29      -0.08     -0.77     -0.01     0.03
 Addendum:
  Government cons. expend. +
                                    0.66             1.22 (0.52)    3.67       1.33      2.34       0.91      1.44      2.86      2.20      0.23
 transfer payments


      Notes: Indented components add to the final entry at the prior level of indentation.




                                                                            59
                   Table 6: Test Statistics for a Break in the Mean Growth Rate in TFP
                                                    QLR (sup-Wald) test
                                                                                                Nyblom test            LFST test
                                   1 break             2 breaks       3 breaks
A. 1956-2016
 p-value for H0: t =                   0.01                  0.06               0.01                  0.02             0.03
 Estimated break dates                  1973Q1                1973Q1             1973Q1
                                                              2006Q1             1995Q4
                                                                                 2006Q1
                    ˆ                 0.11                                                        0.11
          90% CI for              (0.03, 0.36)                                                (0.02, 0.40)
B. 1981-2016
  p-value for H0: t =                  0.38                  0.14               0.25                  0.35             0.31
 Estimated break dates                  2006Q1                1995Q1             1988Q1
                                                              2006Q1             1995Q4
                                                                                 2006Q1
                    ˆ                 0.05                                                       0.05
          90% CI for               (0.0, 0.15)                                                (0.0, 0.27)

  Notes: All test are of a constant mean against a non-constant alternative: for the QLR, regime changes; for
  the Nyblom, against random walk drift; for the LFST, against more general martingale variation. All tests
  are heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation-robust. The final two rows in each block provide the point
  estimate of the standard deviation of a random walk drift in the mean,   , and its 90% confidence
  interval based on inverting the test statistic.

                                         Table 7: Industry Growth by Subperiod
                                                                                                         Change
                                                            Pre-    1995-    2000-     2004-    2007- after 2004
                                                           1995      2000     2004      2007     2014      (d-c ) VA Weight
                                                              (a)      (b)       (c)      (d)      (e)         (f)      (g)
  (1) Private business                                      0.62      1.35     2.05      0.32     0.26      -1.73     100.0
  (2)    Finance and Insurance                             -0.48      3.37     0.89      0.27     0.22      -0.63       8.3
  (3)    Energy (Oil/gas, pipeline, refining, utilities)    3.15    -3.47      5.55     -3.51     3.14      -9.06       5.9
  (4)    Transportation (ex. pipelines)                     3.47      2.34     2.57      2.78     0.40       0.21       2.5
  (5)    Construction                                       0.17    -1.29    -0.82      -5.50    -0.62      -4.67       6.0
  (6)    IT producing                                       8.47    14.46      7.23      6.78     2.49      -0.45       5.7

  (7) Business ex. finance                                 0.71      1.17     2.17      0.34     0.28          -1.84    91.7
  (8)    Finance intensive                                 0.22      0.24     1.35     -0.03     0.57          -1.37    44.7
  (9)    Non-finance intensive                             1.16      2.03     2.95      0.67    -0.03          -2.28    47.0

 (10) Business ex. finance and IT prod                     0.25      0.23     1.84     -0.10     0.12          -1.93    86.0
 (11)    IT-intensive                                      0.39      0.96     2.19      0.86    -0.22          -1.33    42.8
 (12)    Non-IT-intensive                                  0.11     -0.52     1.49     -0.99     0.45          -2.49    43.2

  Notes: Industry and aggregate growth based on BLS 60-industry MFP data. Entries are percent
  change per year, except for value-added weight, which is average percentage share from 1988-
  2014.


                                                                        60
       Table 8: Panel Regressions of Industry TFP Growth on Regulatory Restrictions

                                                         (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)
                 Regulationi,t                          0.032         0.033
                                                       (0.032)       (0.033)
                Regulationi,t-1                        -0.023        -0.011
                                                       (0.027)       (0.026)
                Regulationi,t-2                        -0.045        -0.036
                                                       (0.039)       (0.035)
                Regulationi,t-3                         0.022         0.036
                                                       (0.023)       (0.034)
               Regulationi ,t:t-2                                                   -0.018          -0.009
                                                                                    (0.040)         (0.036)
                                                                                                     0.060
                                                                                                    (0.050)
          Industry Fixed Effects                         Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes
            Year Fixed Effects                            No           Yes           Yes              Yes
   F-statistics for Regulation (p-value)              0.36 (0.83)   0.44 (0.78)   0.19 (0.67)     0.86 (0.43)

Notes: Data are annual observations of industry TFP growth (the dependent variable) and regulations for
the 42 industries for which Regdata has an index of regulation, 1988-2014. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered by industry. Regulationi ,t:t-2 denotes the average value of Regulation for lags 0-
2, and Regulationi ,t-3:t-5 is defined analogously.



     Table 9: Changes in Weekly Hours of Time Use, 2007 to 2015, People 15 and Older




                                                             61
