                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WHY ARE SOME IMMIGRANT GROUPS MORE SUCCESSFUL THAN OTHERS?

                                        Edward P. Lazear

                                      Working Paper 23548
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23548


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           June 2017, Revised November 2018




I am grateful to Lars Oxelheim and Charlotta Olofsson who provided the data from Sweden and
to Melissa Kearney for discussant comments at the Utah Business Conference. My thanks also to
Caroline Hoxby for extensive and thoughtful comments and to Juan Saavedra for help with the
IPUMS data. Additionally, Enrico Moretti, Robert Pollak, Kathryn Shaw and others at the NBER
summer institute for helpful comments that are reflected in this draft. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Edward P. Lazear. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Why Are Some Immigrant Groups More Successful than Others?
Edward P. Lazear
NBER Working Paper No. 23548
June 2017, Revised November 2018
JEL No. F22,J01,J15,J61,M5

                                         ABSTRACT

Success of immigrants in the US, measured by earnings or education, varies dramatically by
country of origin. Surprisingly, immigrants from Algeria have higher educational attainment than
those from Israel or Japan. Another fact: The US admits few migrants from Algeria. Immigration
slots are rationed and as a consequence, average immigrant attainment is inversely related to the
number from a source country and positively related to its population and education level. The
formal model’s three variables explain 73% of the variation in educational attainment of
immigrant groups in the US. The theory and predictions are bolstered by Swedish and Canadian
data.


Edward P. Lazear
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and Hoover Institution
and also NBER
lazear@stanford.edu
        Algeria, Israel, and Japan, along with over one hundred other countries, are sources of
migrants to the United States. Try the following thought experiment: Rank those three countries’
immigrants, highest to lowest, by educational attainment. The ranking is Algeria at the top
followed by Israel and Japan. Surprised? Consider an additional fact: Algerians make up .0005
of immigrants, Israelis comprise .003 of US immigrants whereas about 1% of immigrants are
from Japan. The largest origin country of US immigrants is Mexico, accounting for 27% of the
immigrant population. Mexican immigrants rank 134th out of 136 in educational attainment, as
compared with Algerian immigrants who rank 25th. Yet average education attainment in Mexico
is higher than that in Algeria. The group with the highest educational attainment is that from the
former Soviet Union, the most under-represented group among all immigrants in the US.
        The attainment of immigrants in the US varies greatly by country of origin. Average
educational attainment by country of origin ranges from a low of 9 years of schooling to a high
of 16 years. Similarly, average annual earnings by country of origin ranges from about $16,000
to $64,000. Not surprisingly, the correlation between these two measures of attainment is .7.
Additionally, two of the largest sources of US immigrants are at both extremes, with Mexico’s
migrants to the US having a mean educational attainment of 9 years, whereas India’s migrants to
the US have a mean of 16 years. Contrast that with the fact that the average educational level in
Mexico is almost twice that of the average educational attainment in India. What explains these
immigrant attainment differences across origin countries and the counterintuitive patterns?
        Because the US admits as immigrants only a small fraction of most origin countries’
populations, almost every country has a large enough group of highly educated people from
which the US could draw its immigrants. Many of these individuals might be willing to move to
the US if admitted. If so, then the average educational attainment of immigrants from any origin
country depends in large part on whom the US is willing to admit. The more selective is
immigration policy, the higher is the educational attainment of the group.
        Important is that inferences about the quality of various countries as sources of
immigrants are likely to be incorrect if they are based on the attainment of immigrants in the US
from the particular country. The simple correlation between an immigrant’s attained level of
education and the average level of education in his or her origin country does not differ
significantly from zero.1 Mexico is not an inferior source country despite immigrants from
Mexico ranking near the bottom in educational attainment. That is a result of the policy filter
and selection criterion, not the inherent quality of Mexico’s average educational attainment. A
desirable destination country like the US could likely select high attainment immigrants from
almost any country if that were the goal. In general, it is not. Other considerations such as
refugee status as emphasized by Sweden or family reunification as emphasized in the US
influence the admission choice and consequent attainment of immigrants.
         Most models of immigration treat migrants as if they are mobile labor, moving from one



1
The r-squared in a regression of immigrant’s attained education on home country education using the
American Communities Survey, as described below, is .02.

                                                  1
sector to another freely, without any constraints on the migrant imposed by policy.2 These
models have served analysts well in considering who chooses to come to the US, but they are
less well-suited both theoretically and empirically in describing attainment of the immigrant
population when excess supply and rationing of immigration slots is the rule.
        Instead, supply plays a different and arguably more realistic role. Policy, explicit or
implicit, determines the number of immigrants that are accepted from each source country. In
the US, strong emphasis on family reunification means that there are many immigration slots for
some countries and few for others. But given the number of slots, it is still necessary to
determine which individuals come from each country. It is argued that selection is from the top
and supply considerations may play a heavy role here.
        There are, therefore, two types of selection at work. The selection emphasized in past
literature is “personal selection,” where an individual decides whether or not to migrate based on
economic and other considerations. Generally ignored by the earlier literature is what might be
called “process selection,” where the destination country creates an admission system that results
in a particular kind of selection through an explicit or implicit rule. Process selection is more
important in countries that have excess demand for immigration slots. The system in the United
States, which favors family reunification, is not neutral across countries and results in process
selection. Because some origin countries are better represented among the current stock of
immigrants, a seemingly neutral rule results in a non-neutral allocation of immigration slots.
This occurs because the likelihood of having a relative already residing in the US varies by
origin country.
        Rationing of immigration slots is clearly important in the United States. For example,
between 2009 and 2014, approximately 1 million individuals per year were granted permanent
resident status. In each of those years, there was a large number of applicants who were in the
queue for resident status, equaling about four times as many as the number granted permanent
residency.3 There is excess supply of immigrants, even by measures of those who apply. There
are surely many more who would apply if they thought they would be admitted, but decline to do
so because the likelihood that their application will succeed is too low. Each year, H-1B visas,
awarded to individuals who are sponsored to work at US firms, run out well before the year ends.
        Rationing also has a dramatic effect on performance of immigrants. To incorporate the
importance of rationing and process selection, an extreme approach is adopted, albeit a
caricature of the true situation. A desirable destination country is assumed to choose the number
of immigrants that it will admit from each of the world’s source countries. Selection is assumed
to be from the top of that country’s attainment distribution, either because the destination
country uses that criterion of admission given the number admitted, or because those with higher
levels of attainment are more likely to migrate. The latter could result from standard supply
considerations, like the returns to migration being positively correlated with skill, or simply


2
 Models, such as the one by Roy (1951) are frequently used to describe the flow of migrants to the US.
See, for example, the seminal work by Borjas (1987).
3
 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, “Annual Immigrant Visa Waiting List Report as
of November 1, 2015,” 2015, and Department of Homeland Security, “Yearbook of Immigration
Statistics 2014,” 2016.

                                                    2
because those with higher attainment levels are better able to learn about and secure a scarce
slot.4 As a consequence, the shape of the education distribution in the origin country, the
country’s population, and importantly, the target immigrant number from that country determine
the composition and attainment of immigrants in the US.
        At some level, it is obvious that policy is a key determinant of immigration patterns. The
large shift of migrants to the US from source countries in Europe to those in Latin America
occurred after policy changed in 1965 favoring family reunification. There was no abrupt
corresponding change in supply conditions. Natives of the West Indies and Surinam a make up
3% of the population of the Netherlands as a consequence of Dutch policy toward their former
colonies. They account for only a tiny fraction of the US population despite those countries
being geographically closer to the US than to Europe. The major presence of Algerians in France
and minor presence in the US is a consequence of France allowing people from its former
colonies to settle in the country. Of course, common language affects the desire to migrate to
certain countries, but this factor does not explain time series changes nor the fact that the
majority of immigrants in the US are not native English speakers. Supply considerations, by
themselves, cannot rationalize the very different distributions of immigrants by country or origin
across different destination countries, as will be shown by a comparison of Canada, Sweden, and
the United States. Nor can supply considerations alone predict performance of the various
immigrant groups in the destination countries. To deal with either of these issues, it is necessary
to acknowledge the role that policy and rationing plays in the pattern of migration.
        Although the point of this analysis is not unique to the United States, the focus is the US
because the assumption that the process selection is paramount applies in the US better than in
most of the world’s countries. The excess supply of potential migrants to the US means that the
rationing rule is a key factor in determining the nature of immigrants in the US. However, it will
also be shown that data from Sweden, another desirable destination country, support the
hypothesis. Furthermore, a comparison of sources of immigrants in the US and Canada,
geographically similar countries with almost identical economies, make clear that supply cannot
be the only factor in explaining immigration patterns and attainment.
        The model, which implies that three and only three variables should determine

4
 Borjas and Friedberg (2009) argue that selection rules explain the rise in wages of immigrants that
occurred between 1990 and 2000. Additionally, Kerr and Lincoln (2010) examine the effect of the rise in
H-1B visas on innovation and document its importance. Kerr, Kerr, and Lincoln (2015) use the LEHD
data and find that skilled immigrant labor is an important determinant of the overall increase in the skilled
workforce of American firms. H-1Bs are important because the H-1B program is always over-subscribed
and the number of H-1Bs permitted is a policy choice that results in selection from the top, made by the
US government.
         Two Hunt papers, Hunt (2011) and Hunt (2015), examine the performance of highly skilled
immigrants in the US. Another measure of ability to perform in the US relates to English fluency, which
was explored in Lazear (1999). Lewis (2013) picks up on that theme and discusses the ability of
immigrants to substitute for native-born US labor and how that relates to language skills. Similarly, Peri,
Shih and Sparber (2015) estimate the effect of STEM immigration on productivity and find it is
substantial, using city differences. None of these papers speaks to the empirical validity of the assumption
that selection is from the top of an origin country’s distribution, but the fact that many of the origin
countries have low educational levels implies that the high skilled ones are selected from the top.

                                                     3
educational attainment does well. In the US, 73% of the variation in immigrant educational
attainment is explained by the variables of interest in the model, namely the number of
immigrants in the US, the population of the origin country, and the mean level of educational




attainment in the origin country.
        Figure 1 illustrates the main argument. Consider two countries, 1 and 2, with equal
population sizes and with educational distributions as shown. Country 2's distribution is a
rightward displacement of country 1's distribution.
        Suppose that the US were to decide that 3% of its immigrants will come from country 1,
but that 30% will come from country 2 and suppose further that all who are offered US residency
accept. If the US also allows only the most educated immigrants in first from each country, or
alternatively, if the most educated in each country are most attracted to the US or most able to
navigate their way through the immigration process, then the upper tail of each distribution will
end up migrating to the US. In this case, because the US targets 3% from country 1 and 30%
from country 2, the minimum cutoff level of education in each country is A1* and A2*,
respectively. Note that the educational cutoff level for country 1, the lower education country, is
considerably above that for country 2, the higher education country, because so many more are
being admitted from country 2. Given the cutoffs and the underlying distributions, the average
level of education among immigrants from country 1 and country 2 are A1 and A2. The
educational attainment of immigrants from 1 exceeds that from 2, i.e., A1 > A2 , even though
country 1's education level at home is below that of country 2 at home.
        Of course, this is not a necessary outcome. It depends on the amount by which country
2's education level dominates country 1 and in particular on the number of immigrants that the
US admits from each of the two countries. But figure 1 illustrates that other things equal, the
smaller the proportion of immigrants in the US who come from a country, the higher is the
expected level of education of immigrants in the US who are supplied by that country.

                                                4
                                                 Model

          The general model captures the intuition of the figure and discussion. Suppose that the
US chooses a selection rule such that Ii of the immigrants have origins in country i. The selection
rule that determines Ii is taken to be exogenous, determined by policy, politics, or considerations
outside the model.
          Assume that anyone outside the US offered immigrant status in the US accepts it.
Assume additionally that rationing is such that the top of the educational distribution (or any
other dimension of immigrant ability) is admitted first. This can either be a result of explicit US
policy or a consequence of the supply side, where the people most likely to come to the US from
any other country are at the top of the ability distribution, the latter resulting either because they
are best able to navigate the immigrate hurdles or because they have the highest return from
migrating. This policy-determined selection of immigrants fits those who come in legally with
official documentation. Those who enter the country without documentation are more likely to
fit a strict supply-determined mechanism because the rationing rule chosen by the US does not
bind.5
          Let Ni be the population of country i and let fi (A) be the density of education or some
other measure of ability or attainment, A, in country i.
          It is not necessary to assume that anyone offered residency in the US accepts, although
that is the most straightforward way to think about it. Another interpretation of fi(A) is that it is
the transformed distribution that takes into account not only attainment, but also the proportion
of those in country i with attainment level A who will migrate to the US if permitted to do so.
The necessary condition in this case is simply that immigrants from countries that are admitted
in higher quantities are a lower attainment group than those from countries admitted in lower
quantities. Limiting the quantities of entrants has the effect of raising the average ability of those
selected.
          Given the policy determined Ii, Ai* is the cutoff ability level of immigrants from country
i determined such that

               
        Ni           f i ( A)dA  I i
               Ai *

or

(1)     N i [1  Fi ( Ai *)]  I i  0

       The expected level of education among those from country i in the US is simply the
conditional expectation or




5
It is possible that the policy on internal enforcement and border control may have an effect even on those
who do not apply through legal channels.

                                                    5
                    1          
(2)     Ai                      Af ( A)dA
               1  Fi ( Ai *) Ai * i

       The goal is to predict the effect of the key variables on the average educational level or
other measures of attainment of a country’s migrants to the US. Those variables are the number
of immigrant slots allocated to country i, Ii, the population of country i, Ni, and the level of
education in country i, μi, where μi is defined as the average level of education in origin country
i.
       To obtain the theoretical predictions, differentiate (2) with respect to Ii, Ni, and μi. In
general, from (2), for any variable x,

                            Ai *
               f i ( Ai *)
         Ai                x 
         x [1  Fi ( Ai *)]2 A *
                                        Af ( A)dA
                                             i
                                     i



                            1                f ( A)
                                    
                                                      i
                                           A          dA
                      1  Fi ( Ai *)   A *
                                         i     x
                               A * f i ( Ai *) Ai *
                             i
                               1  Fi ( Ai *)  x



or

                                     Ai * 
                                                               
                                      x  A * Af ( A)dA
                        f i ( Ai *)
                  Ai                                           
                                                          Ai *
                                                              i
                                                          i

                 x     [1  Fi ( Ai *)]  1  Fi ( Ai *)
                                                                    
(3)                                   1                 f ( A)
                             
                                 1  Fi ( Ai *)  Ai *
                                                       A i
                                                          x
                                                                 dA




        The derivation in (3) allows the basic theoretical predictions to be stated. Most of the
implications come directly from the properties of conditional expectations as interpreted in the
current context. The theory is stated in the form of propositions, the proofs of which are
contained in the appendix.

Proposition 1:
                   Ai
                       0 .
                   Ii
       The larger is the number of immigrants admitted from country i, the lower is their
       expected level of attainment, Ai .

Proposition 2:


                                                                  6
                Ai
                     0 .
                Ni
       For any given number of immigrants, Ii, the larger is the population in country i, the
       higher is the expected level of attainment of immigrants Ai from that country.

        Finally, let Fi(A) = F(A-μi) so that every country’s ability distribution is of the same
form, but merely displaced by country-specific parameter μi. Countries with higher μi values
have higher ability distributions. Assume further that f '(A) is negative for all A>Ai*. This is
likely to hold empirically under the assumption that the most able are taken first because there is
no country that provides so many immigrants that the cutoff ability, Ai*, would not be in the
upper tail of the ability distribution, which is expected to be negatively sloped. Then,

Proposition 3:

         Ai
             0
         i

        Immigrants from countries with higher levels of attainment have higher attainment in the
destination country.

       It is also possible to express the concepts in propositions 1-3 in terms of the
“representation ratio” defined as

              Ii /  Ii
       Ri /                    .
              Ni /  Ni


Ri should be interpreted as the over-representation of country i among immigrants, given the
country’s relative population importance. If Ri equals 1, the proportion of immigrants in the US
from country i reflects its weight in the overall population of the world. If Ri exceeds 1, that
country is over-represented among US immigrants. If Ri is less than 1, then country i is under-
represented among immigrants in the US. Note further that Ri is simply the ratio of immigrants
from i to the population from i, Ii /Ni , times a scalar that measures the proportion of total
immigrants taken by the destination to the world population,  I i /  N i . This will be employed
later in testing functional from and other implications.
         The representation ratio is a useful concept for understanding some patterns that emerge.
For example, India is highly under-represented among immigrants by a factor of almost four,
despite the fact that Indians are the third largest group of immigrants (behind Mexicans and
Filipinos). In contrast, Jamaicans are highly over-represented, making up over forty times the
number of immigrants as would be expected given Jamaica’s population even though there are
only one-third as many immigrants from Jamaica as there are from India.
         It is then possible to state a corollary to propositions 1 and 2 in terms of the
representation ratio:


                                                 7
Corollary 1: Given a fixed number of immigrants,

                Ai
                    0
                Ri

       At any point in time, the number of immigrants is given. Therefore countries with higher
representation ratios have lower expected levels of attainment Ai .

        Additional theoretical predictions can be derived. The model provides implications not
only for immigrants and their relative standing in the recipient country, in this case the US, but
also for their situation vis à vis the general population of the origin countries. For these
purposes, define Ai as referring to and only to levels of attained education. Let

       Δ / Ei(A | A>Ai*) - Ei(A) / Ai - μi

where Ei is the expected level of education within country i, given the distribution of education
fi(A) in country i. Then Δ is interpreted as the difference between the attained education of
immigrants in the US from country i and the average level of education of the overall population
in country i.

Recall that Ai / Ei(A | A>Ai*) so

                 1                            
       Δ/                 
            1  Fi ( Ai *) Ai *
                                Af i ( A)dA   Af i ( A)dA
                                               



      The empirically verifiable implications are stated as corollaries here and proved in the
appendix.

Corollary 2: MΔ/MIi < 0.
       The difference between the mean education of immigrants from origin country i and the
mean education of the population of that country falls in Ii.

Corollary 3: MΔ/MNi > 0.
       The difference between the mean education of immigrants from origin country i and the
mean education of the population of that country rises in Ni.

Corollary 4: MΔ/Mμi = 0.
        Under the assumptions above, a shift in the mean of the origin country’s education
distribution is neutral, having no effect on the difference between the mean education of
immigrants from that country and the mean education in the origin country’s overall population.
        Equivalently, if Ii = Ij and Ni = Nj, then the difference between the mean level of
education among immigrants from country i and country j equals the difference between the

                                                     8
mean level of education in the origin countries’ overall population.


Discussion
        The logic behind the propositions and corollaries fits the example in the introduction and
the data on immigrant background and attainment, both education and earnings, in the US.
        Proposition 1 predicts the basic point made at the outset. When a country is permitted to
send only a small number of immigrants and when selection is from the top down, those who
enter the US will be highly talented. The group with the highest level of educational attainment
came from the USSR. Note that this is “USSR,” not Russia, which means that they entered
before the breakup of the Soviet Union. Among the pool of immigrants in the sample, there
were only 400 from the former Soviet Union as compared with over 395,000 from Mexico, the
largest source of US immigrants. The former Soviets were a rare group, needing to obtain both
exit permission from the USSR as well as entry permission from US. A large proportion were
highly-educated political dissidents, many of whom were elite academics. The same is true
perhaps to a lesser extent of other countries, like Algeria. The average level of education in
Algeria is well below the mean for origin countries, but those who succeeded in moving to the
US were not typical Algerians. Instead, they were more educated than their compatriots, so much
so that as a origin country, Algeria is in the top 20% of immigrant groups to the US in
educational attainment. Algerians make up less than .0005 of US immigrants - a tiny fraction -
and those who have been admitted to the US have been selected for reasons that correlate well
with education. The same educational attainment would not likely be found of Algerian migrants
to France, where they make up a much larger fraction of the immigrant population.
        Proposition 2 is slightly more subtle, but almost equally intuitive. Consider selecting the
most highly educated 1 million people from a tiny country like Laos with 7 million people versus
1 million from India with 1.3 billion. If the distribution of underlying ability were the same in
both countries, A* for India would be higher than A* for Laos because 1 million people
comprise a much smaller fraction of the top tail of the distribution when there are 1.3 billion than
when there are 7 million. In fact, that is what is seen in the data. A substantial fraction of US
immigrants come from India, comprising almost 5% of the sample of immigrants. But because
India is so large, India is very much under-represented (by a factor of almost four), given its
importance in world population. As such, those who come from India are from the top part of
India’s educational distribution. India itself is not a country with a high average level of
education. Only 14 countries in the world have lower average levels of education than India has.
However, because US immigration policy does not select randomly from origin countries nor
from individuals within each country, Indians in the US rank second among immigrants in
educational attainment.
        Proposition 3 makes the more intuitive point that the more highly educated are people in
the home country, the more educated are those who immigrate from them. Consider two
countries with exactly the same populations and that make up exactly the same proportion of US
immigrant pool. If the ability distribution from country 2 lies to the right of that from country 1,
then selecting the same fraction of the upper tail from each results in a higher average level of
education among those selected. This is shown in Figure 2. Two countries, 1 and 2, have
similarly shaped distributions of talent, but country 2's distribution is a rightward shift of country

                                                  9
1's distribution. Consequently, A2* exceeds A1* by the difference in their means, i.e., M Ai / Mμi
should equal 1. Furthermore, as is the subject of corollary 4, A2, defined as the expectation of
ability among immigrants from 2, exceeds A1, defined as the expectation of ability among
immigrants from 1, by the difference in their means. This is equivalent to the statement that A2
exceeds the mean of distribution 2 by the same amount that A1 exceeds the mean of distribution
1.


                                              Figure 2




         Corollary 1 simply states propositions 1 and 2 in another intuitive form. A country can
be over- or under-represented among immigrants. When a country is over-represented, the
cutoff level of ability from that population must be lower than it would be were that same
country under-represented among immigrants.
         Corollaries 2, 3, and 4 follow directly from the model, but empirically, they are different
tests of the model’s logic. The dependent variable in the corollaries is Δi, which is not the same
as A i . The average attainment among immigrants from country i, A i could be high relative to
that from country j, A j , but that does not imply mechanically that A i is high relative to the
average level of education in country i. For example, immigrants from the United Kingdom
have average schooling attainment of 15 years, above the immigrant mean. But the average level
of education in the UK is well above the mean education for other countries in the world, so the
value of Δ for the UK is low. Conversely, immigrants in the US from Yemen have only 9 years
of schooling, but the average level of education in Yemen is only 2.5 years, resulting in a high

                                                 10
value of Δ. Obviously, as a statistical matter, Δi and A i may be related because the former
contains the latter, but they are not the same. Corollaries 2-4 provide additional predictions that
can be tested and could be rejected, even were propositions 1-3 to hold empirically. Furthermore,
note that the predicted relation of Δ to μi is zero, not negative as would result from pure
statistical bias.
         In the analysis below, attainment among immigrants is measured by three different
variables, namely average education, hourly wages among working immigrants, and average
earnings among all immigrants from a particular country.
         Without exception, all predictions of propositions 1 through 3 and corollary 1 are borne
out for all three measures. Corollaries 2-4 are found to hold with respect to educational
attainment, but cannot be tested for the two income variables because the data do not contain
information on income for the most of the 129 origin countries used in the analysis.

Specific Distributions of Ability and Implied Structural Estimates
        Under more specific assumptions, the propositions and corollaries stated above can be
parameterized. This approach has the advantage that it allows for interpretation of estimates, but
more important, it provides additional checks on the credibility of the model and its
assumptions.6
        To begin, suppose that each origin country has a normal distribution of A with a country-
specific mean μi and country-specific variance σi2 . Recall that Ii is the exogenously determined
policy variable. Let Fi* denote the cumulative normal distribution with mean μi and variance σi2.
Further, let fi* be the normal density with mean μi and variance σi2. Then, from (1), Ai* can be
determined as

(1')    Ni [1-Fi*(Ai*)] - Ii = 0

and similarly

                       1         

                1  Fi *( Ai *) Ai * i
(2')     Ai                         Af *( A)dA


        If all the μi and σi were known, the exact A i for each country i would be determined,
given μi . That is, once the country’s ability distribution is known precisely and once Ai* is
given, it is straightforward to calculate the conditional expectation of those who are above Ai*.
Then a goodness-of-fit statistic can be computed by checking to see how well the actual A i
compare to those predicted based on the observed μi of the origin country and σi.
        The data below provide an average attained level of education for the 129 countries


6
 I ask the reader to excuse my self-indulgence for pointing out that one of (if not the) first structural
estimation approaches in labor and applied microeconomics appeared in my 1977 paper on a different
topic. See Lazear (1977).

                                                     11
studied so that μi is observable. The only missing parameter is σi but this can be obtained for a
subset of countries using and additional dataset (IPUMS, as described below).

                                               Data

        The primary data on attainment of immigrants in the US come from the American
Community Survey from years 2011 through 2015. This is a series of five consecutive cross-
sectional data sets. By combining years, a larger sample is created so that more precision can be
obtained. It is straightforward to adjust standard errors for population weights and to correct
wage data for inflation to turn nominal wages and earnings into real values. Given the individual
data, the means of attainment variables, namely, education, wages, and annual earnings can be
computed by country of origin.
        The variables of interest are those that measure attainment of the immigrants once in the
US. They include educational attainment, wages, and income. The independent variables are
either internally constructed, as is the case for Ii, or drawn from other data sets. UN reports
provide information on average education within the origin country and population statististics
are taken from World Bank data. For convenience of reading the tables, Ii is defined as the actual
number of immigrants from country i, measured in millions as estimated by scaling up the ACS
data to reflect sample size relative to overall population. Similarly, Ni is defined as the
population of country i in 100 millions. Additionally, information on GDP per capita, share in
agriculture, growth rates, proportion with tertiary education and distance of the origin country
from the US is obtained. Appendix B contains the sources for each of the variables used.
Additionally, data from Sweden described in a later section is used to corroborate findings and
distinguish the hypothesis here from other explanations.


                                             Results

         The main results are presented in tables 1 through 3. Table 1 tests the propositions using
the average educational attainment of immigrants from country i as the dependent variable.
There are 129 countries with information necessary for the analysis. For each of those countries,
observations on each individual in the ACS sample is used. The 129 observations consist of
origin-country averages among those immigrants who are in the ACS sample. Note that the
country-based immigrant weighted regressions reported in tables 1-3 are equivalent to using the
raw individual-based ACS data, but the country versions are reported because the variation in Ii,
Ni, and μi are at the country, not individual levels. Later, individual data are used to examine
cohort and age-of-arrival effects.
         Columns 1 through 4 of table 1 use different weighting schemes and subsamples. Column
1 is a full sample analysis where countries are weighted by the number of observations that are
used to compute the mean of the dependent variable. This is equivalent to using the individual
data (analyzed below in table 8) from which the country means are drawn. Column 2 presents the
same analysis on the same sample, but weights every country equally. The results are similar,
both in terms of sign and statistical significance. All the propositions are supported by these
results. Specifically, the average educational attainment of immigrants from country i declines

                                                12
in Ii, as predicted by proposition 1, increases in Ni, as predicted by proposition 2, and increases in
μi as predicted by proposition 3. Furthermore, the three variable model explains 73% of the
variation in immigrant educational attainment (column 1).
          In accordance with proposition 1, a one standard deviation increase in a country’s
number of immigrants decreases the predicted level of educational attainment in the US by about
.4 years on a mean level of education of 13.4 years. The predicted difference in education
among immigrants from the highest immigrant provider, Mexico, and the lowest immigrant
provider, Estonia is 4.3 years. The actual difference between immigrants from the two countries
is not far off at 5.6 years in favor of those from Estonia.
          Proposition 2 predicts that the larger the population of the origin country, the higher is
the attained level of education among immigrants. A one standard deviation increase in the
population of the origin country implies about .4 of a year increase in the education levels of the
immigrants from that country. (Coincidentally, this is the same number as a one standard
deviation change in Ii produces.) Compare a tiny country like Cape Verde with ½ million people
to a large country like Nigeria with almost 200 million people. Both have similar average levels
of education, but in accordance Proposition 2, the average level of education among immigrants
in the US from Cape Verde is 9.8 years versus over 15 years for those from Nigeria.7
          The more intuitive prediction of proposition 3, that the education of immigrants from
country i is positively associated with education among natives in country i, is borne out by the
positive and significant coefficients on μi in table 1. A one standard deviation increase in the
mean level of education in the origin country implies about a one year increase in education
among immigrants. This is not completely consistent with the theory, however. The coefficient
should be 1, as mentioned above (see the proof in the appendix of proposition 3, which yields the
result that M A i / Mμi = 1). The coefficient in table 1 on μi is always less than one. Some of this
may be attributed to an errors-in-variables issue, where μi is mis-measured, but the coefficient is
substantially below 1, seeming to deviate from the literal prediction of the model that assumes
the distribution distribution across countries up to a shifter in the mean.
          Finally, table 1, columns 7 and 8, speak to corollary 1, where the representation ratio is
used in place of Ii and Ni . Corollary 1 is supported by the results, which yield negative and
statistically significant coefficients. Recall that India is very much under-represented among US
immigrants, despite being the third largest supplier of immigrants. Because India is the second
most populous country in the world, it is under-represented by a factor of 4 among US
immigrants. The implied difference between the education of immigrants from India and that
from, say, El Salvador, which is highly over-represented is about 3.5 years based on this factor
alone. The actual difference is about 6 years.
          About 73% of the origin country variation in educational attainment is explained by these
three variables alone (in column 1). Importantly, almost all of this is driven by the primary


7
 The actual difference is much greater than that predicted from the coefficients in table 1, but the direction
and nature of the effect is as predicted. Also, there are about 6 times as many immigrants from Nigeria as
there are from Cape Verde, but there are 400 times more people in Nigeria than in Cape Verde. Indeed,
Cape Verde is over-represented among immigrants by a factor of 12, whereas Nigeria is under-
represented by a factor of 5.

                                                     13
rationing variable, Ii . The r-squared in the weighted Ii regressions of Ai on Ii alone is .55, of Ai
on Ni alone is .09, and of Ai on μ alone is .02.
        Columns 3 - 6 repeat the analysis, but with different sub-samples. In columns, 3 and 4,
the four largest origin countries of immigrants are omitted to ensure that the results are not
driven by a few countries. In columns 5 and 6, the smallest countries are omitted. Qualitatively,
the results are unchanged, although the magnitudes do change some, especially and not
surprisingly for the coefficient on Ni, because the omission of very large population countries
changes the scale of that factor.8 Additionally, the conclusions are robust to weighting and
sample choice.
        Table 2 performs the same analysis, but defines attainment in terms of the hourly wage
received among those working rather than educational attainment.9 Columns 1 through 7 of
table 2 mirror columns 1 through 7 of table 1, with all signs and statistical precision being
similar across dependent variable definitions. A one standard deviation decrease in Ii implies
about a $1.39 increase in the wage on a mean wage of $30.42 and a one standard deviation
increase in the Ni implies a $2.24 increase. Just as was the case for education, the larger the
number of immigrants from an origin country, the lower is the average wage, and the larger is
the population of the country, the higher is the average wage among those immigrants.
Additionally, the higher is the level of education in the origin country, which serves as a proxy
for the average wage in the origin country, the higher is the immigrant wage. Indeed, substituting
GDP per capita for education as a proxy for wage in the origin country gives essentially the same
results. Also, as was the case in table 1, all robustness checks on weightings and sub-samples
confirm the initial results of the first column.
        Table 3 is analogous to table 2, but the dependent variable is average earnings among all
immigrants from country i. This takes into account wage conditional on working, as in table 2,
but also is affected by hours of work and employment rates among the immigrant population.
Again, results are qualitatively identical.
        The effects estimated in table 3 can be quite large. For example, the predicted difference
between average earnings of those from the Philippines, which supplies the second largest
fraction of US immigrants and Mexico, which supplies the most, is $13,297 in favor of
Philippines. Although Filipinos are the second largest group of US immigrants, there are almost
five times as many Mexican immigrants in the US as Filipino. That difference accounts for the
much higher predicted income for Philippine immigrants. The actual difference between the two
groups is about $16,300 in favor of the Philippines. Note that both origin countries have average
levels of education of around 9 years, so the origin countries are comparable at least in this
respect.
        Corollary 1 has already been discussed in the context of tables 1-3. Corollary 1 simply


8
 A variable measuring population squared does not enter significantly in the weighted regression, but
enters positively as predicted in the unweighted version.
9
 The dependent variable is in absolute dollars. The linear specification is appropriate for country means,
but not for the individual-based data used below. Income distributions are approximately log normal at
the individual level, but should be normal for means. The actual distribution of country means exhibits
some positive skew.

                                                    14
condenses propositions 1 and 2 into the representation ratio, which is analyzed in columns 7 and
8 of the three tables. As discussed earlier, the data strongly support the contention of corollary
1, namely that the lower the representation ratio, the higher the achievement of a given country’s
immigrants in the US.
        Corollaries 2-4 are testable in the same way that Propositions 1-3 were tested, with two
exceptions. First, because there is no direct measure of average wage or earnings for all the
countries in the dataset, the analysis is restricted to estimating only Δ defined in terms of
education, namely the education of immigrants from country i minus the average level of
education in country i.10
        Second, there is a standard statistical problem introduced by regressing Δ on independent
variables that include μ because μ is part of Δ. Recall that Δ is defined as A i - μi ,
so any measurement errors in μi bias the coefficient on μi downward. The standard solution for
this problem is to instrument the independent variable, in this case, using something that is
correlated with μi but does not have the same measurement error associated with it. Fortunately,
there is another measure of education at home that is correlated with average education (as is
evidenced by the first stage), but is not the same variable. The proportion of the population with
tertiary education from Barro and Lee (2010) is a measure of a country’s education level that is
different from μi but related to it. That variable is used as an instrument.11
        Table 4 reports the results. Column 1 provides the estimates from the instrumental
variables approach. As corollary 2 predicts, the sign on Ii is negative and as corollary 3 predicts,
the sign on Ni is positive. The larger is the group of immigrants in the US, the smaller is the
difference between the immigrants’ educational attainment in the US and the average
educational attainment of the population in the origin country. The larger is the population of
the home country, the larger is the difference between the immigrants’ educational attainment in
the US and the average educational attainment of the population in the origin country. Finally, as
predicted, the effect of μ is not significantly different from zero. Of course, the failure to find a
significant effect of μ does not imply that corollary 4 is proved, but merely that it is not refuted
and the standard error is large enough to prohibit ruling out a sizeable effect of μi. The r-squared
from the first stage is .54 with an F(1, 66) = 28.1, which provides some additional evidence on
the validity of the estimates.
        Column 2 reports the OLS results. They are similar, with the exception of the coefficient
on μ, which, not surprisingly, is negative. Entering the same variable on both sides of the
equation results in bias, in this case negative.

Functional Form


10
  It is important to use measures that are on the same scale, particularly with respect to proposition 4. The
closest to wages or earnings in the US would be purchasing power parity GDP per capita, but this would
not be a good proxy of comparable earnings at home if for no reason other than scaling.
11
  Under the assumption that Fi(Ai) = F(Ai - μi), it is only the mean of the distribution that matters, in
which case the proportion with tertiary education is a valid instrument. However, a more general
specification that allows the entire distribution to vary might have higher moments of the distribution
included and the tertiary instrument would only be valid if those other moments were included.

                                                     15
        Equations (1) and (2) imply homogeneity of degree zero in Ii and Ni. Specifically,
changing both Ii and Ni proportionately should not alter attainment among immigrants because
Ai*in (1) is not affected when both are multiplied by any factor λ. Multiplying Ii and Ni by λ in
(1) gives

        N i [1  Fi ( Ai *)]  I i  0

which reduces to equation (1) so Ai* is independent of the scalar. Additionally, since A i in (2)
depends only on Ai* and on fi(A), neither of which changes with λ, A i is not affected by λ. This
is testable. It implies that attainment across immigrant origin countries should only depend on
the ratio of Ii to Ni and on μi, which locates the origin country’s attainment distribution, but not
on the absolute levels of Ii and Ni directly. Table 5 tests this homogeneity implication and
explores other functional form issues.
         Columns 1 and 2 report the results when only the ratio of Ii to Ni and μi are included as
independent variables. The mean education in the home country should be included even in the
form that tests heterogeneity because the distribution is permitted to shift across countries.
Recall that the representation ratio is merely Ii/Ni times a scalar relating the world population to
the number of immigrants in the US. Thus, the homogeneity property is equivalent to saying that
neither Ii nor Ni should affect the cutoff and therefore attainment, given the representation ratio.
         In table 5, column 1 weights by number of immigrants from country i and column 2 is the
unweighted version. In both forms, the ratio enters negatively, as predicted. Compare column 1
with column 3 and column 2 with column 4, the latter two allowing Ii and Ni to enter directly.
The homogeneity property is clearly violated in both weighted and unweighted versions with Ii
continuing to enter negatively and Ni entering positively.
         There are a number of possible explanations. Recall that the assumption was that the
distribution of A was identical across countries up to a shifter in the mean, μi. That assumption
is violated. Specifically, large population countries have a higher conditional expectation than
would be predicted, which suggests a thicker upper tail in larger countries. One possibility is
economies of scale in educational production. For example, India has top technical universities.
Smaller countries with equal per capita GDP cannot afford to support major educational
institutions. If true, there would be disproportionately more highly educated individuals in large
countries than in small countries, which would thicken the upper tail and result in a positive
coefficient on Ni. This is in fact the case. The next section provides structural estimates and
drops the assumption that Fi(A) = F(A-μi), i.e., that all source countries have the same
distribution of education (at home) up to a mean shifter. There, country-specific education data
from IPUMS12 is used for a subset of countries. Those data reveal that India has one of the
highest standard deviations and coefficient of variations of within-country education levels.
Despite having a very low average level of education, there is a significant fraction of Indians
who are highly educated, some of whom migrate to the US, many through the H1-B program.
As mentioned at the outset, Indians are highly under-represented in the US, but those who are


12
  International Public Use Microdata Series (2018).

                                                      16
here tend to come from the top tail of the educational distribution.
        China is a somewhat different case, having a higher mean education than India, but a
much lower standard deviation and coefficient of variation. Still, because China is so large and
because 10 percent of the Chinese population have completed the equivalent of high school,
there are many Chinese with high levels of education who might be willing to move to the US.
        The negative coefficient on Ii may be driven by different immigration policy selection
rules for countries that account for many versus few immigrants. In the case of countries that
account for only a small number of immigrants that are under-reprensented in the US (like the
USSR or African countries that fit the Algerian example), skill rather than other factors may be a
more important consideration. Family reunification is likely to play a greater role for those
countries that have large numbers of immigrants in the US. As a consequence, Ii enters
negatively, even holding constant the ratio of Ii to Ni, because small countries fit the selection-
from-the-top assumption more closely.
        The final two columns report the results when logs rather than levels are used.
Unsurprisingly, the results are not affected qualitatively.

Structural Estimates
        The structural approach that assumes normality of the attainment distribution, outlined at
the end of the model section, can be implemented. The details of the estimation are described in
Appendix C. Briefly, for a subset of the countries used in the tables above, IPUMS data are
available. They provide information on the actual level of education of individuals within the
countries. The original dataset had over 700 million observations, but a random sample of
10,000 observations from each of 66 countries was selected so that in addition to the mean, the
standard deviation and 90th percentile of educational attainment could be computed.
        Before engaging in structural estimation, as a check, the reduced form regression in
column 1 of table 1 is re-estimated using the subset of 66 countries. The coefficients change
slightly, but are fundamentally the same as those on the sample of 129 countries. The r-squared
for the table 1, column 1 regression rises slightly to .75 from .73 when the sample is restricted to
the 66 countries for which IPUMS data are available instead of the original 129 countries. The
addition of the standard deviation of the education in the source country enters positively,
although just below standard significance levels (t=1.89). (The coefficient on the 90th percentile
was close to zero.) The interpretation makes sense. Those source countries with the most
variation in education for a given mean have a fatter upper tail, which results in a higher
conditional expectation of educational attainment among immigrants.
        The structural estimation is performed as follows. The IPUMS data provide the mean and
standard deviation of education in the source country. Given those values, the actual upper tail
of the educational distribution for each country can be calculated, getting a predicted Ai* based
on the Ii/Ni ratio for each country-specific distribution of education. Once Ai* is obtained, a
predicted average level of attained education among immigrants, namely those whose education
exceeds Ai*, can be calculated for each of the i countries. Goodness-of-fit of the structural
model can be calculated by regressing the actual A i on the estimated one.
       When this is done on the subset of 66 countries for which IPUMS data are available, the
r-squared of actual on predicted is .62. Thus, the structural model does 83% as well in
explaining the data as does the reduced form. (The ratio of r-squareds in structural and

                                                17
unconstrained reduced form is .62 / .75 = .83.)

                                   Additional Considerations

Other Explanatory Factors
        Table 6 allows other variables that are not explicitly modeled to affect the educational
attainment of immigrants in the US. The inclusion of other factors raises the explanatory power
by about 15 percentage points, from .73 to .88 in the weighted version of column 1. In particular,
variables that measure growth and stage of development are included, as is the origin country’s
distance from the US (capital city to Washington, DC). The variables that measure stage of
development include GDP per capita, the last five years’ growth rate, and the share of GDP that
is comprised of agricultural output. Those variables are highly correlated particularly with Ii and
with μi and a regression of educational attainment on only the supply variables results in an r-
squared that is almost the same as that for the three variables of the model. Consequently,
regressions of educational attainment on rationing variables as well as the additional variables is
most informative to see which drive the results.
        The results in table 6 show that none of the additional variables remain significant
through all specifications. The opposite is true of the variables predicted by the model. Those
coefficients maintain sign and significance throughout all specifications. Although the
magnitudes are somewhat different from those found in table 1, the basic story remains the same.
        In the preferred specification of column 1, the coefficients on distance, the GDP growth
rate, and agriculture’s share of GDP are significant. The latter two suggest that the less
developed and less rapidly growing is the economy, the greater is the incentive for high
education individuals to seek residency in the US. This seems more consistent with a supply
side explanation and recall that the supply side is expected to play an important role in making
valid the assumption of selection from the top.
        Distance of the origin country from the US is also significant in column 1 and might be
associated with more traditional supply-side explanations. Immigrants who are further away
must bear larger costs to come to the US and this would be a barrier that might cut most for
lower skilled migrants. This explanation, while plausible, is questionable for a few reasons.
        First, the result is driven entirely by the four largest origin countries: Mexico,
Philippines, India and China. When those countries are excluded or when each of those four
countries is allowed to have its own fixed effect, the importance of distance as an explanatory
variable vanishes.
        Second, India, China and the Philippines are all distant from the US. Immigrants from
India have high levels of education, those from China are slightly below the median and those
from the Philippines are slightly above. Similarly, Mexico and Canada each border the US.
Canadian immigrants have over five years more education on average than those from Mexico.
Additionally, Mexicans are three times more over-represented among US immigrants than
Canadians, despite equal distance of travel, which suggests that distance cannot be the primary
determinant of migration patterns.
        Third, the correlation between the number of immigrants from an origin country and
distance is small, equaling -.11 and not statistically significant. This is not surprising because
unlike in the past, in the 21st century distance is not much of an impediment to movement. The

                                                  18
cost of airplane ticket even from distant countries to the US is low. For example, a quick online
search shows that a ticket from Delhi to New York can be purchased for $711. The difference in
earnings between the US and origin countries, even for low skilled immigrants, is on the order of
$11,000 per year.13
        In one of the four specifications, column 1, share in agriculture and growth are
significant. Their signs suggest that the highly educated flee countries that are stagnant and
agricultural. This is consistent with a supply story. But again, the result is driven by the four
large countries, primarily India. India does not fit the supply story alone. Although the US tends
to get highly educated Indians, as supply would suggest, they are very much under-represented
among US immigrants. If supply were the only factor, one would expect large numbers of
educated Indians entering the US. The fact that Indians also make up a significant fraction of
those applying for H-1B visas and that those visas run out long before demand is satisfied
suggests that rationing must be a major part of the explanation.
        The conclusion from the empirical analysis is that the model works well in predicting
who ends up in the US. Although supply considerations may matter, particularly in determining
who is successful in being admitted to the US, a structure that assumes that all who are admitted
come and that the US admits from the top of the attainment distribution of each country after
determining how many to admit from each county explains the data well. All predictions are
borne out and the structural model provides a good fit with the data.

Explicit Policy Deviates from that Assumed
        In a typical year, over 60% of those issued permanent resident status are family
sponsored. Although this does not rule out that those individuals are from the top of the
educational attainment distribution at home, it does not appear to be a criterion that is closely
related to selecting the most able from each country.
         Even though the model is admittedly stylized, it would be useful to find some evidence
that lends some credence to its assumptions and especially the assumption that potential migrants
are selected from the top of the origin country’s attainment distribution.
        There is at least some support for the view that immigrants are selected from the top of
the distribution. Recall that Δi is defined as the difference between the average educational
attainment among immigrants and the average attainment in origin country i. To the extent that
immigration slots to the US are scarce and desirable, ability may come into play in finding ways
to make it into the US. Some of this is explicit. A number of skills-based green cards are issued
to highly educated foreign citizens who eventually become residents and citizens of the US. But
given the number who enter through other legal channels, not to mention those who come in
illegally, it is worth exploring the validity of the assumption that the highly able from any given
country are selected into the United States. In 129 out of 129 cases, Δi is positive, meaning that
the average educational attainment of immigrants from country i exceeds the average level of
education in country i. The difference averages 4.8 years, with a low of ½ year and a high of 11
½ years.
        Although supportive of the assumption, the evidence is not conclusive because


13
  See Hanson, et. al., (2017) and my comment on that paper in the same volume.

                                                  19
educational attainment of those who are in the US might be higher than that of those who remain
in the origin country if for no other reason than the US has higher average education than the
world as a whole.14 It is possible to rule this out by using the raw ACS data from which the
country averages are computed. (These data form the basis for additional analyses below.) The
raw ACS data allow an examination of individuals who came to the US as adults and were
therefore likely to have received most of their education elsewhere. The individual data reveal
that 86% of immigrants who are over 25 years old and arrived within the last 6 years have
attained levels of education that exceed the mean in their origin country. Those who come to the
US, even as adults, appear to have higher educational achievement than those left behind.
         As already discussed, it is likely that in addition to the rationing rule, supply side
considerations enter. Obtaining permission to reside in the United States may be more easily
acquired by those who are the most educated, given that slots are rationed. This pushes in the
direction of getting the top immigrants from any given country, as assumed.
         Additionally, Hanson, Liu, and McIntosh (2017) find that even for Mexico, which
supplies the largest number of migrants to the US and which also is the largest source of
unskilled labor, those who come to the United States are drawn from middle-income Mexicans,
not from the lowest part of the income distribution. Grogger and Hanson (2015) find selective
preference for staying in the US among foreign students in the US who have more educated
parents and merit-based financial support. Again, this is a supply-side justification for the
assumption that selection ends up being from the top of the distribution. Docquier, Lohest, and
Marfouk (2007) pay explicit attention to “brain drain” from developing countries to more
advanced places and document this, noting in particular that it has increased over time. Selection
from the top is the recipient country’s description of what the origin country calls brain drain.
         Finally, it is possible to modify the model slightly to account for different aspects of
policy. For example, in the US, skills and employment reasons account for about 15% of those
awarded permanent residency each year. Suppose that all of those are from the top of the
distribution, and those admitted for other reasons are less likely to be drawn from the top, with a
lower conditional expectation of attainment. To the extent that the proportions of admission by
reason could be measured by country of origin, this could be accommodated. The results on Ii
still entering negatively in columns 3 and 4 of table 5 provide some support for the view that the
proportion admitted on the basis of skill varies by country, as does the discussion of
unauthorized immigration below.

Family Reunification and Undocumented Immigrants
        The countries most likely to have immigrants who come in on a family reunification
basis, with a few exceptions,15 are those that have the largest number already in the US. They
may bring the average level of education down, not because there are so many of them, but
because they are selected on family basis, rather than skill. Although possible and probably true
to some extent, the relationships predicted by the propositions and corollaries hold whether the

14
 Chiswick and Miller (2011) argue that there is some negative assimilation that occurs after migration
and Chiswick and Miller (2012) investigate both negative and positive assimilation.
15
     El Salvador is a good example, being over-represented by a factor of 32.

                                                      20
high immigrant countries, which also account for much of family reunification, are included or
not.
        Related, countries that are geographically close to the United States and over-
represented, like Mexico and El Salvador, may have a higher proportion who enter without visas.
Supply considerations are more likely to be a factor for these individuals because they are not
subject to the immigration slot rationing system. It is also conceivable, although not obvious,
that undocumented entrants would be of lower educational attainment than those who come in on
the basis of family reunification, which is high among immigrants from those countries.
        Passel and Cohn estimate the number of “unauthorized” immigrants by region of the
world from which they migrated.16 Those estimates can be used as an additional independent
variable to determine whether countries in regions with a larger number of people in the US
without authorization have lower attainment.
        They do. The Passel and Cohn number of unauthorized immigrants from the region is
added as a variable to the specification in table 1, column 1, and a significantly negative effect is
found (the coefficient is -.00022 with a standard error of .00004). The estimate implies that a one
standard deviation increase in the number in the US without authorization implies about two-
thirds of a year less educational attainment among immigrants. Also, the coefficient on Ii falls
from -.52 to -.40, which is consistent with the view that those who are in the US without
documentation are less educated. But the main predictions of the model and theory are
maintained, changing only slightly and not qualitatively. Attainment falls with the number of
immigrants from a country and rises with both the population of that country and its average
education.


Why Aren’t Supply-based Explanations Sufficient?
       Consider a pure supply theory of migration where those who get the most out of
migrating move to the United States. There are a variety of versions of this, with the earliest
being that of Sjaastad (1962). Already mentioned is the well-known work of Borjas (1987),
which formalizes and applies the Roy (1951) model to migration.17
       If origin-country-specific factors and rationing were not relevant, then there would be a
supply determined A* that would be world-wide. Whether a Sjaastad or Roy-style model
determined the desire to migrate, absent country-specific idiosyncracies, one would expect that
there would be a level of ability such that those above that cutoff level found it worthwhile to




16
 Passel and Cohn, “As Mexican share declined, U.S. undocumented immigrant population fell in 2015
below recession level” Pew Research Center, 2017.
17
  Grogger and Hanson (2011) find some support for the wage differential model driving selection of
immigrants into a country. In particular, because there is a large difference between wages of high and
low- skilled immigrants in the US, skilled immigrants tend to prefer the US as a destination country.
What seems most relevant is the difference between the wages of the skilled in the destination country
and the origin country, but this is likely to be correlated with the destination country’s skill premium.

                                                     21
migrate and those below did not.18 Under these circumstances, there would be no implied
negative relation between the number from any country and average attainment in the US. In
fact, it would likely go in the opposite direction from that predicted by this model and found in
the data. Consider two countries of the same size. Given the same cutoff A*, if country A sends
more migrants for reasons of supply to the US than does country B, then there must be a fatter
upper tail in country A than in B, which would generally imply that the expected attainment of
those from A would exceed that of those from B. But the reverse is true. The higher is Ii , the
lower is the attainment of immigrants from i.
         The role for supply emphasized here is in having the most able fill whatever quota is set
by policymakers. Of course, the reality is that characteristics do vary by country potentially
causing the cost of or benefits from migration to be higher in some origin countries than others.
This might result in countries sending differing numbers and average attainments of migrants.
This possibility has already been addressed in previous sections and analyzed in table 6, but it is
worth considering the argument more specifically in this context.
         Allowing costs to differ by country of origin is analogous to the gravity models used in
trade economics19. Countries tend to trade more with their closest neighbors. Analogously,
individuals are more likely to move closer to neighbors than to more distant ones. It is surely true
that a migration version of gravity models explains some of the migration pattern. When
countries are ranked by their representation ratios, nine of the top ten are from the Western
Hemisphere. Without exception, these are countries with small populations, the largest being El
Salvador with about 6 million people. However, as already discussed in detail above, distance is
not a good predictor of the number of immigrants in the US. Recall that there is no significant
correlation between distance of a country from the US and the number of immigrants from that
country. Nor is distance a consistent factor in explaining attainment in the US, as shown in table
6. Distance matters in some specifications in table 6, but not in others. A couple of additional
points are relevant.
         First, from a supply point of view, it is the gain from migration, not the final attainment,
that should be related to the desire to migrate. As a consequence, it is necessary to argue that
those who attain the highest levels of education in the US also have the most to gain from
migration, given the costs. This is not an obvious proposition because those with highest levels
of education are scarce in their origin countries and might be particularly valuable there. Still, it
is not unreasonable that the value of education in a highly developed economy may well be
greater than the value in a less developed one.
         Second, factors that are most likely to affect supply do not consistently explain
attainment in the US, again using evidence on country growth rates, share in agriculture and
GDP per capita as reported in table 6. More important, those factors do not even explain the
number of immigrants from a given country. When the number of immigrants from a given
country is regressed on potential supply determinants, which include GDP per capita, origin


18
 If unskilled rather than skilled labor had a comparative advantage in US, then the reverse would be true.
Those with ability below some A* would migrate and those above would not.
19
 See, for example, Bergstrand (1985) and Lewer, and Karemera, Oguledo and Davis (2000) and Van den
Berg (2008), the latter two of which are direct applications to immigration.

                                                   22
country growth rate, share in agriculture and distance from the US with a control for country
size, none is significant. Similarly, regressing Ii / Ni on the same variables (omitting Ni ) finds no
significant relationships, except distance. This suggests that supply alone does not do well in
explaining the pattern of migration from the various source countries.

Patterns of Migration to Other Countries Refutes Simple Supply Explanations
         Can there be any doubt that immigration policy affects migration flows? If a desirable
destination country with an excess supply of potential immigrants decides for political reasons to
let in more people from a given source country, there will be more from that country. Evidence
from a comparison between the US, Canada and Sweden makes that clear.
         Canada and the United States20 are contiguous. Canada has an economy that is highly
integrated and quite similar to that of the US. A migrant who finds the US a favorable economy
relative to his or her origin country is likely to find Canada favorable as well. Were relative skill
rewards or distance the major determinant of migration patterns, the countries that supply
immigrants to the US would be similar to those supplying immigrants to Canada. Indeed, there is
some similarity.21 The correlation between immigrants from country i to the US and from
country i to Canada is .31 across 120 origin countries. Supply surely matters and those whose
skills are not highly valued in their home countries are more likely to choose those countries
whose economies are favorable to those skills. If the US is favorable relative to the home
country, in most cases, so too would be Canada. A positive correlation is consistent with that
view, but a correlation of .31 means an r-squared of .09. In logs, however, the r-squared is
around .4, which is a better indicator of the cross-country correlations. There is clearly
significant correlation between migration patterns to the US and Canada from other source
counties, but a large fraction of the variance remains unexplained. 22
         More specifically, there are large deviations in the patterns of migration that belie a
simple supply explanation. Six of the top ten immigrant source countries to the United States are
not among the top ten source countries to Canada. Most important, Mexico, the country that
comprises four times as many immigrants in the US as any other country, is not even among the
top 10 source countries of immigrants in Canada, despite Mexico being closer to Canada than

20
 Migrants moving to different parts of the US face greater differences in travel than some who
contemplates a move to Canada instead of the US. The distance from Beijing to Vancouver, British
Columbia is 4600 miles, virtually identical to the distance from Beijing to Seattle, Washington. The
distance from Beijing to Washington, DC. is 6927, considerably further than that to Seattle even though
both are in the US.
21
  The findings are based on data from http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/census-recensement/2016/dp-pd/hlt-
fst/imm/Table.cfm?Lang=E&T=21&Geo=01&SO=4A, “Immigration and Ethnocultural Diversity
Highlight Tables - Immigrant population by place of birth, period of immigration, 2016 counts, both
sexes, age (total), Canada, 2016 Census — 25% sample data.”


22
 Some variation and clustering is to be expected even without constraints on migration. For example,
immigrants from Cuba are disproportionately found in Florida, even though they are free to move
between states in the US.

                                                   23
any origin country other than the US.23 This almost certainly reflects immigration policy. A
large proportion of those from Mexico who come in to the US do so on this basis of family
reunification. Because there are many Mexicans in the US already, those from Mexico are more
likely to have relatives in the US (even given the population) relative to those from other
countries.
        Consider another important example. Hong Kong ranks fifth as a source of immigrants in
Canada and is over-represented among Canadian immigrants by a factor of 29. Part of this is a
reflection of Canada’s decades long policy of attempting to attract migrants who are
entrepreneurs and investors. By contrast, Hong Kong ranks 30th in sources of immigrants to the
US. Other differences are difficult to explain on the basis of supply. The United Kingdom is the
source country for eight times as large a proportion of Canadian immigrants as of US
immigrants. The Canadian point system (in effect since 1967) favors language skills and
education, which, in addition to family reunification, helps those from the UK migrating to
Canada to a larger extent than those migrating to the US. Those from Cuba rank sixth in number
of immigrants in the US and sixtieth in Canada. The migration to the US reflects a flood of
refuges who came when Castro came to power. Florida is closer to Cuba than is Toronto, but the
largest group of immigrants in Canada come from India, which is half way around the world.
The US created special provisions for those fleeing a communist nation that allowed migration
from Cuba to the US on humanitarian grounds.24 Additionally, the US has almost 1 million
immigrants from El Salvador, a country of 6 million, which means that a large fraction of
Salvadorans have a relative in the US that make them eligible for entry on family grounds.
Salvadorans are four times as over-represented among immigrants in the US than they are among
immigrants in Canada. Family reunification policy in the US that favors Salvadorans is a more
plausible explanation than that the US has a labor market much better suited to Salvadorans than
does Canada.25
        Analysis of Swedish data helps distinguish between supply and rationing explanations of
migration and immigrant attainment. Like the US, Sweden does not base its immigration
primarily on skill. Other factors are important in determining the composition of migrants to
Sweden, but the factors in Sweden are somewhat different from those in the US. Sweden
accepts immigrants on the basis of refugee status to a much greater extent than does the US.
Other than the Scandinavian countries and countries related to them through history, like
Iceland, the most over-represented origin countries for immigrants in Sweden are Bosnia,
Lebanon, Somalia, Eritrea, and Iraq, which are countries with many fleeing from war.
        Data were obtained from the Swedish Registry administrative data (Statistics Sweden)




23
  There are some small Caribbean countries that are closer to some parts of Canada than are some places
in Mexico to other parts of Canada.
24
  Migration Policy Institute (2017).
25
  The fact that Spanish is prevalent in the US is a consequence of migration policy, not a factor that
initially made the US a desirable location for Latinos.

                                                     24
and Registret över befolkningens utbildning.26 The underlying dataset is similar to the ACS for
the US and covers years 2011-2015 as in the US. Table 7 reports results.
         First, columns 1 and 2 of table 7 repeat for Sweden the analysis done for the US in table
1. The dependent variable is average educational attainment in Sweden of immigrants from
country i. The only change in independent variables is that Ii used is the number of immigrants
from country i in Sweden, rather than in the US. Just as for the US, the number of immigrants
from a country has a strong negative effect on educational attainment, whereas population and
education of the origin country have strong positive effects on educational attainment. Important
is that the negative effect of number of immigrants from country i is based on completely
different countries in Sweden than it is in the US. It is implausible that such different migration
patterns to the US versus Sweden occur as a result of supply conditions that differ. Because the
economies of the US and Sweden are not so different particularly as compared with the
economies of the primary origin countries to each, only geography would differ. But Sweden
has more Iraqis and Somalis relative to the US because Sweden chose to let them in as an
explicit refugee policy, not because it is easier (if in fact it is) to get from Iraq and Somalia to
Sweden than to the US. It is highly unlikely that Iraqis and Somalis find it so much better to
migrate to Sweden and Filipinos find it so much better to migrate to the US. Yet the effect of the
Ii variable is qualitatively the same in Sweden as it is in the US, consistent with policy and
rationing.
         More generally, the correlation between the representation ratio in the US and that in
Sweden is almost zero (.05) and between the number of immigrants in each of the two countries
is also almost zero (.04). Were the same supply factors pushing migration, one would expect a
much higher correlation between the pattern of migration to each of the two countries.
         Column 3 of table 7 provides additional placebo-like evidence on this point. If supply
were sufficient to explain migration patterns and attainment, then because the US economy is not
so different from that of Sweden, one might expect the number who come to the US would be a
good indicator of supply forces inducing those to come to Sweden as well. Thus, the number of
immigrants in the US from country i is entered in column 3. It has no effect on attainment in
Sweden, but the number of immigrants in Sweden from country i continues to matter. Even the
educational attainment of immigrants from i in the US is not a very strong predictor of
attainment of immigrants in Sweden as seen in column 4, and again, the number of immigrants
from country i in Sweden remains a negative factor, albeit on the margin of significance.

Reverse Causation


26
  The Swedish dataset contains statistics for 98 countries (including Sweden) between the years 2011 and
2015. The number of observations included for each year are as follows: 5,472,582 (2011); 5,499,465
(2012); 5,528,680 (2013); 5,568,916 (2014); and 5,605,685 (2015). Immigrants account for about 19% of
the sample. The earnings and transfer values refer to individuals betweens the ages 20 and 64, while the
education values refer to individuals between the ages of 25 and 64. All variables come from register data
(administrative sources) by Statistics Sweden and therefore cover all individuals who were registered in
Sweden each particular year. All variables associated with education level come from Statistics Sweden's
Registret över befolkningens utbildning or "Register of Population Education.”


                                                   25
         The primary implication of the model is that those countries that provide a large number
of migrants to the US have lower educational attainment. The assumption is that the policy
choice is on the number selected from country i and not the educational attainment level itself.
But suppose the US had an explicit policy of letting in only low-skilled individuals, say to
prevent competition with the higher skilled native-born Americans, and to implement the policy,
let in more from low-skilled countries.
         First, μi, which measures education in the origin country, should control for this factor. If
the US is intentionally admitting those from low skilled countries, μi would be lower on average
among the immigrant population, but including μi as an explanatory variable should leave no
room for Ii or Ni to influence average attainment among immigrants. Still, it is worth exploring
the reverse causation more directly.
         The best evidence against this view is provided by the simple correlation of Ii and μi,
which is essentially zero at -.02.27 There does not seem to be any pattern of selecting more
immigrants from countries with low levels of educational attainment.
         Another possibility is that immigrants with low levels of education are more likely to be
admitted to the United States on an individual basis. Although possible, there is no reason why
this would result in a negative correlation between number from any particular country and
average skill level. Low-skill immigrants might be selected, but there are plenty of low-skilled
immigrants in the world and there is nothing that implies that the lowest skilled would all be
from one country. Were this the case, randomly selected low skilled would come
disproportionately from high population countries with many low skilled individuals. Specific
examples, India being most important, runs counter to this view. India is the second most
populous country in the world and has one of the lowest levels of education of the 134
countries. Yet Indians are both under-represented among immigrants in the US and highly
educated. Given that the US allows in many Indians and given that there are many poorly
educated Indians, if the policy were to select negatively on the basis of skill, one would expect
that the Indians who are here would be of low skill. Indians in the US are highly educated
because a small number of Indians are admitted relative to the Indian population. That selection
rule is consistent with the results.
         Furthermore, a policy that seeks low-skilled immigrants does not appear to be a true
description of the data. The average educational attainment among immigrants in the sample as
a whole is a little over 12 years, which is not much below that for the native-born American
population.

Random Selection of Immigrants
       The implications on Ii and Ni that form the basis of propositions 1 and 2 and corollaries 2
and 3 are a result of a model that assumes immigration slots are rationed on the basis of ability,
from the top down. Were the selection process random, there would be no reason to expect that
countries that were sources of a larger number of immigrants, Ii, would have lower levels of
attainment. The same is true of population of the origin country. Were immigrants selected
randomly, then the distribution of talent in the US would mimic that of the origin country. It is


27
  It is -.004 when weighted by the number of immigrants from the country.

                                                  26
true that Proposition 3 and corollary 4, which postulate a positive correlation between origin
country educational attainment and educational attainment of their US immigrants, could result
from a random selection process because countries with higher levels of educational attainment
would also send migrants with higher levels of education under random selection. The most
important implications, however, are violated by the random selection model.

Dynamics and Individual Characteristics
        The analysis to this point has examined only country level data, but the individual ACS
data shed light on some details that are of additional interest. One issue is whether immigrants
who enter when young have higher attainment levels than those who enter when old. Table 8
provides the answer.
        In table 8, the raw ACS data are used to determine outcomes at the individual level,
rather than for the country of origin, although country variables can be used as controls. There
are approximately 1.5 million individual observations on which results are based. Note that
because these are not country averages, but are instead individual data, wages and earnings are
logged as is standard.
        As before, the variables that are predicted by the model to matter (Ii, Ni and μ) continue
to enter as predicted in the individual level regressions, even when individual characteristics are
held constant as in columns 2 through 6. Not surprisingly, current age enters positively and age
squared negatively for all attainment variables. Educational attainment, hourly wage and total
annual earnings are related to age of entry negatively. Those who enter the US when young have
higher levels of attainment than those who come in when older, and that result holds for all three
attainment variables.28 An interaction term between age of entry and average level of schooling
in the origin country enters positively, mitigating the adverse affects of coming as an adult.29 If
the individual migrated from a high education country, there is less or no advantage to coming as
a child. But if the immigrant migrated from a country with a low average level of education,
final educational attainment, hourly wages and earnings are higher when coming young. This is
likely to affect the positive differences in quality of education between the US and low education
countries. That positive difference in quality is not present when the origin country has high
average levels of education. Female immigrants have lower levels of earnings than their male
counterparts, although educational attainment is approximately the same for male and female
immigrants, with males having only .2 years advantage.

Cohorts


28
  Quadratic terms did not enter any of the regressions in a meaningful way and were often statistically
insignificant, even with regressions having almost a million to 1 ½ million obervations.
29
 Cohort effects were analyzed as well. Some countries’ immigrants entered on average as early as the
1960s and some as late as the early 2000s. Holding other factors constant in table 8, the only attainment
variable that is statistically and economically related to average year of entry is educational attainment.
Those who entered from countries that reflect more recent waves of migration have higher levels of
education. But they do not have substantially higher annual earnings or higher hourly wages, given their
personal educational attainment.

                                                    27
         The IPUMS data provide information on educational attainment of the source country for
some countries and some decades used in the analysis of the ACS data. The data are incomplete,
however. For example, IPUMS provides average levels of education in Mexico in 1960 but not
for Cuba, when there was a large wave of Cuban migration and no information is provided at all
for 63 of the 129 countries analyzed in table 1. Still, for those countries on which information is
available, the attainment of immigrants can be based on the education in the source country, the
population in the source country, and the number of immigrants from that country who came in
during that same decade as the immigrant who is reflected in each particular observation. This
provides a more accurate test of the theory because it is based on selection at the time of entry,
i.e., the flow, rather than on the stock of immigrants from a country who are present now. The
drawback is that not all countries can be analyzed because the IPUMS data and time periods only
correspond to a subset of countries and individuals.
         Table 9 repeats the analysis of table 1, 2, and 3 at the individual level for countries on
which IPUMS data are available. The Ii variable used is the number of immigrants from country
i who came in during the decade in which the individual in question entered. Analogously, the
Ni and μi variables refer to the values that held at the time the individual in question migrated to
the US. These are better measures of the variables described by the theory, but as said, they do
not cover all countries.
         Column 1 analyzes educational attainment using the individual-specific variables.
Column 2 repeats the country level regression done in column 1, table 1 on the subset of
countries for which data used in column 1 of table 9 are available for comparison.30 Column 3 is
analogous to column 1 of table 2 and column 4 repeats the country level table 2 analysis on the
subset of IPUMS available countries. Similarly, column 5 is analogous to column 1 of table 3
and column 6 repeats the country level table 3 analysis on the subset of IPUMS countries. There
are some substantial changes in magnitudes of the coefficients between the cohort-specific
estimates and those that treat immigrants as a stock that arrived at the same time, but none that
changes interpretation or contradicts the predictions of the model. Additionally, all of the results
are qualitative identical to those shown in tables 1, 2, and 3. As before, the smaller the number of
immigrants, the larger the population of the source country and the higher the average years of
education in the origin country, the higher is expected attainment by the immigrant in the US.
The quantitative effects in table 9 are in line with results in earlier tables. The refined cohort
analysis on the subset of countries for which data are available does not alter any of the
conclusions drawn from prior tables.

                                              Conclusion

       The larger the number of immigrants from a given country, the lower is the educational
attainment, wage rates and earnings of that group. The pattern is a result of a selective
immigration process that rations slots. Because of variations in the way the various origin
countries are treated by the immigration system, a particular distribution of immigrants results,

30
  This is equivalent to the weighted version shown in table 1 on the subset of 66 countries because the
data are at the individual level. Those countries with more individuals are weighted more heavily, exactly
as in column 1, table 1, except that there are fewer countries used in table 9 than in table 1.

                                                   28
which gives rise to differences in educational attainment and earnings by country of origin.
Those countries that are awarded the largest number of slots tend to have immigrants with lower
attainment levels.
         For the same reason, the larger the population of the origin country, the higher the
attainment of immigrants from that country. It is easier to select one million highly educated
people from India with 1.3 billion people than it is from Laos with 7 million people.
Consequently, immigrants of Indian origin have higher levels of educational attainment than do
immigrants of Laotian origin.
         A model of selection is constructed that yields seven specific empirical implications, all
of which are borne out by data from the American Communities Survey, 2011-2015. The larger
the number of immigrants from an origin country, the lower the level of educational attainment,
of wages and of earnings in the US. The larger the population of the origin country, the higher
the educational attainment, the higher the wages and the higher the earnings of those immigrants
in the US. A more parsimonious approach expresses predictions in terms of a representation
ratio, which is a measure of how under- or over-represented a country is in the US immigrant
stock. Immigrants from source countries that are over-represented are predicted and found to
have lower attainment in education, wages and earnings. Data from Sweden support the
hypotheses as well and yield results consistent with those from the US.
         The theory also has implications for the difference between attainment of immigrants and
that of the population in the origin country. This provides a separate test of the model and all
implications are borne out. In particular, the larger is the stock of immigrants from any given
country, the smaller is the difference between the attainment of immigrants from that country
and that of the origin population. Additionally, the larger is the population of the origin country,
the larger is the difference between the attainment of immigrants from that country and the origin
population.
         The model that gives a role to only these three variables explains 73% of the variation in
country-mean educational attainment of immigrants in the US. A structural approach that
assumes normality of the underlying educational distribution coupled with the model’s specific
selection rule performs well in explaining the data, yielding a goodness-of-fit statistic that is
about 83% as high as the unconstrained reduced form version. Overall, the model that postulates
selection from the top of origin countries’ ability distribution does well in describing the actual
data.




                                                29
                                         References

Barro, Robert and Jong-Wha Lee. 2010. “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the
       World. 1950-2010.” Journal of Development Economics 104(C): 184-198.

J.H. Bergstrand. 1985. “The gravity equation in international trade: Some microeconomic
       foundations and empirical evidence.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 67(3):
       474-481.

Borjas, George J. 1987. “Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants.” The American
        Economic Review 77(4): 531-553.

Borjas, George J. And Rachel M. Friedberg. 2009. “Recent Trends in the Earnings of New
        Immigrants to the United States.” Working Paper no. 15406, NBER, Cambridge, MA.

Chiswick, Barry R. and Paul Miller. 2011. “The ‘Negative’ Assimilation of Immigrants: A
      Special Case.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 64(3): 502-525.

Chiswick, Barry R. and Paul Miller. 2012. “Negative and Positive Assimilation, Skill
      Transferability, and Linguistic Distance.” Journal of Human Capital 6(1): 35-55.

Docquier, Frederic, Olivier Lohest, and Abdeslam Marfouk. “Brain Drain in Developing
      Countries.” The World Bank Economic Review 21(2): 193-218.

Grogger, Jeffrey and Gordon Hanson. 2011. “Income Maximization and the Selection and
      Sorting of International Migrants.” Journal of Development Economics 95(1): 42-57.

Grogger, Jeffrey and Gordon H. Hanson. 2015. “Attracting Talent: Location Choices of Foreign-
      Born PhDs in the United States.” Journal of Labor Economics 33(S1): S5-S38.

Hanson, Gordon, Chen Liu, and Craig McIntosh. 2017. “Along the Watchtower: The Rise and
      Fall of U.S. Low-Skilled Immigration.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
      Washington, D.C.

Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten. Penn World Table Version 7.1. Center for
       International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of
       Pennsylvania, Nov 2012.

Hunt, Jennifer. 2011. “Which Immigrants are Most Innovative and Entrepreneurial?” Journal of
       Labor Economics 29(3): 417-457.

Hunt, Jennifer. 2015. “Are Immigrants the Most Skilled US Computer and Engineering
       Workers?” Journal of Labor Economics 33(S1): S39-S77.


                                             30
Immigration and Ethnocultura Diversity Highlight Tables - Immigrant population by place of
      birth, period of immigration, 2016 counts, both sexes, age (total), Canada, 2016 Vrndud
      &nfsdh; 25% sample data

International Public Use Microdata Series, International: Version 7.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis,
        MN: IPUMS 2018.

Karemera, David, Victor Iwuagwu Oguledo, and Bobby Davis. 2000. “A gravity model analysis
      of international migration to North America.” Journal of Applied Economics 32(13):
      1745-55.

Kerr, William R. and William F. Lincoln. 2010. “The Supply Side of Innovation: H1-B Visa
       Reforms and U.S. Ethnic Invention.” Journal of Labor Economics 28(3): 473-508.

Kerr, William R., Sari Pekkala Kerr, and William F. Lincoln. 2015. “Skilled Immigration and the
       Employment Structure of US Firms.” Journal of Labor Economics 33(S1): S147-S186.

Lazear, Edward P. 1999. “Culture and Language.” Journal of Political Economy 107(S6): S95-
       S126.

Lazear, Edward P. 1977. “Education: Consumption or Production?” Journal of Political
       Economy 85:3 (June 1977): 569-97.

Lewis, Ethan. 2013. “Immigrant-Native Substitutability and the Role of Language” in
       Immigration, Policy, and Socioeconomic Inequality, ed. David Card and Stephen
       Raphael. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2013, pp. 60-97.

Migration Policy Institute. “Cuban Immigrants in the United States,” November 9, 2017.
       https://www.migrationpolicy.org/article/cuban-immigrants-united-states


Passel, Jeffrey S. and D’Vera Cohn. “As Mexican share declined, U.S. unauthorized immigrant
        population fell in 2015 below recession level” Pew Research Center, 2017.
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/04/25/as-mexican-share-declined-u-s-undocumented-
immigrant-population-fell-in-2015-below-recession-level/

Peri, Giovanni, Kevin Shih, and Chad Sparber. 2015. “STEM Workers, H-1B Visas, and
        Productivity in US Cities.” Journal of Labor Economics 33(S1): S225-S255.

Roy, Arthur. 1951. “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings.” Oxford Economic Papers
      3(2): 135-146.

Sjaastad, Larry A. 1962. “The Costs and Returns of Human Migration.” Journal of Political
       Economy 70(5): 80-93.

                                                31
U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Office of Immigration Statistics. Yearbook of
       Immigration Statistics: 2014. Washington, D.C., August 2016.
       <https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/DHS%202014%20Yearbook.pdf>

U.S. Department of Homeland Security. U.S. Lawful Permanent Residents: 2015. by Ryan
       Baugh and Katherine Witsman, Washington D.C., March 2017.
       <https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/Lawful_Permanent_Residents_201
       5.pdf>

U.S. Department of Homeland Security. U.S. Lawful Permanent Residents: 2014. by Nadwa
       Mossaad, Washington D.C., April 2016.
       <https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/Lawful_Permanent_Residents_201
       4.pdf>


U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs. Annual Immigrant Visa Waiting List
       Report as of November 1, 2015. 2015.

Van den Berg, Hendrik and Joshua L. Lewer. 2008. “A gravity model of immigration.”
      Economic Letters 99(1):164-167.




                                             32
Table 1: Attainment of U.S. Immigrants
Dependent Variable= Average Education of Immigrants from Country i
                   (1)          (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)                        (6)        (7)        (8)
Ii              -0.524***    -0.702*** -1.837*** -2.607***  -0.496***                  -0.519***
                      (0.0333)       (0.153)      (0.288)      (0.495)      (0.0696)   (0.184)

Ni                    0.252***      0.283***      1.519***     1.189***     0.269***   0.289***
                      (0.0307)      (0.0683)      (0.193)      (0.203)      (0.0627)   (0.0824)

μi                    0.322***      0.265***     0.402***     0.291***      0.362***   0.399***     0.191** 0.250***
                      (0.0528)      (0.0409)     (0.0364)     (0.0365)      (0.123)    (0.108)     (0.0796) (0.0416)

Ri                                                                                                 -0.111*** -0.0451***
                                                                                                   (0.0167) (0.01000)



Weight                    Ii          None           Ii         None           Ii       None          Ii       None

Sample                  Full          Full        Without      Without      Ii > 0.2   Ii > 0.2      Full       Full
                                                  Mexico,      Mexico,
                                                  Philipp.,    Philipp.,
                                                India, China India, China

Constant             10.248***      11.142***     9.428***    10.892***     9.689***   9.404***    11.456*** 11.514***
                      (0.493)        (0.377)      (0.372)      (0.349)      (1.172)    (1.031)      (0.701) (0.379)
Observations            129            129          125          125           29         29          129       129
R2                    0.7276         0.3468       0.6311       0.4601       0.7614     0.5156       0.2775    0.3012

*
    p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                             33
Table 2: Attainment of U.S. Immigrants
Dependent Variable = Average Hourly Full-Time Wage for Immigrants from Country i
                    (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)                            (8)
Ii               -1.801*** -2.454*** -6.681*** -8.162*** -1.646***  -1.873*
                  (0.154)    (0.835)   (1.561)  (2.955)   (0.319)   (0.949)

Ni                     1.327***     1.451***     5.997***    4.381***     1.388***    1.487***
                       (0.142)      (0.373)      (1.044)     (1.214)      (0.288)     (0.424)

μi                     1.748***     1.797***     2.150***    1.893***     1.716***    2.063***    0.606      1.491**
                       (0.244)      (0.223)      (0.197)     (0.218)      (0.565)     (0.557)    (0.763)     (0.610)

Ri                                                                                               -0.481***   -0.212**
                                                                                                  (0.151)     (0.102)

Weight                     Ii        None           Ii        None           Ii        None          Ii       None

Sample                   Full         Full       Without      Without      Ii > 0.2   Ii > 0.2    Ii > 0.2    Ii > 0.2
                                                 Mexico,     Mexico,
                                                 Philipp.,   Philipp.,
                                               India, ChinaIndia, China

Constant               13.819***   14.898*** 10.316***      13.948***     12.882**    10.475*    25.018***   17.990***
                        (2.280)     (2.058)   (2.015)        (2.080)      (5.379)     (5.306)     (6.748)     (5.658)
Observations              129         129       125            125           29         29          29          29
R2                      0.6633      0.3805    0.5663         0.4133        0.6991     0.4809      0.2920      0.2967

*
    p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                             34
Table 3: Attainment of U.S. Immigrants
Dependent Variable = Average Annual Earnings for Immigrants from Country i
                    (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)                         (7)        (8)
Ii              -2053.17*** -2890.98** -9929.36*** -11081.17** -1855.76*** -2203.01
                 (229.85)     (1223.88) (2248.49) (4334.64)     (477.97) (1409.56)


Ni                    1622.04***     1805.71***    6676.43***   5539.12***     1652.19*** 1785.27***
                       (211.60)       (546.54)     (1503.32)    (1780.99)       (430.58)   (629.99)


μi                    1098.23***     1359.01***    1735.91***   1495.76***      832.55     1532.07*     201.68 1248.30***
                       (364.55)       (327.18)      (284.15)     (319.30)      (844.96)    (826.98)    (436.49) (324.15)


Ri                                                                                                     -543.18*** -266.70***
                                                                                                        (91.84)    (77.83)

Weight                     Ii             None          Ii           None          Ii       None           Ii       None


Sample                    Full             Full      Without      Without       Ii > 0.2    Ii > 0.2     Full        Full
                                                     Mexico,      Mexico,
                                                     Philipp.,    Philipp.,
                                                   India, China India, China

Constant                24155***      23837***       19485***     22614***      24943***    19889** 34348*** 26587***
                       (3400.98)     (3017.14)      (2902.10)    (3050.82)     (8050.29)   (7879.50) (3844.90) (2951.03)
Observations              129              129         125            125         29          29          129        129
R2                      0.5325            0.1788     0.3689          0.2080     0.5808      0.3015      0.2174     0.1691

*
    p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                35
Table 4: Attainment of U.S. Immigrants as Compared with Natives of Origin Country
                                      (1)                   (2)
                                      IV                   OLS

Dependent Variable                       Delta                Delta
Ii                                      -0.499   ***        -0.558***
                                        (0.0528)            (0.0416)

Ni                                       0.338***           0.206***
                                        (0.0636)            (0.0403)

μi                                       -0.286             -0.765***
                                        (0.182)             (0.0838)

Tertiaryi


Weight                                     Ii                  Ii

Sample                                    Full                Full

Constant                                6.623***            11.356***
                                        (1.815)              (0.855)
Observations                               70                  70
R2                                       0.7993              0.8618
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                       36
Table 5: Attainment of Immigrants in U.S.
Dependent Variable = Average Education Level of Immigrants from Country i
                     (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)               (6)
Ri                -0.111***  -0.0451***   -0.0448***    -0.0369***
                  (0.0167)   (0.01000)     (0.0106)     (0.00933)



μi                     0.191**      0.250***     0.310***      0.267***    0.275***    0.304***
                      (0.0796)      (0.0416)     (0.0497)      (0.0387)    (0.0550)    (0.0349)

Ii                                               -0.481***     -0.628***
                                                 (0.0329)       (0.146)

Ni                                               0.215***      0.244***
                                                 (0.0301)      (0.0654)

ln(Ii)                                                                     -1.374***   -0.643***
                                                                           (0.0869)    (0.0811)

ln(Ni)                                                                     0.946***    0.545***
                                                                           (0.0888)    (0.0609)


Weight                   Ii           None          Ii          None          Ii        None


Sample                  Full          Full         Full          Full        Full        Full

Constant              11.456***      11.514***   10.714***     11.333***   10.136***   10.274***
                       (0.701)        (0.379)     (0.476)       (0.360)     (0.468)     (0.355)
Observations             129            129         129           129         129         129
R2                     0.2775         0.3012      0.7617        0.4201      0.6801      0.5342
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                          37
Table 6: Attainment of Immigrants in U.S.
Dependent Variable = Average Education Level of Immigrants from Country i
                                  (1)              (2)               (3)             (4)
Ii                            -0.319***         -0.500***         -1.430**        -2.447***
                              (0.0501)           (0.150)          (0.630)          (0.780)
Ni                             0.160***          0.179**          0.959**         1.185***
                              (0.0383)          (0.0686)          (0.361)          (0.336)
μi                             0.445***         0.358***          0.563***        0.399***
                               (0.125)           (0.104)          (0.115)         (0.0954)
GDP per Capita (PPP             0.0309           0.0141          -0.00145          0.0143
Adjusted)                     (0.0217)          (0.0170)         (0.0200)         (0.0156)
GDP Growth Rate                -0.117**          0.0418            0.0703          0.0872*
                              (0.0564)          (0.0467)         (0.0571)         (0.0437)
Agricultural Value Added as    0.160***          0.0573           0.0793*          0.0422
% of GDP                      (0.0504)          (0.0353)         (0.0450)         (0.0321)
Distance between               0.273***          0.151**           0.0652         0.00131
Washington DC and capital     (0.0704)          (0.0730)         (0.0823)         (0.0778)
of country i
Weight                             Ii             None                Ii            None
Sample                           Full              Full       Without Mexico, Without Mexico,
                                                              Philipp., India, Philipp., India,
                                                                   China            China
Constant                       6.788***         8.762***          7.027***        9.036***
                               (1.277)           (1.094)          (1.147)          (1.016)
Observations                      69                69               65               65
R2                              0.8797           0.4629            0.5793          0.5042

*
    p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                  38
Table 7: Analysis of Sweden
Dependent Variable: Proportion with post-secondary degree
                                   (1)               (2)           (3)           (4)
      Ii Sweden (in millions)   -0.801**           -2.11***     -0.766**       -0.670*
                                (0.348)            (0.558)      (0.349)        (0.347)

      Ni (in 100 millions)      0.205***          0.213***       0.149**        0.109
                                (0.0437)          (0.0498)      (0.0677)       (0.0697)

      μi                        0.0189***        0.0256***     0.0184***      0.0145***
                                (0.00423)        (0.00396)     (0.00424)      (0.00465)

      Ii US                                                    0.00000110     0.00000142
                                                              (0.00000102)   (0.00000101)

      Ai US                                                                     0.0210*
                                                                               (0.0110)
      Weight                     Ii Sweden          None         Ii Sweden      Ii Sweden


      Constant                   0.102**          0.0957**      0.0975**        -0.157
                                (0.0445)          (0.0402)      (0.0446)       (0.140)
      Observations                  77               77            77             77
      R2                          0.397            0.482         0.406          0.435

Standard errors clustered at the area level.
*
 p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                 39
Table 8: Attainment of U.S. Immigrants (Individual level data)

                                       (1)                (2)                 (3)              (4)            (5)
 Dependent                       Education         Education Attained Natural Log of      Natural Log      Education
Variable                        Attained in Years in Years            Hourly Earnings    of Annual     Attained in Years
                                                                                         Earnings      Origin Country
                                                                                                       Average
                           Ii        -0.524***          -0.586***          -0.0277***       -0.0293***      -0.524***
                                    (0.00106)          (0.00103)          (0.000260)       (0.000337)       (0.0333)

                          Ni         0.252***           0.274***           0.0251***        0.0270***       0.252***
                                   (0.000974)         (0.000945)          (0.000220)       (0.000285)       (0.0307)

                          μi         0.322***           0.234***         -0.0000175        -0.00996***      0.322***
                                    (0.00168)          (0.00317)         (0.000757)        (0.000982)       (0.0528)

                        Age                            0.0367***           0.0477***         0.102***
                                                       (0.00133)          (0.000449)       (0.000581)

                       Age2                          -0.000867***         -0.000394***     -0.000982***
                                                     (0.0000121)         (0.00000470)     (0.00000609)

     Age of Arrival to                                 -0.0905***         -0.0188***        -0.0253***
                 U.S.
                                                      (0.000997)          (0.000265)       (0.000343)

     Age of Arrival to                                0.00714***          0.00111***       0.00151***
            U.S. x μi
                                                      (0.000109)         (0.0000292)       (0.0000379)

                     Female                             -0.243***          -0.235***         -0.470***
                                                       (0.00684)          (0.00156)         (0.00202)

            Education                                                      0.0634***        0.0746***
     Attained in Years
                                                                          (0.000197)       (0.000256)

                Constant            10.248***          12.521***           1.120***         7.436***       10.248***
                                    (0.0157)           (0.0426)            (0.0122)         (0.0158)        (0.493)
                     Weight           None               None                None             None           None

                     Sample            Full              Full                Full             Full            Full

         Observations               1491182            1491182             981178            981178         1491182

                          R2        0.1816              0.2422              0.2111           0.2033          0.7276
*               **
    p < 0.10,        p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                    40
Table 9
Cohort Analysis
(decade specific in columns 1, 3, 5; current stock measures of variables in 2, 4, 6)
                     (1)           (2)             (3)                 (4)                (5)             (6)
VARIABLES        Education     Education Hourly Wage              Hourly Wage      Annual Earnings Annual Earnings
                 attainent     (at origin                       (at origin country                (at origin country
                             country level)                           level)                             level)

Ii               -0.369***     -0.509***       -1.217***           -1.476***           -1,655***       -1,883***
                 (0.00126)     (0.000369)       (0.0208)           (0.00263)             (14.42)         (2.610)

Ni               0 .274***      0.182***        1.161***           1.139***            1,944***        1,433***
                 (0.00141)     (0.000280)       (0.0232)           (0.00187)            (16.14)         (1.983)

μ                0.394***       0.137***        0.663***           1.283***            1,366***        767.9***
                 (0.00253)     (0.000657)       (0.0431)           (0.00464)            (29.11)         (4.652)

Constant         10.42***       12.31***        23.33***           20.36***            25,878***       28,904***
                 (0.0161)       (0.00447)        (0.277)           (0.0316)             (185.1)         (31.68)

Observations      773,960      773,960          545,182             374,772             773,960         773,960
R-squared           0.186       0.800            0.013               0.725               0.043           0.643
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                           41
                                                            Appendix A

 Proofs

 Proposition 1:
 From (1), using the implicit function theorem,
                  Ai *     /  Ii
                        
                   Ii      / Ai *
                                    1
                          
                               N i f i ( Ai *)
 which is negative.
                                           Af ( A)dA           
                                          Ai * i               
                  Note also that in (3),                   Ai * is just the conditional expectation of A, given A>Ai*,
                                            1  Fi ( Ai *)
                                                               
minus Ai*, which is necessarily positive since the conditional expectation must exceed its lower limit. This implies
that the sign of the first term in (3) is just the sign of MAi*/Mx .
 Additionally, when the underlying distribution of ability, f i(Ai*), is independent of x as it is for x=Ii, the sign of the
derivative in (3) is the same as that of MAi*/Mx because the second term is zero.
                  Thus, since MAi*/MIi < 0,       Ai decreases in Ii . |||
 Proposition 2:
   Analogously,

                   Ai *     /  Ni
                         
                    Ni      / Ai *
                               1  Fi ( Ai *)
                           
                                N i f i ( Ai *)

 which is positive. By the same logic that is in the proof above, and since fi(A) does not depend on Ni,
                  Ai
                        0.                         |||
                  N i

 Proposition 3:

                  First note that when Fi(A) = F(A-μi),

                  Ai *     /  i
                        
                   i      / Ai *
                            N i f ( Ai *  i )
                          
                            N i f ( Ai *  i )
                          1
 from (1).
                  Substituting into (3) yields


                                                                  42
                                                                          
                                                                                                      
                   Ai   f ( A *  i )  A * Af ( A)dA        
                        i i                               Ai *
                                                                                     i
                                                                           i

                                          
                   i 1  F ( Ai *  i ) 1  Fi ( Ai *)
                                                                                                    
                                                1                                        f ( A  i )
                                                          
                                        1  F ( Ai *  i ) Ai *
                                                                 A
                                                                                               i
                                                                                                           dA

                The first term is positive because, as stated before, the conditional expectation exceeds its lower
limit. The second term is positive because
                  f ( A  i )
                                  f ' ( A  i )
                       i
 and because f '(A) <0 for A>Ai*.                                              |||

 Corollaries


                  The proofs of the corollaries follow.


 Corollary 1:

 Rewrite (1) as

                                                 I      i
                  [1  Fi ( Ai *)]  Ri              i
                                                                 0
                                                 N
                                                 i
                                                             i




 Then
                        
                Ai *  Ri
                     
                 Ri    
                        Ai *
                          Ii /  Ni
                           i                i

                                f i ( Ai *)

 which is negative. Using the same logic as in the proof of proposition 1 and noting that Fi(A) does not depend on
Ri,

        Ai
            0                         |||
        Ri



                  To prove the corollaries that relate to Δ, note that for any variable x,



                                                                                         43
                         Ai * 
                                                        
                          x  A * Af ( A)dA
          f i ( Ai *)
                                            
    
                                        i
                                   i
                                         Ai *
 x   [1  Fi ( Ai *)]  1  Fi ( Ai *)
                                                       
                       1                 f i ( A)
                  1  Fi ( Ai *) Ai *
                                      A            dA
                                           x

                           f ( A)
                A           i
                                    dA
                           x




 Corollary 2:
                                                                         Ai *        1
                    Since Fi(A) does not depend on Ii and since                                 ,
                                                                          Ii    N i f i ( Ai *)

                          1  
                                                                
                      N i f i ( Ai *)   Ai * Af i ( A)dA
        f i ( Ai *) 
  Ai                                                            
                                                           Ai * < 0
  Ii         [1  Fi ( Ai *)]             1  Fi ( Ai *)
                                                                


                                                              |||

                                                                         Ai * 1  Fi ( Ai *)
 Corollary 3: Since Fi(A) does not depend on Ni and since                                     , which is positive,
                                                                          N i N i f i ( Ai *)

                    1  Fi ( Ai *)  
                                                                
                      N i f i ( Ai *)   Ai * Af i ( A)dA
        f i ( Ai *) 
  Ai                                                            
                                                           Ai *  0
  Ni          [1  Fi ( Ai *)]            1  Fi ( Ai *)
                                                                

                                                              |||

 Corollary 4:
                 Consider two countries. Define the base country as having an ability distribution given by F(A) and
arbitrary country i as having an ability distributions Fi(A), where as in the text, Fi(A) is a displacement of F(A) by μi.
                 The cutoff level for the base country is A* to satisfy (1) such that

                    N0 [1-F(A*)] = I0

 where I0 is the policy determined number of immigrants from the base country.
                  Recall that


                                                                    44
          Ai *
                1
           i
 so that Ai* = A*+μi . The goal is to show that Δ is invariant with respect to μ. This is equivalent to showing that
average ability among immigrants, A i , is greater than A by μi because

                  i  A i  E ( Ai )
                   A  E ( A)
                 and
                 E ( Ai )  E ( A)  i
                 soif  i   ,
                 then
                 Ai  A  i

                 Definitionally,


              1         

        1  Fi ( Ai *) Ai *
 Ai                         Af i ( A)dA

 or

             1        
 Ai                
        1  F ( A *) A* i
                            Af ( A  i )dA


 because Fi(A) = F(A-μi), fi(A) = f(A-μi) and Ai* = A*+ μi .
                A change of variables allows this to be rewritten as


                          1        
             Ai                 
                     1  F ( A *) A*
                                     ( A  i ) f ( A)dA

                        1                          i        
                              
                   1  F ( A *) A*
                                   Af ( A)dA               
                                               1  F ( A *) A*
                                                                f ( A)dA

                        1                      [1  F ( A *)]
                              
                   1  F ( A *) A*
                                   Af ( A)dA  i
                                                 1  F ( A *)
                  A  i




                                                           45
                                                      Appendix B
                                                    Additional Tables
                                                       Table B-1


                    Description                       Source                    Mean           Std Dev
 Variable
                     Mean years of schooling         ACS                        13.32207       1.641941
 Ai (Education)
                   among immigrants from country
                   i
                     Mean wage among immigrants ACS                             27.79516       7.738721
Ai (Hourly
                   from country i (condition on
Wage)
                   working)
                     Mean earnings among             ACS                        33062.38       10567.58
 Ai (Annual
                   immigrants from country i
Earnings)
                   (unconditional)
                     Number of immigrants in US ACS                             0.23           0.75
 Ii
                   from country i in millions
                     Population of country i in 100 World Bank Database         0.53           1.71
 Ni
                   millions                         2015
                     Mean schooling in country i     UN Development Reports     8.611628       2.796416
 μi
                                                    2016

                    Representation ratio                                        6.279349       12.64804
 Ri                                                   Created

                    Percentage with tertiary          Barro and Lee             10.6199        6.762148
 Tertiaryi
                   education in country i
                    Per capita GDP in purchasing      Heston and Summers        18071.52       13331.35
 GDP/personi
                   power parity dollars
                    5 year growth rate of GDP         Heston and Summers        3.774583       3.437578
 GDP growthi
                    Agricultural output / total       World Bank                6.976657       6.589
 Agr share in
                   output in country i
GDPi
 μi Sweden         Proportion with tertiary           Registret över            0.3            0.13
                  education in Sweden                befolkningens utbildning
 Ii Sweden         Number of immigrants in            Swedish Registry          11311          17695
                  Sweden from country i
 μi (decade        Average educational                IPUMS                     5.308946       2.000397
specific measure) achievement
 sd (decade        Standard deviation of              IPUMS                     3.965702       0.5955079
specific measure) educational achievement
 p90 (decade       90th percentile of educational     IPUMS                     10.66928       2.622574
specific measure) achievement
 Ni (decade        Country population                 IPUMS                     204379977.48   359734697.88
specific measure)




                                                          46
                                             Appendix C

     Fi(Ai*) is assumed to be a normal distribution, with mean μi and standard deviation σi for
country i. Define the cumulative standard normal as G(zi) with zi = (Ai* - μi) / σi . Because Ii is
in millions and Ni is in 100 millions, it is necessary to convert Ni into the same units so define

Ni* / 100 Ni .

                              Ni*[ 1- G( zi) ] = Ii
or

                              G(zi) = 1- Ii / Ni*
Thus,

                              zi*= G-1(1- Ii / Ni*)

where zi* is the Ai* cutoff converted into standardized normal units.

Then,

(C1)                  Ai* = σi G-1(1- Ii / Ni*) + μi

which is easily obtainable.

         Once Ai* is obtained from (C1), it is possible to estimate Ai. That is done as follows.
Because Ai* is in the upper tail of the normal for all countries (even Mexicans at about 7 million
equal only about 6% of Mexico’s population at the time of the sample), the tail of the
distribution is flat, close to linear, and negatively sloped. Also, because Ai* is so high relative to
μi, it is assumed that

                      E(Ai | Ai >Ai*) = A*+k

 Given the highly irregular country-specific histograms for the educational distributions,
particularly in the upper tails, this assumption provides some robustness to the estimates. It
essentially allows Ai* to do all the work, but Ai* incorporates the origin country-specific
information on mean education, standard deviation of education and selects Ai* so as to ensure
that the upper tail corresponds to Ii / Ni .
        Because the standard deviations are available for only 66 of the 129 countries, the
reduced form specification estimated in column 1, table 1 is repeated for the 66 countries.
Coefficients are similar as is the r-squared, which rises slightly to .75.


                                                    47
      Goodness of fit of the structural model is calculated by regressing the actual Ai on the
predicted Ai across all i countries. The r-squared is .62, meaning that the structural model fits
about 83% as well as the reduced form version, lending additional credence to the approach
formalized through equations (1) and (2).




                                                 48
                                                     Appendix D

 Acknowledgement for IPUMS data.

         The author wishes to acknowledge the statistical offices that provided the underlying data making this
research possible: National Institute of Statistics and Censuses, Argentina; National Statistical Service, Armenia;
National Bureau of Statistics, Austria; Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, Bangladesh; Ministry of Statistics and
Analysis, Belarus; National Institute of Statistics, Bolivia; Central Statistics Office, Botswana; Institute of
Geography and Statistics, Brazil; National Institute of Statistics and Demography, Burkina Faso; National Institute
of Statistics, Cambodia; Central Bureau of Census and Population Studies, Cameroon; Statistics Canada, Canada;
National Institute of Statistics, Chile; National Bureau of Statistics, China; National Administrative Department of
Statistics, Colombia; National Institute of Statistics and Censuses, Costa Rica; Office of National Statistics, Cuba;
National Statistics Office, Dominican Republic; National Institute of Statistics and Censuses, Ecuador; Central
Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics, Egypt; Department of Statistics and Censuses, El Salvador; Central
Statistical Agency, Ethiopia; Bureau of Statistics, Fiji; National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies, France;
Federal Statistical Office, Germany; Ghana Statistical Services, Ghana; National Statistical Office, Greece; National
Statistics Directorate, Guinea; Institute of Statistics and Informatics, Haiti; Central Statistical Office, Hungary;
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, India; BPS Statistics Indonesia, Indonesia; Statistical Centre,
Iran; Central Organization for Statistics and Information Technology, Iraq; Central Statistics Office, Ireland; Central
Bureau of Statistics, Israel; National Institute of Statistics, Italy; Statistical Institute, Jamaica; Department of
Statistics, Jordan; National Bureau of Statistics, Kenya; National Statistical Committee, Kyrgyz Republic; Institute
of Statistics and Geo-Information Systems, Liberia; National Statistical Office, Malawi; Department of Statistics,
Malaysia; National Directorate of Statistics and Informatics, Mali; National Institute of Statistics, Geography, and
Informatics, Mexico; National Statistical Office, Mongolia; Department of Statistics, Morocco; National Institute of
Statistics, Mozambique; Statistics Netherlands, Netherlands; National Institute of Information Development,
Nicaragua; National Bureau of Statistics, Nigeria; Statistics Division, Pakistan; Central Bureau of Statistics,
Palestine; Census and Statistics Directorate, Panama; General Directorate of Statistics, Surveys, and Censuses,
Paraguay; National Institute of Statistics and Informatics, Peru; National Statistics Office, Philippines; Central
Statistics Office, Poland; National Institute of Statistics, Portugal; U.S. Bureau of the Census, Puerto Rico; National
Institute of Statistics, Romania; National Institute of Statistics, Rwanda; Government Statistics Department, Saint
Lucia; National Agency of Statistics and Demography, Senegal; Statistics Sierra Leone, Sierra Leone; Statistical
Office of the Republic of Slovenia, Slovenia; Statistics South Africa, South Africa; National Bureau of Statistics,
South Sudan; National Institute of Statistics, Spain; Central Bureau of Statistics, Sudan; Federal Statistical Office,
Switzerland; Bureau of Statistics, Tanzania; National Statistical Office, Thailand; Central Statistical Office, Trinidad
and Tobago; Turkish Statistical Institute, Turkey; Bureau of Statistics, Uganda; State Committee of Statistics,
Ukraine; Office of National Statistics, United Kingdom; Bureau of the Census, United States; National Institute of
Statistics, Uruguay; National Institute of Statistics, Venezuela; General Statistics Office, Vietnam; and Central
Statistics Office, Zambia.




                                                          49
