                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          AN OVERLAPPING GENERATIONS MODEL
                              OF ELECTORAL COMPETITION




                                  Alberto Alesina

                                 Stephen E. Spear




                              Working Paper No. 2354




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 1987




Our interest in this topic was stimulated by an observation made by Howard
Rosenthal during a session of the Pitt-CMU theory workshop. We are also grateful
to the participants of the CMU Political Economy workshop, and to Herschel Grossman
for many helpful comments. Spear's work on this paper was supported by a grant
SES 8420486 from the Natinal Science Foundation which is
                                                         gratefully acknowledged.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Financial
Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                        NBER Working Paper #2354
                                                        August 1987




                 An Overlapping Generations Model of Electoral Competition




                                         ABSTRACT




           This paper presents a dynamic model of political competition between

       two "parties" with different policy preferences. A "party" is explicitly

       modelled as a sequence of overlapping generations of candidates, all of

       whom face finite decision horizons.        In general, there is a conflict

       between the interests of the individual policymakers and those of the

       "party"   ,   which   includes subsequent generations of candidates.     We

       characterize this conflict and suggest a scheme of "intergenerational

       transfers" within the party which can resolve or mitigate this conflict.

       The the paper shows how the "overlapping generations" model can be

       usefully applied to the political arena.




Alberto Alesina                                         Stephen Spear
GSIA                                                    GSIA
Carnegie—Mellon University                              Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                                    Pittsburgh, PA 15213
 I. Introduction



     One of the most famous results in political economy is that one should

 observe policy convergence in a two-party system.           In particular, if the
candidates maximize the likelihood of (re)appointment as suggested by Downs

 [1957] ,   full   convergence of policies results in equilibrium: both parties

adopt the same policy. This is the basic message, for example, of the "median

voter theorem".

     The assumption that candidates care only about winning elections, however,

is extreme and perhaps overly simple.         In general, different policymakers may
have different views about policy and/or they may adopt as their own the

objective functions of different constituencies with conflicting political or

economic interests. In this case, candidates do rt view winning an election

as their only goal, but also as a means of implementing the policies most

preferred by their constituencies.         We believe that this view (formalized

originally by Wittman [1977]) is nre realistic and more general because it

can incorporate the case of pure Downsian candidates as a particular (and

extreme) case of the broader model. It us label candidates who are not

purely Downsian as "politically motivated".

    Wittman [1977, 1983], Calvert [1985] and Chapell-Keech [1986] have shown

that if there Ls uncertainty about the distribution of voters' preferences so

that electoral results are uncertain, "politically motivated" candidates may

not propose fully convergent platforms to the voters. However Calvert [1985]

emphasizes that even if convergence is not complete, the candidates may locate

"very close" to each    other,   certainly nuch closer than their respective ideal

or "bliss" points. Furthermore, if candidates are sufficiently Downsian, even




                                          1
full convergence may result in equilibrium.

   Alesina [1987a] ,   on the other hand, shows that these results of partial

(or complete) convergence are time-inconsistent        since candidates cannot

credibly pre-commit to electoral platforms.          While candidates have an

incentive to announce convergent platforms to increase their chances of

winning an election, once in office the winning candidate is not committed to

her announced platform.    Indeed, she has every incentive to follow her most

                    Rational, forward looking voters would account for this ex
preferred policy.

post incentive and vote accordingly.       Thus,   if the candidate's tenure in

office is finite, the only time-consistent electoral equilibrium is one in

which no convergence is possible and the two candidates follow their most

preferred policies when in office2. This result holds even if the candidates

attribute only a very small weight to their policy goals and almost all weight

to the goal of winning elections.

    This divergence of policies is sub-optimal in the sense that both

candidates would benefit from a reduction of this volatility.                     This

sub-optimality arises from two considerations.        First, each "party" would

prefer that its candidate follow convergent policies, in order to capture

(probabilistically) middle voters. Second, society as a whole may suffer from

excess volatility of policy, particularly of economic policy. Alesina [l987b]

provides an example of the effects of excess volatility of monetary policy for

the bisiness cycle.    In that nDdel, stochastic changes of policyrnakers with

different preferences on the inflation/unemployment trade-off amplify the

effects of the cycle by destabilizing expectations of future policies.            This

excess volatility in policymaking can be reduced by several mechanisms;       for a

survey on this issue, see Alesina-Tabellini [1987] .      Alesina   [1987a,b] ,    for



                                       2
 example, has shown how the repeated interaction of two "infinitely lived"

 parties can sustain partial or complete convergence by means of reputational

 strategies in an infinitely repeated game. A "party" is identified in this

 context by an objective function defined over a set of economic or
 non-economic goals. In these papers, the candidates are completely identified

 with the party, so that the goals of finite-lived policymakers coincide with

 those of the long-lived party.

     The identification between the "party" and each individual candidate is,

however, unrealistic.   Thus, this paper moves a step toward a more realistic
model of the party.      We model the "party" as a sequence of candidates

 "politically active" in different time periods, accounting explicitly for the
fact that individual      policymakers hold political      office,     and that
officeholders live finite political lives.   The existence of a "last period't

for the individual policymaker generates a potential conflict between the

interests of the individual and those of her party.4 In analyzing this model,

we will be particularly interested in the question of whether it is possible

that finitely-lived policymakers follow "far-sighted"     policies, that is,
policies which do not maximize their short-run benefits, but maximize the

long-run benefits of the "party" or even of society as a whole.      cXtr analysis

provides an affirmative answer to this question.

    We suggest a transfer scheme which enforces an equilibrium in thich the

policymakers, even in their last period of political life, do not follow their

individually most preferred policies.     Instead, they adopt policies which
enhance the chances of a candidate of their own type (or party) being elected

to succeed them.    We view the transfer scheme as one in which fture
presidential candidates alive     today (labelled, purely as a matter of



                                      3
convenience, "vice-presidents") compensate the "president"
                                                             currently in office

for not locating at her most preferred policy.    If the "vice-president" is

subsequently elected, her "vice-president" will compensate her for not

locating at a most preferred policy, and so on.    The amount of compensation

(in utility terms) trust be sufficient to make the incumbent officeholder

indifferent between her most preferred policy ex post and the ex ante optimal

policy.   With incentives to deviate from the optimal pre-commitment policy

thus eliminated, equilibria with pre-commitment become possible.

    We note that the possibility of using intergenerational transfers to deal

with time-consistency problems was proposed originally by Kotlikoff,     Persson

and Svensson [1986), although in a different context.        In addition, Cremer

[1986) has studied how finitely-lived members        of an infinitely-lived

organization can achieve some degree of cooperation by nineans of implicitly

defined transfers from young agents to old agents in the allocation of effort.




                                       4
 II. The Model



      We consider an overlapping generations model of political competition.

The policymakers have a political life of two periods, where the term "life't

will be used to indicate the period of politically active life. A period is

identified with a term of office. Thus, there are elections at the beginning

of each period.       When a policymaker is "young" (i.e. in her first period of

life), she can be either a vice-president or out of office.              When a
policymaker is "old" (i.e. in her second period of life) she can be either

president or out of office.      Thus, a president cannot be appointed nore than

once, although it is possible to reinterpret the model to accomodate the

possibility of reappointment (see the Appendix).     Also, if a policymaker has

served as vice president when young, she automatically becomes the candidate

of her party for the following presidential elections. We note again that our

use of the term vice-president is used purely for convenience to denote future

candidates who are currently alive.

      The policymakers belong to one of two parties, labelled 1 and 2.   Party 1

represents a constituency with the following objectives defined On           the
unidimensional policy issue z e [0,1] for each period:



(l.la)    W'   U(z)


where U is twice continuously differentiable, and


(1.lb)            = 0


and




                                         5
                                       b
(1. lc) U (z) {}        0    as z {}



In addition, we assume that 13(z) is strictly concave, so that 13(z) < 0 for

all z. Party 2 represents a constituency with the following objectives in each

period:




(l.2a)    W2 =   V(z)

where V is twice continuously differentiable, and


(l.2b)                  0
          V[y'°]

and


(l.2c)                   0   as z {} yb
          V(z) {}

In addition, we assume that V(z) < 0 for all z. The two parties have

different bliss points          and yb To fix ideas, we assume that xb >

      Thus, each policymaker belongs to one of the two parties and adopts the

appropriate objectives.          In addition, each candidate attributes a positive

utility to holding office per se, regardless of the policy followed when in

office.    We denote this benefit by k and we assume for simplicity that k is

identical for every candidate of either party.        Finally, we assume that both

candidates discount the future at a rate given by the discount factor q which

is assumed to be the same for both candidate types4.

      Electoral competition occurs as follows.       Denote the policies chosen in

period t by a president from party 1 and party 2 by x and Yt respectively.

At the end of period t-l, candidates announce their platforms for period t,



                                            6
denoted x and y. Voters are rational and forward-looking. Hence, they

form rational expectations of the policies that would be followed by the two

candidates if elected. Let us denote these expectations by x and y. These

expectations are determined formally as




           x Et [)
and


                —
                    EtjyJ
where Et        is the conditional expectation operator based on the information

available to voters in period t-l.

      The electoral outcomes are uncertain. For any given x and y, the

candidate of party 1 is elected with probability given by



(1.3)      Pt



This function can be justified as follows. Each voter votes for the candidate

which is expected to isplement the policy closest to her bliss point.         The

uncertainty about electoral results arises because the distribution of voters'

preferences is rt known with certainty.         In particular, the preferences of

the median voter are unknown.         The function (1.3), then, derives from a

probability distribution over possible distributions of voters' preferences,

and, in particular, over the bliss point of the median voter.        In addition,

there might be uncertainty about the number of abstensions. As a result of

the uncertainty about the distribution of the costs of voting as perceived by



                                          7
different voters5.

    We make the following assumptions on the election probability function.

    (1) The function                       is time-invariant and "common knowledge".

    (2) 0      P      1    for all e E             I   and all e E     I,   where I     [0,1].


            0 < P < 1 for all [xe, e] E B, where


                   B —             E       Ix 1b       y     x <
                                                                     b}
                         {(xy)
                          is twice continuously differentiable for all                             except,
    (3)
            P[xiy]
            possibly, at x =
                                           y.
    (4)
            3x
                      P1 >    ()    0 if and only if x < ()                    y
            3P()      P2 > ()          0    if and only if x (>) y.


    Assumption (4) implies that if one candidate moves toward the other's

position,     she         increases             her        chances    of     election     by     capturing

(probabilistically) "middle voters".                         In other words, the nDre conservative

party always gains by moving toward the left and viceversa. Note that this

assumption is restrictive in the sense that it rules out the possibility of

entry of a third party for any policy followed by the existing two parties.

Assumption (1) is stronger than is necessary, but simplifies the analysis of

the model. It implies that the underlying distribution of voters' preferences

is never learned with certainty because, for example, voters preferences

change over time and new voters are born.                             An assumption of time-varying

probability functions can be incorporated: the only crucial assumption is that

electoral results remain probabilistic.                              Assumption (3) states that the

probability of winning depends smoothly on there the candidates locate, but



                                                            8
admits the possibility that a discontinuity may arise when the two candidates'

positions "cross".   Ps will become parent from the analysis below, however,

it will rver be optimal for a candidate to locate in such a way that her

opponent's position is between her own position and her ideal point.   Hence,

this point of discontinuity will never cause any problems in the analysis to

follow. It can be shown that a probability distribution of electoral outcomes

with these properties can be generated by assuming a known distribution over

the bliss point of the median voter.

    In the text we consider only the case in which each president can serve

only for one term. In the Appendix, we show that this framework can be easily

generalized to accoinodate multiple terms.




                                       9
III. Electoral Equilibrium



   We first analyze the electoral equilibria in our model when no
inter-generational transfers are made.        In the absence of such transfers,

there is a clear conflict of interest between the "young" vice-president and

the "old" president in the sense that every policymaker has incentives to

deviate from an optimal ex ante policy once she is elected.            To analyze the

time consistency problems this poses, suppose that candidates could precornmit

to their electoral platforms. Then



(3.1)                           and y=y=y.

Consider the election held at the beginning of period t.                    If the two

candidates "play" Nash against each other, then only the second period

matters, since r intergenerational utility ansfers are being made and r

young agent has any control over the policy adopted while she is either a

vice-president or out of office.      Hence, the two candidates would solve the

following problems (we drop time subscripts for convenience).




(3.2)    max a[P(x,y)U(x) + [i -                    + (l-)P(x,y)k
                                    P(x,y)]U(y)]

                                                   + (l-a)[l -
(3.3)    max a[P(x,y)V(x) +[l -    P(x,y)]V(y)]                  P(x,y)]k

                   0   a   1.



In (3.2) and (3.3) a represents the relative weights attributed to the



                                         10
"ideological goal" versus the goal of simply winning the election (which

yields utility k). The smaller a is, the more Dowrisian are the two

candidates. If (and only if) a = 0, then the two candidates are

interested only in maximizing popularity.

    Following Wittman [1983], Calvert [1985] ,   Chapell-Keech   [1986] ,   it   can be

shown that this problem has a unique solution (given the opponent's action)

which implies partial or complete convergence,           so that the solution
[x(y),y(x)] is such that


                             A
                      xb >x(y)y(x)>yb
                                 A




Denoting the Nash equilibrium for the model by (x,y), it can be shown that the

distance between x and y is monotonically decreasing in k, and that for each a

there exists   a value of k (say k0[a]) such that fork < k0[a],       x —    y.    The

candidate of party 1 is then elected with probability P(x,y).        The intuition

behind these results is straightforward:     each candidate converges from her

bliss point toward her opponent's position, trading off "ideology" against the

increased likelihood of electoral victory.

    Now, consider an old president (say from party 1) who was elected on

the platform x. Once in office, she has an incentive to break the

commitment made when she was a young vice-president. In fact, if the

president could break the commitment made as a candidate and reoptimize,

she would solve



(3.2a)         max   U(x).
                x




                                      11
Thus, if precommitment to a platform is unenforcable, the following

result is immediate.



    Proposition 3.1. For any value of > 0, and any finite value of k,

the electoral equilibrium without precommitment exists, is unique, and
                   b           b
is given by x x and y y


    This result is quite strong:      since old presidents have no future, when

they are in office they have no incentive 'whatsoever to follow a policy

different from their ideal policy. Note also that since presidents cannot be

reappointed, there are no reputational mechanisms such as those studied in

Alesina [1987a,b] which can enforce any equilibria other than that of

Proposition 3.1.

    Since voters are rational and forward looking, they will be aware of the

dynamic inconsistency problem and will not believe any announcements other

than xa b and ya       yb. In this case, the candidate of party 1 is elected

with probability P

    From our analysis of the time consistency problem, it is clear that the

incumbent president and her vice-president will have conflicting views         about

policy.   Since the vice-president must still run       for    office in her second

period of life, she would prefer to precommit the "party" to the strategy
x(y). As proposition (3.1) makes clear, however, the president will never
implement x(y).    Hence, we are   lead   to inquire whether there are mechanisms
for enforcing precommitment when candidates live finite lives. We will show
that this is   possible   if   we allow   for intergenerational transfers between
vice-president and president.      We examine two cases.      The first shows how to


                                          12
 enforce a Nash equilibrium with credible precommitment. In the second, we

 examine the fully cooperative equilibrium                (i.e. the Pareto efficient
 outcomes).



        A] Nash Equilibria with Transfers



        The basic idea behind the transfer mechanism for enforcing precommitment

 is simple. Young vice-presidents make a utility transfer payment h(z) to the

old president. These transfers are a function of the policy followed by the

president in office and can be used by the vice-president to convince the

president to follow policies which are different from the president's bliss

point.       By acting without considering the vice-president's wishes, the

president can, when in office, always achieve her bliss point.            Hence, the
amount of the transfer must be sufficient to make the president indifferent

between carrying out the vice-president's ex ante preferred policy and the

president's bliss point.            Hence, for a policymaker of party 1 the amount of

the transfer required to make the president indifferent between b and x is

clearly



(3.4)       h(x) =           - U(x).


Similarly, for the policymaker of party 2, the transfer is



(3.5)      g(y) =
                     v[yb]
                             -
                                 V(y).


For the Nash game with transfers, both periods of political life now matter,




                                              13
since the    vice-president    must make a rxn-zero utility transfer to the

president.     Hence, the candidates of each rty will solve the following

optimization problems.




(3.6) max



(3.7) max



The first term in braces represents the pected benefits for the second

period of life of each candidate, discounted by q.         The remaining terms

represent the total utility of the first period of political life.      Since the

transfers remove the incentive for deviating from announced policies, the

solutions to (3.6) and (3.7) are time-consistent (and hence credible for the

voters); thus we can impose the condition that a e =      x   and ya   y6   y.

The solutions to these problems are characterized in the following

proposition.



    Proposition 3.2. If the function P is strictly concave in x and

strictly convex in y, then solutions exist and are unique. The solutions

are given by reaction functions x*(y) and y*(x) such that



                   <   y*(x)   x*(y) <


If y*(x) < x*(y)   and k increases, then x*(y) decreases and y*(x) increases.




                                         14
        Proof: We first show the existence part of the proposition. Note

 first that we will never have x* < *            since     either candidate can, by

moving toward the other's position, increase both her "ideological"

utility (by moving closer to her ideal point) and the probability of

winning the election. Hence, restricting the domains of the expected

utilities to policies such that y           x, we see that both candidates

objective functions are continuous. Under the assumptions on F, both

problems are concave, so by standard concave programming results,

solutions exist. When P is strictly concave in x and strictly convex in

y, these solutions are unique.

    To show the second part of the proposition, consider the candidate of

party 1. Substituting for the function h(x), problem (3.4) becomes



(3.8)       max q{P(xy)Ea U[xb) +     (l-a)k         +   a[l   -

                                                                   P(x,y)JU(y)}
                                                                                  -




                                    + 2U(x).


We may assume that y <     b.   Suppose x b and consider the first-order
conditions for the solution to (3.4)



                                            +                      2U'(xb)
(3.9)
            qP1(x1D,y)[c [u(xb) -   U(y)]       (1)kJ          +             0.




Since U1(xb)     = 0, this requires that


(3.10)                                  +                      0.
                                U(y))       (l-a)k]

Since q >   0,   P1(x1,y) < 0 and the term in brackets is positive, we



                                                15
conclude that x <        A similar argument establishes that       >

   The last part of the proposition follows from a simple comparative static

analysis of the first-order conditions associated with problem (3.8).m



    To establish the existence of a Nash equilibrium, define the mapping



              y(x,y) =   [x*(y),y*(x)].

We then have the following result.



    Corollary 3.2.   The mapping -y has a fixed point.    Hence, there exists a

Nash equilibrium for the game with transfers.

    Proof: The mapping y is defined on the set ((x,y) E   I    x I I   y   x). This

set is compact and convex. By proposition 3.2, -y maps this set into itself.

Since the solutions to problem (3.8) are continuous in the variables x and y

(by the implicit function theorem), it follows that -y has a fixed point.

Fixed points of -y are, of course, Nash equilibria for the game.



    Comment 1. The Nash equilibria obtained above are not the only equilibria

for the game with transfers, since the sustainability of the equilibria

obtained above depends on the fact that the vice-president believes that the

transfer will be returned to her if she wins the election.7                   If the

vice-president does not believe the transfer will be returned, then the

policies (xb,yb) will be the Nash equilibrium policies.        (This feature has a

close analog in overlapping generations models of money,                   where   the


sustainability of an equilibrium with valued fiat money depends on agents'



                                          16
believing that money will be valued.)

    Comment 2.   In the appendix, we show how the analysis of proposition 3.2

must be modified if the president can serve more than one term in office.



    B] Cooperative Equilibria with Transfers



    Thus far, we have considered the Nash equilibrium of this game assuming

non-cooperative behavior of the two parties.     This equilibrium, however, is

not on the efficient frontier, i.e. is not a Pareto efficient outcome.

    Hence, in this section, we characterize the efficient frontier of the

game.    We begin by considering the "first-best" policies.     These are the

cooperative policies which would be followed by infinitely-lived parties which

can make binding commitments.      To put it differently, the "first-best"

policies correspond to the best possible equilibria of the game :if we abstract

from the problem of enforcement. Then the first-best policies can be achieved

without recourse to intergenerational utility transfers, and, as was the case

of pre-commitment Nash equilibria, only the expected utility of a candidate in

her second period of life matters. In this case, the following can be easily

shown.



    Proposition 3.3. If a = 1, then any efficient policy pair (f,y) exhibits

full convergence, i.e. T =   r•   If   a < 1, efficient outcomes involve full
convergence and an "agreement" to split k.

    Proof: See Alesina [1987a].



    Comment.   The intuition of this result is straightforward. When a = 1,




                                        17
since candidates are risk averse, they both benefit from full convergence as a

means of optimally sharing risk. When a < 1, candidates must compromise on

two issues:       ideology and the benefits of being in office.       Since any

divergence in policies away from full convergence increases risk without

enhancing either candidate's chances of being elected, it is clear that the

optimal cooperative outcome is to adopt identical policies, together with an

agreement on how to share power.

      Now we turn to the question of whether there exists a transfer scheme

which can support the full cooperative outcome when binding pre-commitments

are not possible.      We consider first the case of a = 1, that is the two

candidates do not attribute any weight to winning elections per se.

      Let us define



(3.11)     ETJ[x,y]   P(x,y) [U(x) +   h(x)] + [1
                                                    -
                                                        P(x,y)]U(y)

and



                      P(x,y) V(x) + [1       P(x,y)][V(y) + g(y)].
                                         -
(3.12)     EV[x,y]



Consider now the problem of finding the cooperative policies for each

"generation" of candidates.      Each generation has to pay its transfer when

young (h[x] and g{y]) and it gets EU(x,y) and EV(x,y) when old.        The best

policies sustainable with this transfer scheme can be found by solving the

following problem.



(3.13)     max 4qEU(x,y) -h(x)+U(x)]+(l-) [qEv(x,y)g(y)+vy]
          (x,y)




                                             18
where 0 < A < 1.

       By substituting from (3.4) and (3.5) for h(x) and g(y) in (3.13), the

problem becomes




 (3.14)     max A[qEU(x,y)        U(xb) +                   +                   -
                                                                                    V(yb) + 2V(y)]
           (x ,   y)
                                            2TJ(x)]             (lA)[qEV(x,y)

Note also that by using (3.4) and (3.5) we obtain



(3.15)      EU[x,yJ      P(x,y) u[xbJ +     [1       -
                                                          P(x,y)]    U(y)

and

(3.16)      EV[x,y] —    P(x,y)   V(y) + [1      -
                                                         P(x,y)]    v[yb].


       We then have the following characterization of the solutions to (3.14).



       Proposition 3.4. If the function P is strictly concave in x and

strictly convex in y, then solutions to (3.14) exist and are unique for

any given value of A. The solutions are , such that



                       y <<x
Furthermore,       for if P1(x,y) and P2(x,y) are sufficiently close to 0 when x = y

then full convergence is not the equilibrium outcome with transfers.

       Proof: The proof of existence is exactly as in proposition 3.2,

since the assumptions on the probability function P and the fact that

it is never optimal to have x < y yield a concave programming problem. That

yb <      and      < xb follows from the fact that, by individual rationality, the



                                                     19
cooperative outcome is at least as good as the Nash equilibrium of corollary

3.2. By proposition 3.2, locating at b (respectively xb) is never a best

response to the other candidate's position in the Nash game. Hence,

(respectively xb) cannot be optimal for the cooperative outcome.

      To show the second part of the proposition, consider the first-order

conditions of problem (3.13).



                                                                                   =
      A{qP(xy)U + 2U'(x)} +                 (lA){qP1(x,y)V
                                                                +
                                                                    P(x,Y)V'(x)}

                       +    [1   -                   +                      +
      A{qP(x,y)u                     P(x,y)]U'(Y)}       (lA){qP2(xY)V          2V'(y)}

where

              —
                  [b]        -
                                 U(x)
and

              =   v          -   v (y).
                      [b]

Taking ratios yields the single expression



               qP1 (x,y)U +             21.1' (x)                    P(x,y)V' (x)
                                                          qP1 (x,y)EV -

           qP2(x,y)TJ +          [1-P(x,y)]U'(y)             qP(x,y)V - 2V'(y)



Suppose that      = 9 and            consider the case where P+(x,x) =      P(x,x)     = 0.   (Since

the function P(') may not be differentiable on the diagonal, we consider the

right and left derivatives respectively.) Under these assumptions, the ratio

above becomes




                                                     20
                       2
                             — P(x,x)
                  l-P(x,x)        2
or

           P(x,x){l-P(x,x)J       4



which is impossible. Hence, for the case where P±(x,x) =    P(x,x)   = 0

we have       .    By continuity, it will still be the case that       for

probability functions having derivatives at x y sufficiently close to 0.U



       We now turn to the case of a     1. WL-ien a < 1, the cooperative solution

must specify a pair of policies (x,y) and a scheme to share the benefits of

being in office.       Let us define k as the utility of candidate i = 1,2 when

the two candidates agree to share power. A simple power-sharing scheme might

involve an agreement to split the gains of holding office between candidates 1

and 2 in proportions 8 and (l-6) when candidate 1 wins, and in proportions

(1-62) and S when candidate 2 wins. These proportions could, for example,

represent shares of cabinet positions. Under this scheme, we would have



                k1 —   k(61+62-l)
and

                k2 =   k(61÷62-l).


      It can then be shown8 that the optimal cooperative agreement with power-

sharing is for the candidates to adopt the policies         obtained for the
case of a = 1, and to negotiate power-sharing proportions (1'2) such that

61+62=1.

      Comment 1. Since the optimal policies depend on the weights A and (1-A),




                                        21
a complete determination of the cooperative outcome will depend on the outcome

of the bargaining problem agents use to determine which particular efficient

policy pair is adopted.

    Comment 2.   The main implication of Proposition 3.5 is that the transfer

scheme will generally rt be sufficient to sustain fill policy convergence.

Intuitively, this result obtains because the effect of the transfer is to

guarantee the incumbent president utility equivalent to what she would get in

the absence of any transfer, i.e. U(xb) or V(yb). Hence, the transfer scheme

effectively eliminates the opportunities for risk sharing which drives the

convergence result 'then pre-commitment is possible.         The fact that the

outcomes achieved by the intergenerational transfer nchanism in general do

not exhibit full convergence implies that the model of electoral competition

with   overlapping generations    is mt equivalent to           a ndel    with

infinitely-lived parties.   In the model with two infinitely-lived parties,

optimal fi.tll convergence policies can be sustained as Nash uilibria in an

infinitely repeated game if the discount rate q is sufficiently close to I

(the "folk theorem"). Here, we have shown that the transfer scheme may not be

sufficient to obtain full convergence even if q    1.   To put it differently,

the transfer scheme cannot sustain the first-best optimum (full convergence)

but can achieve a "second-best", with partial convergence.

    Comment 3.   We have characterized a cooperative equilibrium in which the

two parties maintain their identities in the sense that even though they share

power, they do not follow the same policies.   This result rationalizes those

situations in which representatives of different parties share power in a

coalition government, but still tend to follow different policies.

   Comment 4. We have assumed so far that individual candidates do not have




                                     22
a bequest motive, and    hence   do not internalize the welfare of future

"generations".   In this context, a bequest motive is, perhaps, equivalent to

caring about how history evaluates your tenure in office. A model with a

political bequest motive could be equivalent to a model with infinitely lived

policymakers. Barro [1974] has shown this result in a different context.




                                     23
IV. Interpretation and Conclusions



    This paper has argued that the "overlapping generations" model can be

usefully applied to the political arena.    This ndel captures the potential

"tension" between the short time IDrizon of an individual candidate and the

longer horizon of the "party'.    In fact, a party is formed of overlapping

cohorts of individual members and candidates, so that the overlapping

generations framework seems a quite natural vehical for analyzing this

institution. We believe that the approach of modelling electoral competition

using overlapping generations of candidates has many applications which go

well beyond the particular one studied in this paper.

    In general, the overlapping generations model is a useful tool to analyze

many situations    involving finitely-live members of an infinitely-lived

organization (see also Cremer [1986] on this issue).      For the case of a

political party, one expects that there will be conflicts between the goals of

the individual candidate or elected official at the end of her political life,

and the interests of future generations of candidates of the same party. This

conflict may assume different forms:    we have analyzed one of them, as an

example.   In particular, we have suggested how' a scheme of intergenerational

transfers can enforce policies which are beneficial for the "party" (and for

society as a whole) in the long run, but which would not be followed by any

finitely lived individual candidate.

    There are at least two ways of interpreting these transfers.    The first

one is to simply view them as payments in services of various sorts which the

president receives if she is well-behaved while in office. These payments may

originate from the constituencies which supported her in the past and now are




                                       24
supporting her successor(s).   They can be enjoyed by the president during her

tenure and/or after her retirement.

    Alternatively, one may view the party as the institutional mechanism which

promotes and facilitates these utility enhancing transfers between its young

and old members.   The transfers would then be interpreted as "dues't which new

party members pay to the party (directly as cash contributions or indirectly

as services rendered the party) in exchange for the party's support of their

attempts to gain office.   Thus, "young numbers" of the "party" ork hard for

it, in exchange for the possibility of holding high ranking positions (and the

perquisites which attend those positions) later in life, when new young

members will work hard for them.




                                      25
                                    Appendix



    To complete our discussion of the model, we consider the case where      a

president   can serve more than a single term in office. The model developed in

the text, and the results presented there can accomodate this case by assuming

that a potential presidential candidate must pay an entry fee to the party in

order to become the party's candidate.         If the candidate wins, and is

subsequently re-elected to a second term, the party returns the entry fee at

the completion of the second term.      Under the simplifying assumption that

incumbent presidents run for re-election on the same platform they were

originally elected on, all of the results developed in the text go through for

the multi-term case.      In this appendix, we indicate how the analysis in

proposition 3.2 must be nodified when the model is changed to allow the

president to serve more than a single term in office.

    Under the assumption that the incumbent always runs for re-election on the

same platform she was first elected on, we obtain the same optimization

problems (and the same solutions) as those given by (3.6) and (3.7) when the

candidates are required to pay an entry fee to the party in order to run for

office (except, possibly, for the timing of when the fee is paid).   Under the

assumption that incumbents always run for re-election on the platform they

were first elected on, only the optimization of an incumbent president in her

first term is relevant to determining the optimal time-consistent policy.   If

the entry fee is paid during the president's first term in office, then the

relevant optimization problems are precisely (3.6) and (3.7).     If the entry

fee must be paid in the period during which the candidate first runs for

office, then the problem becomes




                                       26
(3.6')   max



Problem (3.7) is modified similarly.     In this case, however, we must append

the following condition.      Denote the objective function in the above

maximization by EU(x,y;h) and let EtJ(,y) be the expected utility of the

incumbent when she simply adopts her most preferred policy b. Then we

require that



         qEU(x,y;h)-h(x)   qEU(xb,y)



at the optimal policy with transfer. In rds, this constraint requires that

when the candidate pays the entry fee, the discounted expected utility of

running for office is at least as great as that of not paying the entry fee

and simply adopting b. Of course, if the party is in a position to enforce

the payment of the entry fee, then this constraint is irrelevant.        This

situation might occur, for example, when the parties can successfully block

independent candidacies and hence, can force candidates to run within party

rules. In the context of U.S. presidential politics, such strictures do seem

to apply, and we may interpret the entry fee as the costs imposed on

candidates by the system of choosing candidates by state primaries.




                                       27
                                    Footnotes




1.   The result of policy convergence in a two party system is more general

than the udian 'voter     theorem, and it holds both in ndels with perfect or
imperfect information about voters' preferences (as long as the two candidates

have the same information set). For non-median voter convergence results, see

Hinich [1977], Coughlin-Nitzan [1981], Ledyard [1984], Coughlin [1984]. For a

general treatment of spatial competition models, see Hinich-Ledyard-Ordeshook

[1972, 1973], McKelvey [1975], and the literature cited therein.



2. This result holds if the voters are fully informed about the objective

functions of the two parties.     The analysis is more complex in the case of

asymmetric information.     (See Alesina and Cukierman [1987].) Note also that

if there are multiple one-shot Nash equilibria, recent work by Benoit and

Krishna [1985] and Friedman [1985] shows that it may be possible to sustain

partial cooperation in a finite-horizon game without the kinds of transfers we

propose here.



                                                                           For
3.   Analogous considerations would hold for other countries as well.
example, the English economy may have suffered because of the significant

differences in the economic policies of the Labour Party and the Conservative

Party.



4. Lott-Reed [1987] analyze a last-period problem for politicians but in a

different context.      In particular, they do not consider the overlapping




                                       28
sequence of candidates.



5. Extensions of the model allowing for different k's and q's are
coinputationally cunibersome and add very little to the basic results.



6. Ledyard [1984] derives a function analogous to (1.3) from the xicertainty

about costs of voting. A representation of voting behavior analogous to (1.3)

is also postulated by Wittman [1983], Calvert [1985], Alesina [1987a], and

Chapell-Keech [1986]



7.    We are grateful to Costas Azariadis for pointing out this possibility to

us.




8. Proof of this assertion is available from the authors




                                      29
                                 References



Alesina, Alberto, (1987a), "Credibility and Policy Convergence in a Two-Party

    System with Rational Voters", unpublished manuscript.

Alesina, Alberto, (l987b), "Macroeconomic Policy in a Two-Party System as a

   Repeated Game", Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Alesina, Alberto and Alex Cukierman, (1987), "Asymmetric Information and

    Policy Convergence in a Two-Party System", in preparation.

Alesina, Alberto and Jeffrey Sachs, (1988), "Political Parties and the

    Business Cycle in the United States, 1968-1986", Journal of Money, Credit

    and Banking, forthcoming.

Alesina, Alberto and Guido Tabellini, (1987), "Credibility and Politics",

    unpublished manuscript.

Barro, Robert, (1974), "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?", Journal   of
    Political Economy, 62, 1035-1118.

Benoit, Jean-Pierre, and Vijay Krishna, (1985), "Finitely Repeated Games",

    Econometrica, 53, 905-923.

Calvert, Randall, (1985), "Robustness of the Multi-dimensional Voting Model;

    Candidate Motivations, Uncertainty and Convergence", American Journal of

    Political Science, vol. XXIX, 69-95.

Chapell, Henry and William Keech, (1986), "Policy Motivation and Party

    Differences in a Dynamic Spatial Model of Party Competition", American

    Political Science Review, 79, 10-27.

Coughlin, Peter and Samuel Nitzan (1981), "Directional and Local Equilibria

    with Probabilistic Voting", Journal of Economic Theory, 24, 226-239.

Cremer, Jacques, (1986), "Cooperation in On-going Organizations", Quarterly




                                        30
    Journal of Economics, vol. 101, 33-50.

Downs, Anthony, (1957), An Economic Theory of Democracy, Harper, New York.

Friedman, James, (1985), "Cooperative Equilibria in Finite Horizon

    Non-cooperative Supergames", Journal     of   Economic Theory, 35, 330-358.

Hibbs, Douglas (1987), "The American Political Economy: Electoral Policy and

    Macroeconomics in Contemporary America", Cambridge, Ma., Harvard

    University Press, forthcoming.

Hinich, Melvin, (1977), "Equilibrium in Spatial Voting: The Median Voter

    Result is an Artifact", Journal of Economic Theory, 16, 208-219.

Hinich, Melvin, John Ledyard and Peter Ordeshook, (1973), "A Theory of

    Electoral Equilibrium: A Spatial Analysis Based on the Theory of Games",

    Journal of Politics, 35, 134-193.

Hinich, Melvin, John Ledyard, and Peter Ordeshook, (1972), "Non-voting and the

    Existence of Equilibrium Under Majority Rule", Journal of Economic Theory,

    14, 144-153.

Kotlikoff, Lawrence, Torsten Persson, and Lars Svensson, (1986), "Laws as

    Assets", unpublished manuscript.

Ledyard, John, (1984), "The Pure Theory of Large Two-Candidate Elections",

    Public Choice, 7-41, August.

Lott, John R. and W. Robert Reed, (1987), "Shirking and Sorting in a Political

    Market with Finite-Lived Politicians", mimeo.

McKelvey, Richard, (1975), "Policy Related Voting and Electoral Equilibrium",

    Econometrica, 43, 815-863.

Wittman,Donald, (1977), "Candidates with Policy Preferences: A Dynamic

    Model", Journal of Economic Theory, vol. XIV, 180-189, February.

Wittnian, Donald, (1983), "Candidate Motivation: A Synthesis of Alternatives",




                                        31
American Political Science Review, vol. LXXVI, 142-157.




                                  32
