                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE IMPACT OF ALCOHOL ON MENTAL HEALTH, PHYSICAL FITNESS, AND
                           JOB PERFORMANCE

                                        Marigee Bacolod
                                        Jesse M. Cunha
                                         Yu-Chu Shen

                                      Working Paper 23542
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23542


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2017




We thank Jeremy Arkes for helpful comments. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the Departments of the Navy or Defense, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Marigee Bacolod, Jesse M. Cunha, and Yu-Chu Shen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Alcohol on Mental Health, Physical Fitness, and Job Performance
Marigee Bacolod, Jesse M. Cunha, and Yu-Chu Shen
NBER Working Paper No. 23542
June 2017
JEL No. I1,I12

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the impact of legal access to alcohol on a range of behavioral and physical outcomes of
U.S. Army soldiers in a regression discontinuity design. The wealth of novel data collected by the
military on cognitive ability, psychological health, and family history allows us to explore how
impacts vary with risk factors for alcohol consumption. Overall, we observe a large and
significant increase in drinking after the 21st birthday, but the increases are largest amongst those
who were depressed, had a family history of mental health problems, had better coping ability,
and had higher cognitive ability. Despite the large increase in consumption, we do not find any
meaningful impacts of legal access to alcohol - overall or in any sub-group - on any of the short-
term outcomes we observe, including suicidal tendencies, depression, tobacco use, physical
fitness, psychological health, deployability, smoking, and job-related infractions.
Acknowledging the limitations for extrapolation out of sample, we discuss the policy implications
of our results.

Marigee Bacolod                                      Yu-Chu Shen
Graduate School of Business and Public Policy        Graduate School of Business and Public Policy
Naval Postgraduate School                            Naval Postgraduate School
Monterey CA 93943                                    555 Dyer Road
mbacolod@nps.edu                                     Monterey, CA 93943
                                                     and NBER
Jesse M. Cunha                                       yshen@nps.edu
Naval Postgraduate School
Graduate School of Business
and Public Policy
555 Dyer Rd
Monterey, CA 93943
jcunha@nps.edu
1. Introduction
    Alcohol is a pervasive part of our society, and its consumption can have widespread conse-
quences. Plausible theoretical arguments can link alcohol to numerous adverse outcomes, such as
death, crime, sexual activity, poor educational performance, unemployment, low job productivity,
the use of related vices such as drugs and tobacco, poor inter- and intra-personal relationships,
and mental and physical health problems. Importantly, the impacts of alcohol consumption are
likely to vary across individuals. For example, cognitive ability or mental health may aid or hinder
individuals in mitigating the effects of alcohol on judgement and choices.
    Despite clear theoretical pathways, it is difficult to estimate causal relationships empirically be-
cause of either unobserved joint factors that determine both drinking and adverse outcomes (e.g.,
lack of self-control may precipitate both alcohol consumption and poor education outcomes) or
reverse causality (e.g., poor mental health can induce one to consume alcohol). The most credible
empirical estimates to date of the impacts of alcohol consumption come from regression disconti-
nuity (RD) designs around the U.S. Minimum Legal Drinking Age (MLDA) of 21 years. The RD
approach compares individuals just before and after their 21st birthday, and relies on the assump-
tion that there are no other factors influencing alcohol consumption or outcomes of interest at this
threshold. RD estimates of the MLDA have shown that legal access to alcohol increases mortality
(Carpenter and Dobkin, 2009), lowers academic performance (Carrell, Hoekstra and West, 2011;
Lindo, Swensen and Waddell, 2013), increases crime (Carpenter and Dobkin, 2015), and increases
the use of marijuana and tobacco (Dee, 1999; Crost and Guerrero, 2012), amongst others.
    In this paper, we expand the literature in two ways, using several novel datasets on U.S. Army
soldiers. First, we examine outcomes that have not yet been studied in the context of the MLDA,
including suicidal tendencies, psychological health, physical fitness, job-related infractions, and
fitness for combat deployment. Second, we explore heterogeneity in the impacts of alcohol in
terms of potential risk factors, including self-control, depression, coping ability, cognitive ability,
and a family history of mental health problems or substance abuse.
    Our population is all enlisted U.S. Army soldiers between 2009 and 2015.1 This is the only
population we are aware of that contains such a rich panel of data on alcohol consumption and men-
tal, behavioral, and physical outcomes. Outcomes from soldiers are important in their own right:
there are 1.3 million active duty military members who are tasked with safeguarding our country,
and the U.S. military is heavily involved in alcohol abuse prevention (Leskin, 2015). Heavy drink-
   1 Data is available for officers; however, only a handful of officers turn 21 years old while on active duty, as a
four-year college degree is required to obtain an officer’s commission.


                                                         1
ing among service members has also been increasing since 2001 when the US entered its longest
armed conflict to-date (Bray and Hourani, 2007; Oster et al., 2012). The rising trend in drinking
and alcohol related problems is especially noticeable among those returning from deployment (Ja-
cobson et al., 2008; Shen, Arkes and Williams, 2012; Bray, Brown and Williams, 2013), as many
resort to alcohol as a way to cope with combat trauma.
   Our data are drawn from multiple administrative databases. The Periodic Health Assessment
(PHA) is a required, annual clinical health assessment which contains self-reports of alcohol and
tobacco use, depressive symptoms, and suicidal thoughts, as well as the information that deter-
mines fitness for military deployment, a measure of job performance; the Global Assessment Tool
(GAT) is an annual, self-administered and self-diagnostic psychometric assessment, identifies as-
pects of soldier’s underlying psychological traits; annual physical fitness tests include scores for
the number of push-ups and sit-ups completed at one time and the time taken to run two miles; and
judicial and non-judicial punishments are recorded for any breach of military conduct or law.
   Our first finding is that poor psychological health is correlated with alcohol consumption, both
below and above 21 years of age. Second, there is a large discontinuous increase in alcohol con-
sumption at age 21, both in the likelihood of drinking (a 75% increase) and the amount of drinking
in any one sitting (increasing from about a third of a drink to an average of 2 drinks per day). In
addition, those soldiers who were depressed at the baseline or have family history of mental health
problems have larger change in their drinking behavior relative to all other soldiers. On the other
hand, soldiers with better coping ability and those in the top quartile of AFQT distribution also
have larger responses in drinking behavior when they turn 21. Finally, despite the increase in al-
cohol consumption, we do not observe any meaningful impacts on any of the short-term outcomes
we observe, including suicidal tendencies, depression, tobacco use, physical fitness, psychological
health, deployability, and job-related infractions. This null finding is precisely estimated, and is
true over the entire population and when we stratify by soldiers’ baseline psychological traits.
   In sum, our findings suggest that while gaining legal access to alcohol increases overall drink-
ing behavior among U.S. soldiers, it did not have immediate harmful consequences on the observ-
able dimensions of soldier health, fitness, and job performance. However, this conclusion must
be qualified by the limitations of our data and empirical setting. First, as with any RD around the
MLDA, we are only able to look at the subset of individuals around their 21st birthday. While al-
cohol consumption has been shown in laboratory settings to compromise physical and motor skills
(Vogel-Sprott, 1979; Fogarty and Vogel-Sprott, 2002), our study population are young soldiers at
or near their physical prime. It is thus unclear whether our results are externally valid to subjects


                                                 2
who are younger or older than this sample. Second, the RD research design precludes us from
looking at the long-term impact of alcohol consumption and from examining outcomes that may
take time to manifest. Finally, despite our wealth of data, there are other important short-term
outcomes that we do not observe, such as death, hospitalizations, and accidents. Nonetheless, our
study adds important outcomes to a growing body of work of credible estimates of the effects of
alcohol consumption, and demonstrates the importance of recognizing the variation in risk factors
for alcohol consumption across the population.
      The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section describes our data and the setting
of our sample. Section 3 discusses our empirical methods in detail, while Section 4 presents the
main results. Finally, Section 5 concludes.


2. Data and Sample
2.1    Data
      Our population is U.S. Army enlisted soldiers, and our data come from personnel records
and routine health assessments that are collected on all enlisted soldiers. The Master Personnel
File identifies the set of soldiers of an age close to their 21st birthday and contains their demo-
graphic information such as birthdate, gender, race/ethnicity, the Armed Forces Qualifying Test
(AFQT) score, and educational attainment. We merge the Master Personnel File to several other
person-level databases which contain additional information on mental, physical, and behavioral
outcomes.
      Periodic Health Assessment. The Periodic Health Assessment (PHA) is a required annual
assessment that is used primarily to screen for health problems and determine if a solider is fit for
a combat deployment. Some of the data in the PHA is measured by a clinician, and some is self-
reported by the service member. The clinically measured data include height, weight, vision and
hearing ability, blood pressure, and cholesterol level. The self-reported data come from questions
about current and past health symptoms and diseases, alcohol and tobacco use, behavioral and
mental health history, and family history of mental health problems and chemical dependency.
      Soldiers are informed that the elements of the PHA will not be shared with their superiors, and
only used to assess their fitness for deployment. Nonetheless, it is possible that soldiers are not
truthful with the self-reported PHA data, as they know that the PHA is used to determine eligibility
for deployment, and deployability is a major determinant of promotion and career advancement.
Soldiers wishing to appear mentally healthy may shade mental health issues or alcohol use, while
soldiers wishing to not be deployed may fabricate these conditions.


                                                   3
      Global Assessment Tool The Global Assessment Tool (GAT) is a self-evaluation tool that was
developed by the Army in 2009 as part of its efforts to improve soldiers’ psychological resiliency.
All soldiers are required to take the assessment yearly through an online module. They are told
explicitly that their responses are confidential and will not be seen by their superiors. In contrast
to the PHA, there is less reason to believe that soldiers would not be truthful on the GAT as there
is not a direct link between responses and one’s career.
      The GAT contains 105 questions, either binary responses or on five- or 10-point scales, that are
intended to assess a soldier’s psychological health in 14 categories: depression, catastrophizing,
positive affect, adaptability, coping ability, optimism, character, engagement in the workplace,
friendship, loneliness, organizational trust, family satisfaction, family support, and spirituality.
For full details of the GAT questionnaire see Lester et al. (2011).
      Other Administrative Databases Physical fitness data come from the Digital Training Man-
agement System (DTMS), and include scores from the required annual assessments of three events:
push-ups, sit-ups, and a 2-mile run. Lastly, we obtain records of all infractions recorded in a sol-
dier’s official file from the interactive Electronic Records of Management System (iPERMS). This
data contains both judicial proceedings (i.e., court martial) as well as minor breaches of military
conduct.

2.2    Outcomes
      Next we describe the outcome measures that are drawn from these various databases. We ex-
amine the impacts of legal access to alcohol on both soldiers’ drinking behavior and outcomes that
are known to be correlated with alcohol consumption or could potentially be influenced by alco-
hol consumption. Theoretical mechanisms through which alcohol could influence these outcomes
include compromised judgment and impaired physical and/or motor skills.
      Alcohol consumption. We define four measures of alcohol consumption from questions on
the PHA. The first question is: How often do you have a drink containing alcohol?, to which the
soldier can respond: “never”, “monthly or less”, “2-4 times a month”, “2-3 times a week”, or “4 or
more times a week.” From this, we define an indicator for whether a person drinks alcohol. Given
the vagueness of the text, it is unclear whether this question is asking about whether a person has
ever drank alcohol, or whether they have drank alcohol recently. It is worth noting that among our
under-21 sample, close to 13% of the soldiers had consumed alcohol. We also calculate from this
question the proportion of days in which a person drinks, constructing the measure logically from
responses. For example, those who reported drinking “monthly or less” are assigned a value of
1/30, those who report “2-4 times a month” are assigned 3/30, and so forth.

                                                   4
    If the answer to the first question is anything other than “never”, the respondent proceeds to
answer about the intensity of their drinking behavior. They were next asked How many drinks
containing alcohol do you have on a typical day when you are drinking? (1-2, 3-4, 5-6, 7-9, or
10+), from which we define a linear variable of the number of drinks on a typical drinking day,
imputing the midpoint of the category ranges and coding ”10+” as 10 drinks. Finally, respondents
were asked: How often do you have six or more drinks on one occasion? (never, less than monthly,
monthly, weekly, or daily), from which we define the proportion of “binge” drinking days in a
similar manner to the proportion of drinking days.
    Tobacco use. Past studies have documented that alcohol use and tobacco use have common risk
factors (Verdejo-Garcı́a, Lawrence and Clark, 2008). Using responses from the PHA, we define
three measures of smoking on both the extensive and intensive margins. On the extensive margin,
soldiers were asked Do you use any kind of tobacco products?; close to 30% of those under 21
years old reported they do. On the intensive margin, smokers were first asked about the number
of cigarettes smoked, and we define a moderate or heavy smoker as 11 or more cigarettes per day
(results are robust to the use of the continuous number of cigarettes smoked). They were then asked
three questions about their level of nicotine dependency that, along with the number of cigarettes
smoked per day, facilitates the calculation of the Fagerstrom score (Heatherton et al., 1991): How
soon after waking up do you smoke your first cigarettes; Do you find it difficult to refrain from
smoking in places where it is forbidden; Do you smoke more frequently in the morning; and Do
you smoke even if you are sick in bed most of the day. The Fagerstrom score ranges from 0 to 10,
and we classify those with a score of 5 or higher as having a moderate or high nicotine dependence
(results are robust to the use of the linear Fagerstrom score). Amongst smokers under 21 years old,
26% are moderate or heavy smokers, and 14% are classified as having a moderate or high nicotine
dependence.
    Depression and suicide ideation. Alcohol use been shown to be correlated with both major
depression and suicide ideation (Wang and Patten, 2001; Fergusson, Boden and Horwood, 2009;
LeardMann et al., 2013; Fuehrlein et al., 2016; Thompson and Swartout, 2017). However, there is
no evidence to date on the causal pathways at play. The PHA contains nine screening questions
for depression which ask about mood and behavior in the last two weeks. Following the Army’s
psychological health referral guideline, we define a soldier to be at risk of clinical depression if he
answered “more than half the days” or “nearly every day” to at least one of these nine questions.2
   2 The exact wording in the PHA is: Over the last two weeks, how often have you been bothered by any of the
following problems? (1) Little interest or pleasure in doing things? (2) Feeling down, depressed or hopeless? (3)
Trouble falling asleep or staying asleep, or sleeping too much, (4) Feeling tired or having little energy, (5) Poor


                                                        5
In our sample, 6.5% of soldiers under 21 were screened positive for depression. The PHA also
has one question concerning suicide ideation. We define the indicator self-harm thoughts if they
answer anything other than “never” to the question How often in the last 2 weeks were you bothered
by “thoughts that you would be better off dead, or of hurting yourself in some way.” Self-harm
thoughts are rare, with only 0.1% of soldiers in the under-21 sample defined as such.
    Fitness for deployment. A soldier is determined to be fit for deployment “to an austere envi-
ronment” if he has a PULHES score above the occupation-specific minimum. The PULHES is a
function of six factors: (P)hysical capacity or stamina; (U)pper extremities; (L)ower extremities;
(H)earing and ears; (E)yes, and (P)sychiatric stability. Approximately 93% of our under-21 sample
were deemed to be fit for deployment.
    Coping ability and self control. The GAT assesses two psychological traits, coping ability
and self-control, that may be influenced by alcohol consumption through disruptions in the brain’s
neurotransmitter balance (Verdejo-Garcı́a, Lawrence and Clark, 2008). We define self-control as
the answer to a single question from the GAT measured on a scale of 0-10: Think about how you
have acted in actual situations during the past four weeks. Select a number from 0 to 10 according
to how often you showed/used self control. We define coping ability as the sum of responses
from 8 questions as on the GAT, each with a score of 1 to 5: How well do the following statements
describe you–(1) For things I cannot change, I accept them and move on; (2) I control my emotions
by changing how I think about things; (3) When something stresses me out, I try to avoid it or not
think about it; (4) When something stresses me out, I try to solve the problem; (5) When bad
things happen, I try to see the positive sides; (6) I usually keep my emotions to myself; (7) When
something stresses me out, I have effective ways to deal with it; and (8) When I am feeling upset, I
keep my feelings to myself. We take the sum of responses from these 8 questions to form the coping
ability outcome, where a higher score reflects a better coping ability.
    Physical fitness. Laboratory settings have shown alcohol consumption can result in slower
movement and poorer coordination. Our next set of outcomes thus capture a soldiers’ physical fit-
ness. The PFT is a twice-yearly assessment of soldier’s muscular strength and physical endurance
consisting of three events: push-ups, sit-ups, and a 2-mile run. Each event is scored between 0 and
100, and a 60 is required in all events to pass. Passing scores are assigned by gender and age group
for the number of push-ups and pull-ups completed, and the time required for the 2-mile run. For
appetite or overeating, (6) Feeling bad about yourself - or that you are a failure or that you have let yourself or your
family down, (7) Trouble concentrating on things, such as reading the newspaper or watching television, (8) Moving
or speaking so slowly that other people could have noticed. Or the opposite - being so fidgety or restless that you have
been moving around a lot more than normal, (9) Thoughts that you would be better off dead, or of hurting yourself in
some way.

                                                           6
example, for a 21-year old male, the passing ranges are: 42-71 push-ups, 53-78 sit-ups, a 2-mile
run time between 15 minutes 54 seconds and 13 minutes. (For full details of the test, see Army
(2012).) We consider as outcomes the separate event scores as well as the aggregate score (sum
across all three events).
      Job-related infractions. Our final set of outcomes identify all recorded breaches of military
conduct or regulation. There is evidence from non-military populations that crime increases with
legal access to alcohol (Carpenter and Dobkin, 2011), with the plausible pathway being alcohol
impairing judgement. The job of a soldier is unique in that one is always subject to the the Uniform
Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) regardless of whether the soldier is on duty; thus, any breach of
the UCMJ can be considered a job-related infraction.
      The iPERMS database contains various levels of offenses varying in severity. We classify
these offense records into three categories, and consider offenses of each type separately, as well
as an aggregate measure of having committed any offense. A level 1 offense is a minor offense
known as a “letter of reprimand.” It is recorded by the soldier’s commanding officer for a broad
range of behaviors deemed unbecoming of a military service member, such as insubordination, an
initial report of sexual harassment, or disorderly conduct. These types of offenses do not result in
punishments, but the letter stays on the soldier’s personnel record and may affect future promotions
or assignments. A level 2 offense is when a soldier goes through proceedings under Article-15 of
the UCMJ. When a soldier commits an offense covered by the UCMJ, his commanding officer can
decide to process him under Article-15 or bring formal charges. Article-15 proceedings can result
in punishments (such as demotion, confinement, jail time for no more than 30 days, extra duties),
but do not result in a criminal record. Soldiers who undergo Article-15 proceedings do not go
through a formal adjudication process (although soldiers have the right to request a full military
legal trial). Finally, a level 3 offense is one which the commanding officer deems serious enough
to merit a full judicial hearing, known as military court martial. If convicted under a court martial,
the soldier will have a criminal record and receive punishments that range from demotion, fines,
jail time or dishonorable discharge (which affect his post-military benefits). One thing to keep in
mind is that while we can classify types of offenses, our data does not indicate the nature of any
offense. Offenses are relatively rare, with only 3.4% of the under-21 sample having at least one
offense.

2.3    Sample Selection
      Using a window of 6 months above and below the 21st birthday, we first identify all soldiers
in the Master Personnel File who were aged 20.5 to 21.5 at anytime between 2009 and 2015.

                                                  7
We exclude soldiers stationed either outside the U.S. and or on bases within 50 miles of the U.S.
borders with Mexico and Canada, as commanders at these locations have the discretion to adopt
an MLDA other than 21 years old. We also exclude any soldiers who do not have a GAT test
before their 21st birthday. Our working sample size is 29,329 soldiers, but some outcomes are
not observed for every soldier in the window around their 21st birthday. For instance, in the PHA
sample which we use for our main analysis, we only have 11,905 observations. In contrast we are
able to capture more soldiers in the PFT sample (n =28,998) since soldiers are required to take the
test two times a year.
    Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of the individuals in our analysis: the majority are male
(83%) and white (59.9%), virtually all have a High School diploma (a requirement for military
service), and the average AFQT score is the 56th percentile. We summarize the outcome variables
as we discuss our results below.


3. Methods
    We use a Regression Discontinuity (RD) design which exploits the discontinuity in legal access
to alcohol at age 21. Outcomes for individuals observed just prior to their 21st birthday serve as
the counterfactual for individuals observe just after their 21st birthday. Causal identification of the
impact of legal access to alcohol rests on the assumption that no other factors related to outcomes
of interest changed at this threshold other than alcohol access becoming legal, and also that there
is no systematic sorting of when the PHA, PFT, and GAT were taken.3
    Formally, for each person i, let Di = agei − 21 be the distance in days between the observation
of the outcome and the person’s 21st birthday, and Ti be an indicator of being over 21: Ti = 1{Di ≥
0}. Yi are outcomes of interest, such as measures of alcohol consumption and health measures, and
we estimate models of the following form:


                                        Yi = β0 + β1 Ti + g(Di ) + γXi + εi ,

where D = (D, D2 )0 and g(Di ) = α0 D + α1 T ∗ D. Thus, g(D) is a 2nd order polynomial of D in our
parametric specification, with interactions of the over 21 indicator with the quadratic function. β1
is the discrete change in Yi at the discontinuity. For variance reduction purposes, we also include
X, a set of control variables in some of our specifications. Standard errors are adjusted to allow for
   3 While  a subset of soldiers could have been drinking before turning age 21, and this early drinking behavior could
have affected their GAT score, we are exploiting variation from increased alcohol access at age 21. As such, the
interpretation of the treatment effect is conditional on their GAT score prior to age 21 and is the effect of the marginal
increase of access to alcohol at age 21.


                                                            8
an arbitrary correlation in errors at the level of D, the distance to age 21, to account for potential
misspecification as suggested by Lee and Card (2008).
      While in principle we could use nonparametric local linear regression or other techniques, the
underlying data (in particular, of age) are not actually continuous but rather discrete. Following
Lee and Card (2008), we then assess the adequacy of our parametric representation by comparing
our model with a non-parametric specification that includes a full set of indicators for each value
of D (that is, for each day away from the 21st birthday):


                                      Yi = ∑ αd Zdi + γXi + µi ,
                                            d

where Zd is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the soldier i’s age is equal to d, and 0 otherwise. The
coefficients αd are represented as open circles in the figures we discuss below, while the quadratic
polynomial fit of the above equation are represented as connected lines/curves. These plots al-
low for a simple “eyeball” test of the extent to which our parametric formulation is a reasonable
representation of the data.
      To confirm our visual examination with a more formal test, we calculate a goodness of fit
statistic as developed in Lee and Card (2008) and as summarized in Lee and Lemieux (2010),

                                        (ESSr − ESSur )/(J − K)
                                   G=                           ,
                                           ESSUR /(N − J)
where ESSr is the estimated sum of squares of the restricted (quadratic) model while ESSur is the
estimated sum of squares of the unrestricted (fully-saturated) model. G follows a F(J − K, N − J)
distribution where J is the number of values taken by D and K is the number of parameters in the
restricted model. With this F- statistic we can test the null hypothesis that the polynomial fit is as
good or has as much explanatory power as the fully flexible model. In our models, the F- statistics
indicate that the restricted and unrestricted models have similar goodness of fits.

3.1    Heterogeneity Analysis
      A novel contribution of our analysis is that we are able to estimate the heterogeneous impacts
of the MLDA in terms of risk factors for alcohol consumption. We explore the following five
dimensions of heterogeneity, using soldier’s score on that dimension before they turned 21 years
old.
      Depression, Self-control, and Coping Ability. In our main analysis, we consider depression,
self-control, and coping ability as outcomes that may be be affected by alcohol use; however, the
direction of causality could run the other way, whereby these psychological attributes are the risk

                                                  9
factors leading to drinking (Verdejo-Garcı́a, Lawrence and Clark, 2008).
    Self-control and coping ability are already described in section 2.2 and come from the GAT.
For depression, we use screening questions from the PHA as our outcome, but we stratify soldiers
based on their GAT depression scale for the heterogeneity analysis. While there is overlap in the
questions, the PHA follows clinical screening questions more closely and contains more details.
In contrast, the GAT depression scale is based on fewer questions and is intended to capture a
soldier’s inherent tendencies toward being depressed. Specifically, GAT measures depression using
5 questions. Respondents were asked to rate on a 5-point scale (from “not at all” to “every day”)
how often in the past four weeks they were bothered by any of the problems listed. Examples of
the problems include “Feeling down, depressed or hopeless,” and “Feeling very angry.” 4 We take
the sum of scales across all responses to form the baseline depression scale.
    Armed Forces Qualifying Test percentile. The AFQT percentile is computed based on test
scores from the following aptitude tests: arithmetic reasoning, mathematics knowledge, paragraph
comprehension, and word knowledge. The Army uses results from these tests to assign soldiers
to suitable military occupation. It is normalized so the AFQT scores are reported as percentiles
between 1 and 99. The U.S. Army requires a minimum score of 31 on the AFQT for a person to
be enlisted. A score below 31 would require a waiver. As Table 1 shows, the average AFQT score
in our sample is 56.
    Family history of mental health problems and/or chemical dependency. On the PHA, a
soldier was asked to identify whether their parents, grandparent, and/or siblings had mental health
problems or chemical dependencies.5 We classify soldiers into those with and without any family
history of mental health or chemical dependency, and approximately 13% of our sample reported
having any family history. Our results are robust to looking separately at histories of mental health
problems and chemical dependencies, as well as using the number of family members with a
reported condition.
   4 The  complete questions in the GAT are: (1) Feeling down, depressed or hopeless, (2) Feeling tired or having little
energy, (3) Poor appetite or overeating, (4) Feeling very angry, (5) Trouble concentrating on things, such as reading
the newspaper or watching television.
    5 Mental health problems include any of the following disorders: Generalized anxiety disorder, Depression, Bipolar

disease, Schizophrenia, Obsessive compulsive disorder, Attention deficit disorder, Split personality disorder, Person-
ality disorder, Adjustment disorder, Eating disorder, Tourette syndrome, Agoraphobia, Autism, Seasonal affective
disorder, Suicide, Multiple disorders. Chemical dependency includes any of the following categories: alcohol, co-
caine/crack, heroin, marijuana, methamphetamine, narcotics, glue/solvents, LSD, benzodiazepines, Ecstasy, multiple
dependency, other chemical dependency.




                                                          10
4. Results
4.1     The impact of MLDA on alcohol consumption
      We first examine the impact of legal access to alcohol on self-reported alcohol consumption.
Figure 2 presents four different measures of alcohol consumption amongst soldiers in the 180 days
before and after their 21st birthday. A visual comparison of the parametric estimates and the daily
means suggest that the quadratic parameterization fits the data reasonably well. We confirm this
with the F−statistic described above, which tests the null hypothesis that the polynomial model
has as much explanatory power as the fully flexible (non-parametric) model.
      The top left panel of Figure 2 shows that approximately 13% of soldiers report having drank
any alcohol prior to their 21st birthday. The bottom left panel shows that soldiers consume very
little prior to turning age 21, on average about a third of a drink (this measure includes those who
do not drink as drinking 0 drinks). The top right and bottom right panels of Figure 2 show that
amongst those who drink at all, the proportion of drinking days is very low and the proportion of
binge drinking days (having six or more drinks on one occasion) is even lower.
      For the first two months after the 21st birthday, there is a clear rising propensity in the intensive
and extensive margins of alcohol consumption, which then plateau at new higher levels. About
70% of soldiers report having ever drank alcohol by the 2nd month after their 21st birthday, and
the number of drinks on a typical drinking day rises to about 2. The proportion of drinking days
rises to about 10%, and while the proportion of binge drinking days also rises it is still low, at about
0.02%. This ramp-up after the 21st birthday is consistent with the fact that soldiers must wait until
they are off-duty before they can purchase alcohol and drink – depending on one’s occupation or
phase of training, this freedom to drink may be delayed by weeks or months.
      Table 2 confirms the visual impacts seen in Figure 2, although the point estimates are muted as
our regression model does not distinguish between the post-birthday ramp-up in drinking and the
eventual plateau. For example, the RD point estimate for drinking at all is 9.5 percentage points,
which is an increase of 74.8% (=0.095/0.127) even though 2 months after the 21st birthday the
increase over the pre-21 rate is over 5-fold (˜13% to ˜70%).
      It is worth noting that these estimates of the impact of the MLDA on alcohol consumption
are slightly larger than those found amongst both the U.S. population as a whole (a 6 percentage
point increase found in Carpenter and Dobkin (2009) using the National Health Interview Survey)
and the U.S. college student population (a 6.5 percentage point increase found in Lindo, Swensen
and Waddell (2013) using the NLSY 97). The pre-21 alcohol consumption we observe amongst



                                                     11
soldiers is also lower than has been reported in the civilian population. These low rates could be
reflecting under-age soldiers’ unwillingness to report alcohol use: soldiers may not know, or not
believe, that the PHA is not shared with their direct superiors. However, young soldiers generally
live on bases with limited access to alcohol and face strict penalties for drinking under the legal
age, supporting the validity of these low rates. That alcohol consumption slopes upward in the next
60 days after turning 21, as opposed to a discontinuous change at exactly 21, suggests that access
to alcohol is driving this change in alcohol behavior, further validating our research design.

4.2     The impact of MLDA on mental health, physical fitness, and job performance
      Figure 3 presents visual evidence of the change in selected outcomes around the 21st birthday.
As with the alcohol consumption measures, the quadratic parametric specifications fit the data
reasonably well (this is also confirmed by the F- statistics described above). Table 2 contains RD
estimates of all of our outcomes of interest.
      By and large, we observe no systematic differences in any of the outcomes we study for sol-
diers before and after the 21st birthday. That is, virtually all of these RD estimates are small in
magnitude, precisely estimated (standard errors are small, partially stemming from the large sam-
ple sizes), and statistically indistinguishable from zero.6 For instance, in the PHA sample, 29.7%
of the soldiers reported being a smoker just before they turned 21. The estimated impact of turning
age 21 is to increase the prevalence of smoking by 2.2 percentage points, but this estimate is not
statistically distinguishable from 0. Our finding on smoking is consistent with Yörük and Yörük
(2011) who show that the MLDA has a small and insignificant impact on cigarette (and marijuana)
use.7
      That our estimates of the impacts of MLDA are indistinguishable from zero are also not being
driven by the baseline mean. For instance, 93.3% of soldiers are classified as “Fit for deployment”
prior to turning 21. The RD estimate of turning 21 is to lower this percentage by 0.8 percentage
points, but then again the estimate is not statistically different from zero. We do find that the
impact of the MLDA on job-related infractions (“Any offense”) is significant at the 5 percent
level (and is driven by level 1 offenses), but is extremely small in magnitude and economically
insignificant. This is in part due to the low-frequency nature of this event, which is why we present
the RD in Figure 3 aggregated to the weekly level. In addition, Appendix Table 4 shows that
     6 With the large number of outcomes we consider, one may be concerned about issues of multiple inference; how-

ever, common adjustments will tend to increase p-values of hypothesis tests, further supporting our general finding of
no impacts of the MLDA on these outcomes (Savin, 1980).
     7 The military has a ”Zero Tolerance” policy on the use of illicit drugs, the consequence for which is expulsion

from service (Bachman et al., 1999); it is therefore not surprising that the PHA does not ask about marijuana or other
illicit drug use.

                                                         12
the significant estimate is purely an artifact of the functional form rather than a true decline in
job-related infractions post-21.

4.3     Heterogeneity of the alcohol access effect by risk factors
      The null results we described in the previous section might mask potential negative impacts
of alcohol access experienced by certain segments of the population. Next, we analyze the extent
to which soldiers’ baseline psychological and cognitive profiles, as measured by the five traits
described in section 3.1, might act as mediating factors in the impact of alcohol consumption on
behavioral outcomes.
      In practice, we split our sample into the top quartile, interquartile range, and the bottom quartile
for coping ability, depression, self control, and AFQT score, and into those with and without a
family history of substance use/mental health problems. We then estimate the RD model separately
for each group. In addition, the sample size does not distribute exactly as 25%, 50%, and 25%
across the three quartile ranges, due to the discrete nature of the scores. However, all results are
robust to other parameterizations of these variables.
      Figures 4–8 show that there is substantial differences in the pre-21 means of drinking and the
other outcomes by the five dimensions of heterogeneity we study. For example, Figure 4 shows
that over 15% of those whose self-control score is in the bottom quartile drinks alcohol before they
turn 21, compared to only 10% from the top quartile. Those in the bottom quartile are also more
likely to screen positive for depression (11% in the bottom quartile versus 5% in the top quartile),
to have thoughts of self harm (0.9% versus 0.4%) and to commit offenses (2 per 10,000 soldiers
on a given day in the bottom quartile versus 1.3 in the top quartile). We observe similar patterns
when we examine pre-21 means of the outcomes by the distribution of coping ability (Figure 5)
and of baseline depression (Figure 6).
      Differences in pre-21 outcomes are particularly noticeable between soldiers with and without a
family history of mental health problems or chemical dependencies. In particular, Figure 8 shows
that, before soldiers turned 21, those with a family history are more than 3 times more likely to
be screened positive for depression (5% among those without family history versus 18% among
those with family history of mental health problems of chemical dependency), more than 3 times
more likely to have suicidal thoughts (0.5% versus 1.7%) and to commit an offense (0.6 per 10,000
soldier days versus 2).
      Along the AFQT dimension (Figure 7), those who are in the top quartile of the AFQT distribu-
tion are more likely to be drinking alcohol before turning 21 than those in the bottom quartile (11%
among bottom quartile versus 14% among top quartile). But those in the bottom quartile of AFQT

                                                    13
distribution are a bit more likely to have suicidal thoughts (1.1% versus 0.8%) or commit offense
(1.6 per 10,000 soldier on a given day versus 1.1). One thing to note is that across all 5 traits, we
generally do not see differences in physical outcomes (total fitness score and fit for deployment)
by the distribution of the trait.
    These patterns are generally consistent with the descriptive findings in Marsden (2014), which
uses data from select years between 1980 to 2008 of the Department of Defense Surveys of Health
Related Behaviors Among Active Duty Military Personnel. For instance, in a multivariate logit
adjusting for demographics and other factors, they find that prevalence of suicide ideation is sig-
nificantly related to depression symptoms and avoidance coping. Marsden (2014) also find heavy
drinking is not significantly related to active coping.
    Table 3 report estimates of the causal impact of legal access to alcohol on selected outcomes
(the remaining outcomes are reported in Appendix Table 5 for efficiency). Each column represents
a separate RD model for that sub-sample of soldiers. For example, when we categorize soldiers
by their baseline depression score, the RD estimates show that those who score in the bottom
quartile of depression have larger response to MLDA (probability of drinking goes up by 0.13,
p<0.01) than those in the top quartile (probability of drinking goes up by 0.05, p>0.10). We also
observe larger responses among those with family history of mental health or chemical dependency
problems (RD estimates are 0.08 versus 0.17, both p<0.05). Interestingly, those with better coping
ability have larger responses to MLDA than those in the bottom quartile of coping (0.12, p<0.05
versus 0.076, p>0.1); and those in the top quartile of AFQT distribution also have larger response
to MLDA than those in the bottom quartile (0.148 versus 0.088, p<0.05 for both).
    The stratified analysis on drinking outcomes suggest that MLDA mainly affects those with
better cognitive ability (better AFQT and coping skills)–soldiers who are likely to be workers
with better productivity to start with and are better equipped to cope with the stressful military
environment. As a result, we might not expect to see significant loss in worker job performance
when these soldiers gain legal access to alcohol.
    Indeed, when we examine the non-drinking outcomes, we find no significant negative or posi-
tive impacts of turning 21. However, part of the null finding might be due to the low frequency of
the outcomes. For example, the RD estimates for suicidal thoughts is 0.003 (i.e., 0.3 percentage
point increase off a base rate of 0.6%) for those without family history and 0.024 (i.e., 2.4 percent-
age point increase off a base rate of 2.3%) for those with family history of mental health problems
or chemical dependency. Even though the magnitude of the estimate is fairly large in the practical
sense, the standard errors are also very large due to the fact that very few soldiers reported having


                                                  14
suicidal thoughts.

4.4     Validity of the RD and robustness of main results
      One critical assumption for the RD to work in this context is that soldiers are not systematically
manipulating (sorting into) when they take the PHA, PFT, and GAT to either before or after their
21st birthday; and that alcohol consumption is indeed impacted upon gaining legal access after
one’s 21st birthday.
      For all practical purpose, there is no reason to believe that soldiers would purposefully choose
to take either assessment before or after turning 21, since soldiers do not reap any benefit whether
the assessments were taken before or after their birthday. Empirically, Figure 1 shows the distri-
bution of ages across all our samples when the tests were taken, and there does not appear to be
bunching before or after the 21st birthday. These figures suggest soldiers are not manipulating
when they take the PHA, GAT, and fitness test around their 21st birthday, thus verifying the first
assumption for RD validity. The results discussed in Section 4.1 clearly demonstrates that the
second assumption holds as well.
      To check whether our null findings are statistical artifacts of our modeling choices, Appendix
Tables 2, 3, and 4 report estimates of the impact of turning 21 on the PHA, PFT, GAT, and iPERMS
outcomes, respectively, across six different models: linear, quadratic, and cubic specifications of
g(D) with and without controls of X as discussed in the Methods section above. These tables
also report the F-statistic and the mean values of the outcomes. These tables verify (1) that the
quadratic model is a good representation of our data and (2) that the results are robust to the
inclusion or exclusion of the controls.
      In addition to verifying the robustness of our results to the inclusion of soldiers’ characteris-
tics, we can also test whether these characteristics themselves vary across the age 21 threshold.
Specifically, soldiers just under and over 21 should have baseline characteristics that are the same
on average. Figures 1 showed that soldiers are not selectively sorting when they take mental and
physical health and fitness assessments relative to their 21st birthday. This time we would like to
verify whether E(X|D) is continuous through their 21st birthday, at D = 0. For instance, one may
worry that high cognitive ability soldiers disproportionately take the assessments after their 21st
birthday. To the extent that soldiers’ cognitive ability independently affect outcomes, this factor
could in principle confound our estimates of the treatment effect of legal access to alcohol.
      Appendix Table 1 reports our results testing for smoothness in the observable characteristics
of soldiers across age 21. Across the 32 regressions we estimate (eight outcomes for each of the 4
databases), the discontinuity is not statistically distinguishable from zero at the 5% level in all cases

                                                   15
except for one. Note that similar to our analyses of multiple outcomes above, these critical values
are unadjusted for the problem of multiple comparisons, which can lead one to more rejections of
the null hypothesis when the null is in fact correct (Savin 1980).
   In the case that is significant at the 5% level, we find higher share of women taking the PHA
at just over age 21 by 5.47 percentage points (but the gender imbalance is not found in the other 3
samples). To the extent that these discontinuities are real, an increase in the share of women at 21
would lead us to understate the effects of MLDA on alcohol consumption at 21, since women on
average drink less than men. Given that we do not find significant negative effects of MLDA on
other behavioral outcomes, we are not concerned about the gender imbalance across age 21.


5. Conclusion
   In this paper, we estimate the impact of legal access to alcohol on a wide range of behavioral
and physical outcomes of young U.S. Army soldiers, and we explore whether these impacts vary
with risk factors for alcohol abuse.
   Using data on all soldiers between 2009 and 2015, we observe a large and significant increase
in drinking after the 21st birthday overall, and the increases are largest amongst those who were
depressed, had a family history of mental health problems, had better coping ability, and had
higher cognitive ability. Despite the large increase in consumption, we do not find any meaningful
impacts of legal access to alcohol - overall or in any sub-group - on any of the short-term outcomes
we observe, including suicidal tendencies, depression, tobacco use, physical fitness, psychological
health, deployability, smoking, and job-related infractions.
   How do our results add to the current knowledge of drinking behaviors in the military? Drink-
ing and use of tobacco products have long been part of the military culture (Oster et al., 2012).
Alcohol is even used by unit leaders as a way to build unit cohesion and reward the completion of
difficult tasks. As one USMC sergeant recounted in a New York Times Op-Ed of his experience,
beer consumption and underage drinking are common within the barracks even though alcohol is
prohibited inside the military compound (Brennan, 2012). Soldiers do know they will get punished
if they get caught drinking underage or drinking hard alcohol within the barracks. Thus, it makes
sense that using data from the military workplace, we find increases in alcohol have no meaning-
ful impact on soldiers’ physical and mental health and adverse behaviors, even as attaining legal
access increased their consumption.
   While the null findings on this set of short-term outcomes are encouraging from a public health
viewpoint, and perhaps suggest that soldiers are drinking responsibly, more information is needed


                                                 16
to understand the full impact of alcohol consumption amongst service members; thus, our results
need to be interpreted carefully if they are to be used to inform public policy. For one, it must be
recognized that there could be medium- and long-run consequences of drinking that manifest over
time and that we can not observe through this RD design on the MLDA. And, we do not observe
important short-term outcomes such as injury or death, which have been shown to increase with
legal access (Carpenter and Dobkin, 2009). Finally, while young soldiers are broadly representative
of the high-school educated population, the restricted and controlled environment of the military
invalidate the extrapolation of our results to the civilian population of 21 year olds.




                                                  17
References
Army, US. 2012. “FM 7-22 Army Physical Readiness Training.” Washington, DC: Headquarters,
  Department of the Army.

Bachman, Jerald G, Peter Freedman-Doan, Patrick M O’malley, Lloyd D Johnston, and
  David R Segal. 1999. “Changing patterns of drug use among US military recruits before and
  after enlistment.” American Journal of Public Health, 89(5): 672–677.

Bray, Robert M., and Laurel L. Hourani. 2007. “Substance use trends among active duty mili-
  tary personnel: findings from the United States Department of Defense Health Related Behavior
  Surveys, 1980–2005.” Addiction, 102(7): 1092–1101.

Bray, Robert M., Janice M. Brown, and Jason Williams. 2013. “Trends in Binge and Heavy
  Drinking, Alcohol-Related Problems, and Combat Exposure in the U.S. Military.” Substance
  Use & Misuse, 48(10): 799–810.

Brennan, Thomas James. 2012. “In the Military, the Drinking Can Start on Day 1.” New York
  Times.

Carpenter, Christopher, and Carlos Dobkin. 2009. “The effect of alcohol consumption on mor-
  tality: regression discontinuity evidence from the minimum drinking age.” American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics, 1(1): 164–182.

Carpenter, Christopher, and Carlos Dobkin. 2011. “The minimum legal drinking age and public
  health.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(2): 133–156.

Carpenter, Christopher, and Carlos Dobkin. 2015. “The minimum legal drinking age and
  crime.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(2): 521–524.

Carrell, Scott E, Mark Hoekstra, and James E West. 2011. “Does drinking impair college per-
  formance? Evidence from a regression discontinuity approach.” Journal of Public Economics,
  95(1): 54–62.

Crost, Benjamin, and Santiago Guerrero. 2012. “The effect of alcohol availability on marijuana
  use: Evidence from the minimum legal drinking age.” Journal of Health Economics, 31(1): 112–
  121.

Dee, Thomas S. 1999. “The complementarity of teen smoking and drinking.” Journal of Health
  Economics, 18(6): 769–793.

Fergusson, David M, Joseph M Boden, and L John Horwood. 2009. “Tests of causal links
  between alcohol abuse or dependence and major depression.” Archives of General Psychiatry,
  66(3): 260–266.

Fogarty, Jennifer N, and Muriel Vogel-Sprott. 2002. “Cognitive processes and motor skills differ
  in sensitivity to alcohol impairment.” Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 63(4): 404–411.




                                              18
Fuehrlein, Brian S, Natalie Mota, Albert J Arias, Louis A Trevisan, Lorig K Kachadourian,
  John H Krystal, Steven M Southwick, and Robert H Pietrzak. 2016. “The burden of alco-
  hol use disorders in US military veterans: results from the National Health and Resilience in
  Veterans Study.” Addiction, 111(10): 1786–1794.

Heatherton, Todd F, Lynn T Kozlowski, Richard C Frecker, and Karl-Olov Fagerstrom. 1991.
 “The Fagerström test for nicotine dependence: a revision of the Fagerstrom Tolerance Question-
 naire.” British Journal of Addiction, 86(9): 1119–1127.

Jacobson, Isabel G, Margaret AK Ryan, Tomoko I Hooper, Tyler C Smith, Paul J Amoroso,
  Edward J Boyko, Gary D Gackstetter, Timothy S Wells, and Nicole S Bell. 2008. “Alco-
  hol use and alcohol-related problems before and after military combat deployment.” JAMA,
  300(6): 663–675.

LeardMann, Cynthia A, Teresa M Powell, Tyler C Smith, Michael R Bell, Besa Smith, Ed-
  ward J Boyko, Tomoko I Hooper, Gary D Gackstetter, Mark Ghamsary, and Charles W
  Hoge. 2013. “Risk factors associated with suicide in current and former US military personnel.”
  JAMA, 310(5): 496–506.

Leskin, Gregory. 2015. “Preventing Substance Abuse in Military Members and Their Families.”
  Prevention Tactics, 9(14).

Lester, Paul B, Peter D Harms, Denise J Bulling, Mitchel N Herian, and Seth M Spain. 2011.
  “Evaluation of Relationships Between Reported Resilience and Soldier Outcomes. Report# 1:
  Negative Outcomes (Suicide, Drug Use, & Violent Crimes).” DTIC Document.

Lindo, Jason M, Isaac D Swensen, and Glen R Waddell. 2013. “Alcohol and student perfor-
  mance: Estimating the effect of legal access.” Journal of Health Economics, 32(1): 22–32.

Marsden, Robert M. Bray; Laurel L. Hourani; Jason Williams; Marian E. Lane; Mary Ellen.
 2014. Understanding Military Workforce Productivity: Effects of Substance Abuse, Health, and
 Mental Health. Springer.

Oster, Maryjo, Emily Morden, Treatment Committee on Prevention, Diagnosis, Management
  of Substance Use Disorders in the U. S. Armed Forces, Board on the Health of Select Pop-
  ulations, and Institute of Medicine. 2012. Substance Use Disorders in the U.S. Armed Forces.
  Washington, D.C.:National Academies Press.

Savin, Neil E. 1980. “The Bonferroni and the Scheffe multiple comparison procedures.” The Re-
  view of Economic Studies, 255–273.

Shen, Yu-Chu, Jeremy Arkes, and Thomas V Williams. 2012. “Effects of Iraq/Afghanistan
  deployments on major depression and substance use disorder: analysis of active duty personnel
  in the US military.” American Journal of Public Health, 102(S1): S80–S87.

Thompson, Martie P, and Kevin Swartout. 2017. “Epidemiology of suicide attempts among
  youth transitioning to adulthood.” Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 1–11.



                                               19
Verdejo-Garcı́a, Antonio, Andrew J Lawrence, and Luke Clark. 2008. “Impulsivity as a
  vulnerability marker for substance-use disorders: review of findings from high-risk research,
  problem gamblers and genetic association studies.” Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews,
  32(4): 777–810.

Vogel-Sprott, MD. 1979. “Acute recovery and tolerance to low doses of alcohol: differences in
  cognitive and motor skill performance.” Psychopharmacology, 61(3): 287–291.

Wang, JianLi, and Scott B Patten. 2001. “Alcohol consumption and major depression: findings
 from a follow-up study.” The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 46(7): 632–638.

Yörük, Barış K, and Ceren Ertan Yörük. 2011. “The impact of minimum legal drinking age laws
  on alcohol consumption, smoking, and marijuana use: Evidence from a regression discontinuity
  design using exact date of birth.” Journal of Health Economics, 30(4): 740–752.




                                              20
           Figure 1: The distribution of the age of soldiers observed in our databases.




Notes: Datasets include all U.S. Army soldiers between the ages of 20.5 and 21.5 at any time between 2009 and
2015. Every U.S. Army soldier is required to take the PHA and GAT once per year, and the PFT twice per year.




                                                     21
    Figure 2: The impact of the MLDA on alcohol consumption amongst U.S. Army soldiers.




Notes: Data are self-reports from the Personal Health Assessments (PHA) of U.S. Army soldiers who were between
the ages of 20.5 and 21.5 at any time between 2009 and 2015. Circles indicate the daily averages. The solid lines are
 separate fitted quadratic functions of age below and above age 21. See text for detailed definitions of the outcomes.




                                                         22
Figure 3: The impacts of the MLDA on selected mental health, physical fitness, and job perfor-
mance outcomes.




 Notes: Circles indicate the daily averages. The solid lines are separate fitted quadratic functions of age below and
                               above age 21. See text for definitions of the outcomes.




                                                         23
                        Figure 4: Means of selected outcomes, by quartiles of self-control.



                     Drink any alcohol                               Binge drinking (cond. on drinking)                          Smoker

                                                 0 .01 .02 .03 .04
.15




                                                                                                          .4
                                                                                                          .3
.1




                                                                                                          .2
.05




                                                                                                          .1
0




                                                                                                          0
              Screened positive for depression                             Self−harm (per 1,000)                            Fit for deployment
                                                    0 2 4 6 8 10




                                                                                                          0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
.1
.05
0




                     Total fitness score                               Committ offense (per 10,000)
100 200 300




                                                    1 1.5 2
                                                    .5
0




                                                    0




                            bottom quartile                                         Interquartiles                              top quartile

   Notes: Samples include only observations for soldiers under 21 years old. See text for variable definitions.




                                                                             24
                                Figure 5: Means of selected outcomes, by quartiles of coping ability.



                              Drink any alcohol                                 Binge drinking (cond. on drinking)                          Smoker
   .15




                                                          0 .005 .01 .015 .02




                                                                                                                     .3
   .1




                                                                                                                     .2
   .05




                                                                                                                     .1
   0




                                                                                                                     0
                       Screened positive for depression                               Self−harm (per 1,000)                            Fit for deployment
                                                              15




                                                                                                                     0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1




                                                              10
                                                              5
                                                              0




                              Total fitness score                                 Committ offense (per 10,000)
   100 200 300




                                                              1 1.5 2
                                                              .5
   0




                                                              0




                                     bottom quartile                                           Interquartiles                              top quartile

          Notes: Samples include only observations for soldiers under 21 years old. See text for variable definitions.




                                                                                        25
                        Figure 6: Means of selected outcomes, by quartiles of depression.



                     Drink any alcohol                 Binge drinking (cond. on drinking)                          Smoker
.15




                                                 .03




                                                                                            .4
                                                                                            .3
                                                 .02
.1




                                                                                            .2
.05




                                                 .01




                                                                                            .1
0




                                                 0




                                                                                            0
              Screened positive for depression               Self−harm (per 1,000)                            Fit for deployment
.15




                                                 15




                                                                                            0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
                                                 10
.1
.05




                                                 5
0




                                                 0




                     Total fitness score                 Committ offense (per 10,000)
100 200 300




                                                 1.5
                                                 1
                                                 .5
0




                                                 0




                            bottom quartile                           Interquartiles                              top quartile

   Notes: Samples include only observations for soldiers under 21 years old. See text for variable definitions.




                                                               26
                             Figure 7: Means of selected outcomes, by quartiles of AFQT score.



                           Drink any alcohol                                  Binge drinking (cond. on drinking)                          Smoker

                                                       0 .005.01.015.02.025
   .15




                                                                                                                   .3
   .1




                                                                                                                   .2
   .05




                                                                                                                   .1
   0




                                                                                                                   0
                    Screened positive for depression                                Self−harm (per 1,000)                            Fit for deployment
0 .02 .04 .06 .08




                                                                                                                   0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
                                                           8
                                                           6
                                                           4
                                                           2
                                                           0




                           Total fitness score                                  Committ offense (per 10,000)
   100 200 300




                                                           1.5
                                                           1
                                                           .5
   0




                                                           0




                                  bottom quartile                                            Interquartiles                              top quartile

            Notes:Samples include only observations for soldiers under 21 years old. See text for variable definitions.




                                                                                      27
Figure 8: Means of selected outcomes, by any family history of mental health problems or chemical
dependency.



                              Drink any alcohol                     Binge drinking (cond. on drinking)                          Smoker
                                                          .03
     0 .05 .1 .15 .2




                                                                                                         .4
                                                                                                         .3
                                                          .02




                                                                                                         .2
                                                          .01




                                                                                                         .1
                                                          0




                                                                                                         0
                       Screened positive for depression                   Self−harm (per 1,000)                            Fit for deployment
                                                          10 15 20
   0 .05 .1 .15 .2




                                                                                                         0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
                                                          5
                                                          0




                              Total fitness score                     Committ offense (per 10,000)
     100 200 300




                                                          1 1.5 2
                                                          .5
     0




                                                          0




                                                      no history                             has family history

              Notes: Samples include only observations for soldiers under 21 years old. See text for variable definitions.




                                                                                28
Table 1: Summary statistics of the population of soldiers aged 20.5 to 21.5 years old between 2009
and 2015.

                                                            Mean            s.d.       Observations
       Age                                                  20.96          0.28           11,905
       Male                                                 0.828          0.377          11,905
       Completed high school                                0.987          0.115          11,905
       Armed Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT) score            56.21          17.79          11,905
       White                                                 0.60          0.49           11,905
       Black                                                0.219          0.413          11,905
       Asian                                                0.036          0.187          11,905
       Hispanic                                             0.136          0.343          11,905
       Other race                                           0.010          0.099          11,905
       Notes: Sample includes all soldiers between 2009 and 2015 that were observed in the PHA at any
       time 180 days before or 180 days after their 21st birthday.




                                                    29
                                       Table 2: The impacts of the MLDA.




                                                                                                                                                                       Mean,	  under	  
Outcome                                                                                            Over	  21               (s.e.)                Obs.                 21	  sample
Personal	  Health	  Assessment	  (PHA)	  sample
  Drinks	  at	  all                                                                              0.095***                 (0.033)               11,905               0.127
  Proportion	  of	  drinking	  days                                                             0.012**                  (0.005)               11,901               0.000
  #	  of	  alcoholic	  drinks	  on	  a	  typical	  drinking	  day                          0.334***                 (0.107)               11,903               0.376
  Proportion	  of	  binge-­‐drinking	  days	  (6+	  drinks	  per	  day)                     0.001                    (0.002)               11,905               0.003
    Smokes	  cigarettes	  at	  all                                                              0.022                    (0.024)               11,905               0.297
    Moderate	  to	  heavy	  smoker                                                              0.007                    (0.014)               11,905               0.079
    Moderate	  to	  high	  nicotine	  dependency                                               0.000                    (0.010)               11,905               0.041
    Screened	  for	  depression                                                                  0.007                    (0.013)               11,905               0.065
    Self-­‐harm	  thoughts                                                                        0.006                    (0.006)               11,905               0.001
    Fit	  for	  deployment                                                                       -­‐0.008                 (0.016)               11,905               0.933
Global	  Assessment	  Tool	  (GAT)	  sample
  Coping	  ability                                                                                0.025                    (0.059)               15,321               3.92
  Self-­‐control                                                                                   0.044                    (0.236)               15,321               26.06
Physical	  Fitness	  Test	  (PFT)	  sample
  Total	  PFT	  score                                                                            1.02                     (1.59)                28,998               232.60
  Push-­‐up	  score                                                                               0.38                     (0.52)                28,998               83.74
  Sit-­‐up	  score                                                                                0.09                     (0.64)                28,998               79.59
  2-­‐mile	  run	  score                                                                         0.56                     (0.87)                28,998               69.30
Non-­‐Judicial	  and	  Judicial	  Punishment	  sample
  Any	  offense                                                                                   -­‐0.0001**              (0.0001)              1,525,108            0.000123
  Level	  1	  offense	  (letter	  of	  reprimand)                                             -­‐0.0001***             (0.0000)              1,525,108            0.0000723
  Level	  2	  offense	  (Article	  15	  proceedings)                                          0.0000                   (0.0000)              1,525,108            0.0000273
  Level	  3	  offense	  (court	  martial)                                                      0.0000                   (0.0000)              1,525,108            0.0000232
Notes:	  ***	  p<0.01,	  **	  p<0.05,	  *	  p<0.1	  	  Each	  row	  constitutes	  a	  separate	  regression	  estimated	  with	  quadratic	  terms	  in	  
age	  and	  a	  range	  of	  180	  days	  on	  each	  side	  of	  the	  21st	  birthday.	  Robust	  standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  day	  (age)	  
level.	  Covariates	  include	  AFQT	  score	  and	  indicators	  for	  gender,	  education	  level,	  and	  race/ethnicity.




                                                                        30
                                                                    Table 3: The heterogeneous impacts of the MLDA, selected outcomes.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mental	  health	  or	  
                                                           Self-­‐control                                       Depression                                        Coping	  Ability                                           AFQT                                   Chemical	  
                                             Bottom	   inter-­‐    Upper	                       Bottom	   inter-­‐    Upper	                      Bottom	   inter-­‐    Upper	                        Bottom	   inter-­‐ Upper	                        No	  family	        Family	  
                                             quartile quartile	   quartile                       quartile quartile	   quartile                      quartile quartile	   quartile                        quartile quartile	   quartile                      history              history
     PHA	  sample
       Drinks	  at	  all
             Over	  21                     0.140** 0.080* 0.093** 0.135*** 0.104**                                                  0.052              0.076         0.097*** 0.123**                      0.088**           0.074* 0.148**                     0.081**            0.174**
             Mean	  under	  21               0.152  0.132      0.105   0.140    0.135                                              0.107              0.139           0.123   0.115                        0.111             0.128  0.142                       0.119              0.186
       #	  of	  drinks	  on	  a	  typical	  day
             Over	  21                     0.494** 0.285** 0.314* 0.355* 0.428***                                                   0.189              0.182         0.426*** 0.407**                       0.371*          0.264** 0.448**                    0.285***            0.628**
             Mean	  under	  21               0.515  0.366      0.312   0.447    0.397                                              0.300              0.433           0.345   0.348                         0.304           0.382   0.445                       0.343              0.612
       Smokes	  cigarettes	  at	  all
             Over	  21                      -­‐0.006 0.053    -­‐0.013 -­‐0.022 0.039                                               0.029              0.063            -­‐0.015          0.025             -­‐0.035          0.019          0.093*               0.010              0.093
             Mean	  under	  21               0.359  0.293      0.266   0.352    0.290                                              0.267              0.323              0.285           0.277               0.291           0.304           0.288               0.284              0.383
       Screened	  for	  depresion
             Over	  21                      -­‐0.023 0.021    -­‐0.002 -­‐0.008 0.021                                               -­‐0.017           0.017            0.010            -­‐0.027           0.054*            -­‐0.008        -­‐0.015            0.009              -­‐0.024
             Mean	  under	  21               0.111  0.057      0.050   0.145    0.053                                                0.024            0.103            0.047              0.039             0.068             0.065            0.061             0.049               0.175




31
       Self-­‐harm	  thoughts
             Over	  21                        0.003  0.003      0.013  -­‐0.009 0.013*                                              0.006              0.011            0.004             0.001             0.023            -­‐0.002          0.004              0.003              0.024
             Mean	  under	  21               0.009  0.008      0.004   0.012    0.005                                              0.004              0.015            0.006             0.003            0.00874            0.007            0.004              0.005              0.017
       Fit	  for	  deployment
             Over	  21                        0.031  0.010 -­‐0.058** -­‐0.032 0.020                                                -­‐0.022           0.011            -­‐0.031          0.010              0.011            -­‐0.022         0.002              0.008            -­‐0.109**
             Mean	  under	  21               0.913  0.935      0.942   0.909    0.931                                                0.952            0.908              0.944           0.951              0.917             0.934           0.949              0.936                0.911
         Observations                          2,223            5,973             3,709             2,801            5,189           3,915              4,165            5,210             2,530              3,068            6,066            2,766             10,319              1,586
     Total	  PFT	  score
       Over	  21                              3.65             1.39              -­‐1.22           6.82*            0.63            -­‐1.42            3.63             0.18             -­‐1.45             3.73             0.94            -­‐1.88             -­‐0.90            -­‐7.27
       Mean	  under	  21                    224.10           232.90            237.70            222.70           233.30          238.60             226.70           234.40           239.20              229.50           233.40          234.60              234.90             223.20
     Observations                              5,412           14,593             8,993             6,591           12,468           9,939             10,163           12,648            6,187               7,786           14,695           6,505              12,538              1,810
     Any	  offense
       Over	  21                             0.0000 -­‐0.0002** -­‐0.0002* -­‐0.0001-­‐0.0002*** -­‐0.0001                                           -­‐0.0002 -­‐0.0001 -­‐0.0002* -­‐0.0002** -­‐0.0001 -­‐0.0002 -­‐0.0002**                                                     -­‐0.0004
       Mean	  under	  21                    0.0002 0.0001 0.0001 0.0001 0.0001 0.0001                                                                 0.0002 0.0001 0.0001             0.0001 0.0001 0.0001            0.0001                                                       0.0002
     Observations                            321,880 741,156 462,072 406,484 645,996 472,628                                                          574,184 645,580 305,344 396,396 783,172 344,448 516,308                                                                         79,768
     Notes:	  ***	  p<0.01,	  **	  p<0.05,	  *	  p<0.1	  	  Each	  cell	  constitutes	  a	  separate	  regression	  estimated	  with	  quadratic	  terms	  in	  age	  and	  a	  range	  of	  180	  days	  on	  each	  side	  of	  the	  21st	  birthday.	  
     Robust	  standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  day	  (age)	  level.	  	  Covariates	  include	  AFQT	  score	  and	  indicators	  for	  gender,	  education	  level,	  and	  race/ethnicity.	  	  Results	  on	  the	  remaining	  
     outcomes	  are	  included	  in	  the	  Appendix.
    Appendix Table 1: Tests of the balance of covariates across the MLDA discontinuity.


                                                                                        Mean, under
Outcome                                     Over 21        (s.e.)         Obs.          21 sample
Personal Health Assessment (PHA) sample
  Female                                     0.055***         (0.020)        11,905         0.159
  AFQT score                                    0.347         (0.826)        11,905        56.250
  High School only                              0.000         (0.006)        11,905         0.985
  Completed college                            -0.001         (0.005)        11,905         0.011
  Black                                        -0.017         (0.022)        11,905         0.212
  Hispanic                                     -0.020         (0.015)        11,905         0.139
  Asian                                         0.001         (0.009)        11,905         0.038
  Other race                                    0.004         (0.006)        11,905         0.010
Physical Fitness Test (PFT) sample
  Female                                       -0.005         (0.010)        28,998         0.137
  AFQT score                                   -0.225         (0.654)        28,998        55.470
  High School only                              0.002         (0.004)        28,998         0.988
  Completed college                            -0.003         (0.003)        28,998         0.009
  Black                                       -0.023*         (0.013)        28,998         0.216
  Hispanic                                      0.007         (0.012)        28,998         0.136
  Asian                                       0.011*          (0.006)        28,998         0.036
  Other race                                    0.002         (0.004)        28,998         0.010
Global Assessment Tool (GAT) sample
  Female                                       -0.017         (0.015)        15,321         0.159
  AFQT score                                    0.307         (0.764)        15,321        55.860
  High School only                              0.000         (0.005)        15,321         0.985
  Completed college                            -0.002         (0.004)        15,321         0.012
  Black                                        -0.021         (0.015)        15,321         0.201
  Hispanic                                     -0.014         (0.014)        15,321         0.127
  Asian                                         0.005         (0.008)        15,321         0.033
  Other race                                    0.002         (0.004)        15,321         0.010
Non-Judicial and Judicial Punishment sample
  Female                                        0.000          (0.000)      1,530,000       0.161
  AFQT score                                    0.000          (0.000)      1,530,000      55.110
  High School only                              0.000          (0.000)      1,530,000       0.984
  Completed college                             0.000          (0.000)      1,530,000       0.011
  Black                                         0.000          (0.000)      1,530,000       0.198
  Hispanic                                      0.000          (0.000)      1,530,000       0.128
  Asian                                         0.000          (0.000)      1,530,000       0.032
  Other race                                    0.000          (0.000)      1,530,000       0.011
Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Each row constitutes a separate regression estimated with
quadratic terms in age and a range of 180 days on each side of the 21st birthday. Robust standard
errors are clustered at the day (age) level. Covariates include AFQT score and indicators for gender,
education level, and race/ethnicity.
                                                 32
           Appendix Table 2: Robustness of the RD estimates, PHA sample outcomes.

Order of polynomial in age                       1            2            3             1             2            3
Covariates?                                     No            No           No           Yes           Yes          Yes
Drinks at all
   Over 21                                  0.296***      0.095***     -0.093**      0.297***     0.098***      -0.087**
   [s.e]                                     [0.030]       [0.033]      [0.031]       [0.030]      [0.033]       [0.031]
   p-value                                     1.00          1.00         0.91          1.00         0.98          0.00
Proportion of drinking days
   Over 21                                  0.042***       0.012**        -0.014     0.043***      0.013**      -0.012**
   [s.e]                                     [0.005]       [0.005]       [0.005]      [0.005]      [0.005]       [0.005]
   p-value                                     1.00          0.99          0.70         1.00         0.19          0.00
# of drinks on a typical drinking day
   Over 21                                  0.835***      0.334***      -0.212**     0.847***      0.356***      -0.173*
   [s.e]                                     [0.096]       [0.107]       [0.103]      [0.095]       [0.106]      [0.104]
   p-value                                     1.00          1.00          1.00         0.97          0.00         0.00
Proportion of binge-drinking days
   Over 21                                  0.007***        0.001         -0.003     0.007***        0.002        -0.002
   [s.e]                                     [0.001]       [0.002]       [0.002]      [0.001]       [0.002]      [0.002]
   p-value                                     0.76          0.44          0.31         0.12          0.02         0.01
Smokes cigarettes at all
   Over 21                                     0.021        0.022         0.004        0.023         0.026        0.014
   [s.e]                                      [0.016]      [0.024]       [0.033]      [0.016]       [0.024]      [0.032]
   p-value                                      0.27         0.28          0.26         0.00          0.00         0.00
Moderate to heavy smoker
   Over 21                                     0.011        0.007         0.000        0.012         0.006        0.002
   [s.e]                                      [0.009]      [0.014]       [0.018]      [0.009]       [0.014]      [0.018]
   p-value                                      0.38         0.41          0.43         0.00          0.00         0.00
Moderate/high nictoine dependency
   Over 21                                     -0.001       0.000         -0.007       -0.001        -0.001       -0.006
   [s.e]                                      [0.007]      [0.010]       [0.014]      [0.007]       [0.010]      [0.014]
   p-value                                      0.38         0.41          0.43         0.00          0.00         0.00
Screened for depression
   Over 21                                     -0.004       0.007         -0.009       -0.006        0.004        -0.012
   [s.e]                                      [0.009]      [0.013]       [0.016]      [0.009]       [0.013]      [0.016]
   p-value                                      0.71         0.71          0.70         0.25          0.25         0.24
Self-harm thoughts
   Over 21                                     0.002        0.006         0.009        0.002         0.006        0.008
   [s.e]                                      [0.004]      [0.006]       [0.008]      [0.004]       [0.006]      [0.008]
   p-value                                      0.82         0.82          0.81         0.78          0.79         0.78
Fit for deployment
   Over 21                                     -0.009       -0.008        0.000        -0.003        0.004        0.017
   [s.e]                                      [0.011]      [0.016]       [0.022]      [0.011]       [0.016]      [0.021]
   p-value                                      0.69         0.69          0.67         0.00          0.00         0.00
Observations                                  11,905       11,905        11,905       11,905        11,905       11,905

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Each row constitutes a separate regression estimated with quadratic terms in age
and a range of 180 days on each side of the 21st birthday. Robust standard errors are clustered at the day (age) level. The
p-value is from a test of whether the non-parametric model is equal to the parametric model; see text for details.
Covariates include AFQT score and indicators for gender, education level, and race/ethnicity.




                                                            33
     Appendix Table 3: Robustness of the RD estimates, GAT and PFT samples outcomes.


Order of polynomial in age                     1             2             3             1             2             3
Covariates?                                    No            No            No           Yes           Yes           Yes
Global Assessment Tool (GAT) sample
  Coping ability
    Over 21                                   -0.048        0.025        -0.068        -0.050         0.024       -0.073
    [s.e]                                    [0.039]       [0.059]       [0.076]       [0.039]       [0.059]      [0.076]
    p-value                                    0.80          0.79         0.78          0.03          0.02         0.02
  Self-control
    Over 21                                  0.0396        0.0441       -0.1311        0.0186        0.0137       -0.1792
    [s.e]                                    [0.165]       [0.236]      [0.318]        [0.166]       [0.238]      [0.323]
    p-value                                   0.85          0.85          0.86          0.03          0.03          0.03
Observations                                 15,321        15,321        15,321        15,315        15,315       15,315
Physical Fitness Test (PFT) sample
  Total PFT score
     Over 21                                 2.20**          1.02          1.37        2.11**         0.94          1.28
     [s.e]                                    [1.06]        [1.59]        [2.02]        [1.06]       [1.60]        [2.04]
     p-value                                   0.63          0.53          0.50          0.00         0.00          0.00
  Push-up score
     Over 21                                  0.64*          0.38          0.59        0.61*          0.33          0.53
     [s.e]                                    [0.35]        [0.52]        [0.65]       [0.35]        [0.52]        [0.65]
     p-value                                   0.91          0.88          0.86         0.00          0.00          0.00
  Sit-up score
     Over 21                                  0.77*          0.09          0.47        0.75*          0.09          0.45
     [s.e]                                    [0.42]        [0.64]        [0.86]       [0.41]        [0.64]        [0.86]
     p-value                                   0.97          0.96          0.96         0.85          0.90          0.93
  2-mile run score
     Over 21                                   0.79          0.56          0.31         0.75          0.52          0.29
     [s.e]                                    [0.57]        [0.87]        [1.11]       [0.57]        [0.87]        [1.11]
     p-value                                   0.43          0.37          0.36         0.00          0.00          0.00
Observations                                 28,998        28,998        28,998        28,986        28,986       28,986
Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Each row constitutes a separate regression estimated with quadratic terms in age and a
range of 180 days on each side of the 21st birthday. Robust standard errors are clustered at the day (age) level. Covariates
include AFQT score and indicators for gender, education level, and race/ethnicity.




                                                           34
        Appendix Table 4: Robustness of the RD estimates, IPERMS sample outcomes.


Order of polynomial in age                1         2         3        1        2        3
Covariates?                              No        No        No       Yes      Yes      Yes
Non-Judicial and Judicial Punishment sample
  Any offense
    Over 21                           0.0000 -0.0001** -0.0001      0.0000 -0.0001** -0.0001
    [s.e]                             [0.0000] [0.0001] [0.0001] [0.0000] [0.0001] [0.0001]
    p-value                             0.99      0.90      0.59     0.78     0.14     0.00
  Level 1 offense (letter of reprimand)
    Over 21                            0.0000 -0.0001*** -0.0001** 0.0000 -0.0001** -0.0001**
    [s.e]                            [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000]
    p-value                             0.90      0.62      0.15     0.57     0.13     0.00
  Level 2 offense (Article 15 proceedings)
    Over 21                            0.0000   0.0000     0.0000   0.0000   0.0000   0.0000
    [s.e]                             [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000]
    p-value                             0.46      0.42      0.50     0.52     0.48     0.52
  Level 3 offense (court martial)
    Over 21                           0.0000*   0.0000     0.0000  0.0000*   0.0000   0.0000
    [s.e]                             [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000]
    p-value                             0.46      0.40      0.36     0.05     0.03     0.02
Observations                           1,525,108    1,525,108    1,525,108   1,524,016    1,524,016    1,524,015
Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Each row constitutes a separate regression estimated with quadratic terms
in age and a range of 180 days on each side of the 21st birthday. Robust standard errors are clustered at the day
(age) level. Covaritaes include AFQT score and indicators for gender, education level, and race/ethnicity.




                                                     35
                                 Appendix Table 5: The heterogeneous impacts of the MLDA, further outcomes.

                                                                                                                                                                        Mental health or
                                         Self-control                       Depression                    Coping Ability                        AFQT                      Chemical
                              Bottom        inter-   Upper        Bottom inter-      Upper        Bottom inter- Upper               Bottom    inter- Upper            No family     Family
                              quartile     quartile quartile      quartile quartile quartile      quartile quartile quartile        quartile quartile quartile         history      history
     PHA sample
       Proportion of drinking days
          Over 21              0.007    0.011*          0.015**   0.018*     0.017**     0.001      0.009    0.012** 0.015*        0.022***      0.008     0.009       0.012**       0.014
          Mean under 21        0.019     0.013           0.010     0.016      0.014      0.009      0.015     0.012   0.011          0.011       0.013     0.015        0.012        0.023
       Binge drinking days
          Over 21              -0.005    0.001          0.006*    -0.001      0.003      0.001      0.002      0.000       0.002      0.004      0.000     0.001         0.002       -0.001
          Mean under 21        0.005     0.003          0.002     0.004       0.003      0.002      0.003      0.002       0.002      0.002      0.003     0.003         0.002       0.005
       Moderate/heavy smoker
          Over 21              0.008    -0.002           0.017     0.013      0.003      0.002      0.026     -0.010       0.004      0.018      0.002     0.002         0.002       0.030
          Mean under 21        0.123     0.072           0.065     0.115      0.073      0.062      0.097      0.072       0.065      0.061      0.085     0.086         0.072       0.130
       Moderate/high nictoine dependency
          Over 21              0.022    -0.019           0.015     0.004      0.001      -0.010     0.019     -0.012     -0.014       0.010      0.003     -0.018       -0.001       0.003
          Mean under 21        0.070     0.040           0.027     0.069      0.038       0.026     0.062      0.031      0.029       0.036      0.042      0.046        0.037       0.073
       Observations            2,223     5,973           3,709     2,801      5,189       3,915     4,165      5,210      2,530       3,068      6,066      2,766       10,319       1,586
     PFT sample
       Push-up score




36
          Over 21               1.53      0.80           -0.98    3.18***     0.21       -0.99     1.97**      -0.20       -0.10      1.71       -0.03     -0.41         0.14        -3.13
          Mean under 21        81.41     83.64            85A      80.96      83.81      85.56      81.90      84.31       85.73      83.50      84.16     83.07         84.38       81.51
       Sit-up score
          Over 21               0.83      0.47           -1.02      1.83      -0.69      0.12       0.39       -0.02       -0.16      0.74       0.70      -1.93         0.19        -2.16
          Mean under 21        77.28     79.47           81.28     76.91      79.86      81.10      78.03      80.02       81.39      78.45      79.64     80.89         79.82       76.67
       2-mile run score
          Over 21               1.28      0.12            0.78      1.80      1.10       -0.55      1.27       0.39        -0.26      1.27       0.27      0.46          -1.22       -1.98
          Mean under 21        65.40     69.76           71.03     64.86      69.63      71.92      66.74      70.05       72.11      67.58      69.64     70.63         70.72       65.06
       Observations            5,412    14,593           8,993     6,591     12,468      9,939     10,163     12,648       6,187      7,786     14,695     6,505        12,538       1,810
     NJP sample
       Level 1 offense (letter of reprimand)
          Over 21            0.0002* -0.0001*           -0.0001 0.0002***-0.0001** 0.0000 -0.0002*** -0.0001 -0.0001 -0.0002** -0.0001 0.0002**                        -0.0001*     0.0005*
          Mean under 21       0.0001 0.0001              0.0001   0.0001 0.0001 0.0001      0.0001 0.0000 0.0000       0.0001 0.0001 0.0001                             0.0000       0.0001
       Level 2 offense (Article 15 proceedings)
          Over 21             0.0001 -0.0001            0.0000    0.0000     -0.0001     0.0000    0.0000     0.0000 -0.0000*        0.0000     0.0000     0.0000      -0.0001*      0.0001
          Mean under 21       0.0000 0.0000             0.0000    0.0000     0.0000      0.0000    0.0000     0.0000 0.0000          0.0000     0.0000     0.0000       0.0000       0.0001
       Level 3 offense (court martial)
          Over 21             0.0001 0.0000              0.0000    0.0001 0.0000 0.0000           0.0401 0.0000 0.0000              0.0000 0.0000 0.0000               0.0000        0.0000
          Mean under 21       0.0001 0.0000              0.0000    0.0000 0.0000 0.0000           0.0000 0.0000 0.0000              0.0000 0.0000 0.0000               0.0000        0.0000
       Observations          321,880 741,156            462,072   406,484 645,996 472,628         574,184 645,580 305,344           396,396 783,172 344,448            516,308       79,768
     Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Each cell constitutes a separate regression estimated with quadratic terms in age and a range of 180 days on each side of the 21st birthday. Robust
     standard errors are clustered at the day (age) level. Covaritaes include AFQT score and indicators for gender, education level, and race/ethnicity.
