NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY EFFECTS OF INTERNAL MIGRATION: EVIDENCE
FROM INDONESIA
Gharad Bryan
Melanie Morten
Working Paper 23540
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23540

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017

We thank Paco Buera, Rebecca Diamond, Dave Donaldson, Greg Fischer, Pete Klenow, David
Lagakos, Torsten Perrson, Steve Redding, Daniel Sturm, Adam Sziedl, Michael Waugh, Ben
Olken and seminar audiences at the Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics, Paris School of
Economics, Namur, Helsinki, Berkeley, Yale, LSE, Columbia, the University of Chicago,
Toronto, NBER SI 2015, Harvard/MIT, and the CEPR/PODER conference for helpful comments
and suggestions. Anita Bhide, Allan Hsiao and Jay Lee provided outstanding research assistance.
Any errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Gharad Bryan and Melanie Morten. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Aggregate Productivity Effects of Internal Migration: Evidence from Indonesia
Gharad Bryan and Melanie Morten
NBER Working Paper No. 23540
June 2017
JEL No. J61,O18,O53,R12,R23
ABSTRACT
We estimate the aggregate productivity gains from reducing barriers to internal labor migration in
Indonesia, accounting for worker selection and spatial differences in human capital. We
distinguish between movement costs, which mean workers will only move if they expect higher
wages, and amenity differences, which mean some locations must pay more to attract workers.
We find modest but important aggregate impacts. We estimate a 22% increase in labor
productivity from removing all barriers. Reducing migration costs to the US level, a high
mobility benchmark, leads to an 8% productivity boost. These figures hides substantial
heterogeneity. The origin population that benefits most sees an 104% increase in average
earnings from a complete barrier removal, or a 37% increase from moving to the US benchmark.

Gharad Bryan
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
g.t.bryan@lse.ac.uk
Melanie Morten
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
memorten@stanford.edu

1

Introduction

Recent evidence suggests that a policy of encouraging internal labor migration could have
large productivity effects in developing countries. On the macro side, Gollin et al. (2014)
show that non-agricultural (urban) workers produce 4 times more than their agricultural
(rural) counterparts. On the micro side Bryan et al. (2014) show a 33% increase in consumption from experimentally induced seasonal migration. Neither of these results, however, is definitive. The experimental estimates apply to seasonal migration, and a specific
part of Bangladesh. The macro estimates don’t account for selection on unobservables
(Young 2013), and only apply to movement between rural and urban areas.
This paper uses micro data from Indonesia to quantify the aggregate effect of increasing mobility. Two observations motivate our approach. First, migration could increase
productivity if it: a) allows individuals to sort into a location in which they are personally more productive (sorting); b) allows more people to live in more productive locations
(agglomeration); or c) both.1 Second, in the absence of constraints or frictions people will
maximize their production; therefore, a policy that encourages migration will have no
effect on output if there are no existing constraints on mobility.2
We build a model in which workers have idiosyncratic location-specific productivity
and, in which locations differ in their overall productivity. This setup allows for both
sorting and agglomeration effects. Into this framework, we incorporate two kinds of mobility constraints. Movement costs exist if workers must be paid higher wages to induce
them to work away from home. Compensating wage differentials exist if workers must be
paid higher wages to work in low amenity locations. The result is a general equilibrium
Roy model in which workers sort across locations that have heterogeneous amenities and
productivities.3 The model is similar to that used by Hsieh et al. (2016); our approach
1 Selection

is known to be important in migration (e.g. Borjas 1987; Young 2013; Lagakos and Waugh
2013). Much of the literature treats selection as an econometric problem. In our model, sorting is both
something that must be accounted for, and also a source of gains from labor market integration.
2 Our view is that if one cannot find evidence of constraints, then productivity gaps found in the macro
literature (e.g. Gollin et al. 2014) are likely driven by selection. Our approach is similar to Lagakos and
Waugh (2013) who observe that the food problem constrains movement across sectors. Like us, they consider how this constraint affects aggregate productivity in the presence of worker selection.
3 We also allow for workers from some locations to have lower human capital. With limited movement,
this heterogeneity can drive spatial wage gaps.

1

also has close connections to the seminal work of Hsieh and Klenow (2009).4 We use this
structural framework to quantify the change in aggregate productivity that would result
from removing movement costs and/or equalizing amenity differentials. Like Hsieh and
Klenow (2009) and Caselli (2005), we do not consider specific policies, but rather try to
quantify the potential impacts of a set of policy options.

5

Before turning to our structural analysis, we document five motivational facts, which
suggest both that movement costs and compensating differentials exist, and that selection
is important in the data. Indonesian data that records location of birth, current location
and earnings allows us to demonstrate these facts. In the case of movement costs, we
first show that a gravity relationship holds in the data. A 10% reduction in the distance
between two locations leads to a 7% increase in the proportion of migrants that flow between the two locations.6 We also show that people who live farther from their location
of birth have higher wages. A doubling of distance leads to a 3% increase in average
wages, suggesting that people need to be compensated to induce them to move away
from home. In running these regressions, we think of distance as a proxy for movement
costs, which may not capture all policy relevant constraints. For compensating differentials, we show that workers in observably low amenity locations receive higher wages.
Again, our measure of amenities is, at best, a proxy. Furthermore, selection effects, appear to be an important in the data: the greater the share of people born in origin o that
move to destination d, the lower their average wage. The elasticity of average wage with
respect to share is approximately −0.04. Importantly, because our model is one in which
movement costs reduce migration and lead to selection we show that there is almost no
4 Our

framework also has much in common with recent quantitative models of economic geography
such as Allen and Arkolakis (2014), Redding (2016) and Desmet et al. (2016). The framework is similar that
used in work by Tombe and Zhu (2015). Relative to that paper, we use more detailed micro data which
enables us to directly estimate the extent of selection, and we are interested in a different set of questions.
5 Policies to reduce movement costs might include road construction (see, e.g., Morten and Oliveira
2016), religious tolerance building, language training, migration subsidies (see, e.g. Bryan et al. 2014), or
telecommunications improvements. Policies to reduce compensating differentials might include industrial
pollution abatement, hospital building, or removal of building height restrictions (See e.g. Harari 2016).
This latter policy would reduce rents. High rents enter our calculation as low amenities which reduce labor
movement.)
6 We consider all movement costs to be relative to a person’s location of birth, which we refer to as their
origin. So, a person who is born in Melbourne and moves for 10 years to New York and then to London
pays a cost of living in London that is relative to Melbourne, not New York.

2

effect of distance on average wages once the proportion of the origin population at the
destination is controlled for. All of these effects are predicted by our model.
To estimate the potential effects of policy, we turn to our structural model. When
estimating the model, we treat both movement costs and amenity differentials as nonparametric objects to be inferred from the data. This reflects our view that amenities
are hard to measure and distance is unlikely to capture all policy relevant dimensions of
movement costs. Our model allows for straightforward quantification of the effects of reducing movement costs, or amenity-driven wage differentials.7 The intuition is straightforward. We first generate counterfactual population distributions by estimating where
people would live if we removed their empirical tendency to stay at their place of birth
and their tendency to avoid some locations that have high measured productivity.8 Next,
we ask how productivity would change if people moved as suggested by our counterfactuals. Our model of selection implies that each additional migrant will earn less than the
last; to account for this we need to understand how wages change as workers move. Since
selection, in our model, is relative to location of birth, it is average wages of people from a
given origin who live in a given destination that matter. Our unique data, which captures
both location of birth and current location of work, combined with an IV strategy inspired
by our model, allows us to estimate the relevant elasticity.9
Our results suggest moderate aggregate gains, but important heterogeneity. Removing all frictions is predicted to increase aggregate productivity by 22%. These gains are
modest relative to the potential gains suggested by studies such as Gollin et al. (2014),
but are inline with what one may expect from other microeconomic studies. For the people born in some locations, however, the results are much larger, with predicted gains
peaking at 104%. Because complete barrier removal may be impossible, we also compute
the gains from moving to a US level of movement costs, which we see as a high-mobility
7 While

the intuition presented here is accurate, the analysis requires functional form assumptions. For
example, we rely heavily on the assumption that individual productivities are drawn from a Fréchet distribution. In this we follow the seminal work of Eaton and Kortum (2002) and also Hsieh et al. (2016).
8 As explained in Section 4 productivity is estimated as a fixed location effect that remains after adjusting
for the selection of workers in to specific locations.
9 We also account for the potential endogeneity of location productivity (due to agglomeration and price
effects) and location amenity (due to congestion effects) by using consensus estimates from the literature.

3

benchmark.10 We predict an aggregate productivity boost of 8%, with the origin that gains
most seeing a 37% increase. We conclude that unless dynamic effects are large, encouraging migration is unlikely to have very large productivity effects or the sort estimated, for
example, by Hsieh and Klenow (2009). Targeted policies may, however, have big impacts
on the lives of some communities.11
Our paper differs from existing approaches in three ways. First, we consider region-toregion rather than rural-to-urban movement. Since Lewis (1954) and Harris and Todaro
(1970) the development and migration literature has been dominated by rural to urban
studies. In our setting this is potentially inappropriate. Figure 1 shows kernel density
plots of the log of the average monthly wage, calculated at the regency level and broken
down by rural/urban status.12 The figure highlights that while there is large variation
between regencies, there is little variation across rural-urban. Table 1 shows that the majority of migration also occurs within category, rather than across category: between 75
and 85% of migration out of urban areas is to another urban area, and between 25 and
30% of migration out of a rural area is to another rural area. Focusing only on rural-urban
migration misses the within rural and the within urban migrations.13
Second, we focus on counterfactual estimates that predict the effect of removing constraints. While we can learn much from work documenting returns to past migration,14
10 This

counterfactual keeps Indonesian amenity difference constant, and just lowers movement costs to
the US level. Inline with the general argument in Hsieh and Moretti (2017) we find that the US has greater
amenity dispersion than Indonesia.
11 This last observation is in line with Lagakos et al. (2015) who find small aggregate welfare effects, but
that migration subsidies may be well-targeted towards households that are particularly poor. Relative to
that paper, we focus on permanent migration rather than seasonal migration, in a setting where we observe
positive, rather than negative, sorting.
12 Our data records an individual’s current regency of residence, and whether their location is considered
urban or rural. The data also records their regency of birth, but does not record whether their birth location
was urban or not. To fill this data gap we code regencies that have greater than median rural population
share as rural, and the remaining regencies as urban. Appendix Figure 1 shows that the same patterns hold
if rural/urban is defined on the individual level.
13 We find broadly similar back-and-forth migration rates as Young (2013) who uses DHS data to estimate rates of urban and rural migration. The DHS data code a respondent’s origin as one of capital/other
city/town/countryside but does not give the actual location of birth. Young (2013)’s estimate for males is
that 63% of urbanites migrate, and of these, 41% move to a rural area. For 1976, we find out migration rates
of 54%, with 20% migrating to a rural area. Relative to the DHS data our data gives the actual location of
birth so we are able to define rural and urban migrants based on the characteristics of that specific location.
14 Recent work by Kleemans and Magruder (2017); Hicks et al. (2017); Beegle et al. (2011); Garlick et al.
(2016) provide important estimates of the returns to, and impact of, past migrations in Indonesia, Kenya,
Tanzania and South Africa.

4

there are challenges moving from these estimates to predictions of future returns. On
one hand, selection effects mean future migrants may earn less than past migrants; on
the other hand, migration policies work by reducing constraints, and so will tend to encourage migration where past movement was minimal. Because of this, past returns may
contain little information on the likely effects of future policies. For our analysis we directly estimate the impact of removing constraints. Our only use of past migration is to
estimate the strength of selection effects. While this approach is similar to macroeconomic
estimates based on productivity gaps (e.g. Gollin et al. 2014), it accounts for selection effects that are likely to be important.
Finally, we take account of GE effects. First, by incorporating sorting, we allow for
aggregate productivity gains in the absence of large net populations flows. Second, we
calibrate agglomeration, congestion and price elasticities using consensus estimates, and
we then assess how our results depend on these parameters.
Our results are limited in three ways. First, we look only at static gains, leaving examination of dynamic effects for future work.15 Second, we look only at productivity and
only at gains. We do not consider welfare effects of migration and we do not consider
the costs of policy. A full consideration of costs is difficult and can be avoided if benefits
are small. Third, we do not consider specific policies, but rather provide estimates of the
total gains that may be available. Our approach is similar, therefore, to the development
accounting and macro misallocation literatures (Caselli, 2005; Hsieh and Klenow, 2009).
The paper starts by laying out five motivational facts. These facts strongly suggest that
spatial labor markets in Indonesia are characterized by costs of movement, compensating
wage differentials and selection on productivity. The facts imply the possibility of productivity gains from increased movement. We then provide a simple two-location example
that explains how we quantify the possible gains. We follow this by briefly describing
out our formal model, discussing identification and estimation, and demonstrating that
our structurally estimated parameters correlate sensibly with real world proxy measures.
Finally, we present results from counterfactual exercises.
15 There are several potential sources of dynamic gains. For example, migration costs may be endogenous
(Carrington et al., 1996), firm openings may depend on the pool of available migrant labor, or both.

5

2

Data, Motivation and Two Location Example

2.1

Data

Our approach has specific data requirements. In our view, people will only migrate if their
earnings increase enough to compensate them for living away from home (which we take
to be their location of birth). We therefore need data that records an individual’s location
of birth, current location of work, and earnings. Our interest in aggregate returns implies
that data has to be geographically representative. Because we want to non-parametrically
estimate movement costs, the data set must be large enough that it records flows between
all pairs of locations. Data of this kind is available in very few locations, and Indonesia
is the unique country that meets these specifications and has location recorded at a level
below the equivalent of a state.
Our Indonesian data come from the 1995 SUPAS (Intercensal Population Survey) and
from the 2011 and 2012 SUSENAS (National Socioeconomic Survey). These data sets
record, for a large representative set of people, location of birth (from now on origin o),
current work location d (which could be the same as the origin) and monthly earnings
(which we refer to as the wage).16
We also use data from the United States, both to show that our migration facts hold
more generally, and to generate a suitable counterfactual for a high-mobility economy.
We use the 1990 5% Census sample and the 2010 American Community Survey, as these
dates overlap most closely with our Indonesia dates.
We restrict the sample to be male head-of-households between 15 and 65 years old.
Summary stats for the Indonesian and the United States sample are given in Appendix
Table 1. In the US, we have location of birth and work recorded at the level of the state;
in Indonesia, we have this for either regency or province.17 Because of the census nature
16 In

all the surveys except the 2011 SUSENAS income information is only recorded for those who are
employed by someone else. This means that we are missing income information for those who are self
employed which includes those who work in agriculture. To understand whether this includes bias we
supplement this census data occasionally with data from the Indonesian Family Life Survey (IFLS) from
1993, 1997, 2000 and 2007. This data has a much smaller sample and also by design covers only 13 out of
25 provinces, but does collect much more detailed information on incomes. Summary statistics for the IFLS
data are given in Appendix Table 2.
17 Regency is a second level administrated subdivision below a province and above a district. For all

6

of our data, our measure of migration is permanent migration.18 All wage variables are
reported in monthly terms.
We use the 2005 and 2011 Village Potential Statistics (PODES) datasets to get measures
of amenity. From the village-level data, we collapse to regency levels, using population
weights.

2.2

Five Empirical Facts About Migration

From our data, we can calculate the proportion of people from each origin o that move to
each destination d, which we denote πdo as well as the average wage within origin destination pair, wagedo . Using this data, we document five empirical facts about migration.
We present these five facts at the regency level. For the later estimation of the model, we
aggregate regencies into provinces.19
Fact 1 (Gravity: Movement Costs Affects Location Choice). Controlling for origin and destination fixed effects, the share of people born in o that move to d is decreasing in the distance
between o and d.
To document Fact 1, we run a regression
ln πdot = δdt + δot + β ln distdo + dot
surveys, we drop the provinces of Papua and West Papua. We generate a set of regencies which have
maintained constant geographical boundaries between 1995 and 2010. This primarily involves merging
together regencies that were divided in 2001. This leaves us with a sample of 281 regencies, where the
average regency population surveyed in 2011 is 3700 people. Later, for the structural estimates we aggregate
regencies up to the level of province, of which there are 25.
18 Substantial amount of migration is temporary, rather than permanent (Bryan et al. 2014; Morten 2017).
Further, we are not able to track people across census waves, and so do not have information on people
who have moved multiple times, or who have moved and returned home. To ascertain the scope of these
issues we look at detailed migration histories collected in the IFLS. We find that close that multiple and
return migration is not a large issue in our context. Conditional on moving out of the birth regency, 49%
of all migrants make only 1 migration; 27% make two moves (of which, 30% of these second moves are
to return home); and only 12% make 4 or more moves (tables available upon request). These numbers are
broadly similar to those for the US: the average male migrant makes 1.98 moves and 50.2% of movers move
home (Kennan and Walker, 2011).
19 We concentrate here on the Indonesian data. Appendix Table 3 shows that the first four facts also hold
in the US (we do not document Fact 5 in the US as we do not have amenity data at the state level). The
Indonesian results are also robust to aggregating to the province level (Appendix Table 4) and using the
IFLS data (Appendix Table 5).

7

where δdt and δot are destination-year and origin-year fixed effects respectively and distdo
is the straight distance between regency o and regency d.20 The destination effect controls
for any productivity or amenity differences across destinations, and the origin effect controls for the benefits of other possible locations from the perspective of those living at the
origin (this term is similar to the multilateral resistance term in the trade literature.)
We interpret distance as a proxy for migration costs. The results are shown in Table 2
Column 1. We estimate that the elasticity of πdo with respect to distdo is negative, strongly
significant, and sizeable. A 10% increase in distance leads to a 7% reduction in the proportion migrating. These results strongly suggest that there are costs of moving people
across space.
Fact 2 (Movement Costs Create Productivity Wedges). Controlling for origin and destination fixed effects, the average wage of people born in destination o and living in destination d is
increasing in the distance between o and d.
To establish Fact 2, we run the regression
ln wagedot = δdt + δot + β ln distdot + dot .
The results are shown in Tables 2 Column 2. We estimate that the elasticity of the average
wage with respect to distance is positive, strongly significant, and sizeable. A doubling of
the distance between origin and destination leads to a 3% increase in the average wages.
These impacts can be very large. For example, the straight line distance from Denpasar
to Jakarta on the western tip of Java is about 1000km. On the other hand, the distance
from Denpasar to Banyuwangi on the eastern tip of Java is about 100km. Our estimates
suggest that the average wage of migrants from Denpasar to Jakarta will be 30% more
than those to Banyuwangi.
As we explain in more detail in our two location example below, this fact suggests
that movement costs reduce productivity. To easily illustrate this, consider two locations
d and d0 that are identical except that d is closer to o. Fact 2 implies that those who choose
20 dist

do is the straight line distance, in kilometers, between the centroid of regency o and the centroid of
regency d. We have experimented with movement time, generated using Dykstra’s algorithm and assumptions about the time cost of different types of travel. This does not materially affect the results.

8

to move to d0 have higher average wages than those who choose to move to d. Under
the hypothesis that the two destinations are identical, that workers are rational and are
paid their marginal products, the only way that those in d0 can have higher wages is if
migration costs dissuaded some positive productivity movers, who would have earned
less.
Fact 3 (Selection). Controlling for origin and destination fixed effects, the elasticity of average
wages with respect to origin population share is negative.
Fact 3 is documented by running the regression
ln wagedot = δot + δdt + β ln πdt + dot .

(1)

Estimates from this regression are presented in Table 2 Column 3. Our estimates, which
are strongly statistically significant, show that the elasticity of average wages is negative.
In Indonesia, a doubling of the share of people that migrate to a particular destination
leads to a 4% decrease in average wages. This fact is subject to a potential endogeneity
concern: any shock to productivity in destination d that differentially affects people from
different origins o will tend to also alter πdo . Below, we use our full theoretical model
to motivate an instrument to correct for this. Instrumentation changes the quantitative
results, but does not alter the qualitative fact.
Fact 4 (Movement Costs Reduce Productivity by Reducing Selection). The elasticity of average wage to distance drops to almost zero after controlling for the fraction of origin population
that migrates.
We document Fact 4 by running the regression
ln wagedot = δot + δdt + β ln πdt + γ ln distdo + dot .

(2)

Results are presented in Table 2 Column 4. The coefficient on ln πdt changes little when
the distance control is added, but the magnitude of the estimated distance effect, while
still positive and statistically signficant, drops relative to the results in Column 2, falling
to an economically insignificant size.
9

Facts 3 and 4 together suggest a framework where increasing movement costs, proxied
here by distance, leads to a reduction in the proportion of people that move (Fact 1).
This, in turn, leads to an increase in wages (Fact 2), but these wage effects are generated
by a selection effect created by a reduced proportion moving (Facts 3 and 4). This is
consistent with our discussion of Fact 2, where we assume that workers are paid their
marginal productivity, so once destination and origin fixed effects are controlled for wage
differences reflect selection. Importantly, Fact 4 suggests that our structural approach
of estimating the impact of reducing movement costs using the elasticity of wage with
respect to proportion moving will capture most of the effects of removing movement
cost.
Fact 5 (Compensating Wage Differentials). Controlling for origin fixed effects, locations with
higher amenities have lower wages.
To document Fact 5 we run the regression
ln wagedot = δot + δdot + βamendt + dot
where amendt is measured amenity in destination d at time t. To determine amenity, we
take six different measures of amenity from the Indonesian PODES survey and convert to
a single measure by taking the first principle component. We then standardize to give this
variable a zero mean and unit standard deviation. The results are shown in Table 2 Column 5. Our estimates imply that a one standard deviation increase in amenities leads to
a 2.3% decrease in average wages. This is direct evidence that firms pay a compensating
wage differential to attract workers to low amenity locations. Importantly, there is little
endogeneity concern with the sign of this result. While one may be concerned that higher
wage locations can afford higher amenities, this result goes in the opposite direction.

2.3

An Example with Two Locations

In this section we briefly discuss a two-location version of our model. We highlight the
mechanisms through which migration costs and amenity differentials reduces produc10

tivity. We also show how we estimate the productivity impacts of policies that reduce
migration frictions. Because of the simplicity of the two-location model, we can give an
intuitive graphical analysis.
We think of each work place, or destination d, as being characterized by a productivity
wd and amenity αd . We also assume that each location produces different goods and that
people’s productivities depend on their location. In particular, we assume that the wage
of person i living in destination d is wd sid , where sid is the skill level of person i for location
d. Total utility for person i, from location o who decides to live and work in destination
d, is then αd wd sid (1 − τdo ), where τdo is the cost that a person born in origin o pays to live
in destination d. We refer to τdo either as a movement cost or migration cost. We assume
that τdo ∈ [0, 1], τoo = 0 and τdo = τoo . In our empirical work we will back out αd and
τdo as residuals, and so this way of writing the utility function normalizes the measure of
amenities and movement costs relative to wages.
Figure 2 shows the distribution of skill (sid ) across two locations, which we call A and
B; the figure is drawn from the perspective of people born in location B. If there were no
frictions, people would live where their earnings, wd sid , are highest. As drawn, location
A has the higher productivity, and all those above the ray OE, which has slope w B /w A ,
should move to location A (that is those in regions I, I I, and I I I should migrate). If the
two locations had equal productivity, those above the 45 degree line (in areas I and I I)
should move to maximize productivity.
With movement costs, people from B must be compensated for their move to A. This
means that earnings in A are effectively less valuable, and only those above the line OC,
which has slope w B /w A (1 − τ AB ) will choose to move. We can divide those born in location B into four groups. Those below ray OE (the blue dots in region IV) should not
move, because their returns are highest to stay in B, and they do not. Those above OE and
below the 45 degree line (the red dots in region I I I) should move, because A has higher
productivity than B. The higher productivity in A compensated these people for the fact
that their comparative advantage lies in B. With movement costs, these people do not
move. Those above the 45 degree line and below ray OC (the yellow dots in region I I)
should move, for two reasons. First, they have a comparative advantage in location A.
11

Second, A is a more productive location. Consider person x: she loses productivity equal
to the distance xy because she has a comparative advantage in A but does not move, and
an additional amount yz because A is more productive. These two channels mean that
movement costs reduce productivity by reducing sorting, and by reducing agglomeration
in high-productivity locations. Finally, those above OC in region I should move and they
always do.
Fact 2 and its interpretation can be seen in this diagram. As movement costs increase,
fewer people move to A and the wages of those that move increase. This increase occurs
because some people who would have been more productive in A now choose to stay in
B.21
Amenities also move worker locations away from the productivity-maximizing allocation. With amenities, but no movement costs, people now maximize αd wd sid . The effect
can be understood in the same diagram. With no movement costs and B having higher
relative amenity, the ray OC would have slope

αB wB
αAwA .

The same effects – a lack of sorting

and too little agglomeration – are present and so long as the level of amenity in A differs
from the level of amenity in B productivity will not be maximized. The main difference
between amenity differentials and movement costs is that movement costs will reduce
migration relative to home, while amenity differentials reduce the number of people living in one location relative to the other.
It is worth noting that selection plays two roles in our model. On one hand, worker
heterogeneity and selection are a source of gains. Movement costs, which stop workers from moving to their location of comparative advantage, reduce productivity. On
the other hand, selection limits the potential gains from moving more workers to highproductivity locations. In the absence of selection on productivity, all workers who move
will have the same wage, and so aggregate impacts of removing amenity differentials can
be larger.
Our empirical task is to estimate the gain in productivity that would come from allocating people to their productivity maximizing location. This problem can be separated
21 This fact depends on the properties of skills distribution. In the language of Lagakos and Waugh (2013),
comparative and absolute advantage must be aligned. Our Facts 2 and 3 imply that this is the case in our
setting. See also Adao (2016) for a discussion.

12

into two parts. First, we estimate the movement response. This is equivalent to estimating
how many people lie in the triangle OCE (those colored yellow and red). This is conceptually straightforward. In the case where there are no productivity differences between
locations, the productivity maximizing choice is that half the people from B will stay in
B and half will live in A. Second, we estimate how this movement will affect the average
wages of the four groups in our data: those from A that move to B, those from B that live
in A and those that stay in A or B. Functional form assumptions laid out below imply
that average wages for these groups are a constant elasticity function of the fraction of
the origin population that live in the destination. This elasticity is estimable given our
data, which records origin and destination, and is shown in Fact 3 above.22 Because our
data records the proportion of people from each origin who live in each destination πdo ,
and counterfactual population distributions can be expressed in the same way, this elasticity is sufficient to estimate the counterfactual aggregate productivity. In the next two
sections, we lay out how these ideas extend to more than two locations, how to account
for heterogeneous location productivities, and how we incorporate general equilibrium
effects.

3

Model

In this section we present a simple general equilibrium model of migration. The model
is an extension of the labor sorting model in Hsieh et al. (2016), which itself draws on
Eaton and Kortum (2002). The model also has similarities with recent work on quantitative economic geography, particularly Allen and Arkolakis (2014). The economy consists of N locations. Each location can be an origin “o” or destination “d” for a given
migrant. Workers are born in a particular origin, draw a skill for each destination, and
sort across destinations according to wages, amenity and migration costs. Wages and
amenities are endogenous and adjust to ensure equilibrium. We first discuss how work22 Our

data records origin, current location, and, crucially, current earnings at the individual level. Because we have individual level wage data we can therefore estimate the sorting parameter. This additional
piece of information differs out work from the estimation of Tombe and Zhu (2015), who cannot estimate
this elasticity directly given their data.

13

ers choose where to live and work taking wages and amenities as given, and then turn to
production and general equilibrium determination of wages and amenities.

3.1

Utility and Sorting

Lo individuals are born in each origin o. Each person i receives a skill draw sid for each
possible work destination d ∈ N. The individual also receives a skill draw for her location
of origin. Skill is drawn from a multivariate Fréchet distribution,

F (s1 , . . . , s N ) = exp




"

−



N

θ̃
− 1−
ρ

∑ sd

d=1

#1−ρ 


,



which does not depend on the location of birth.23 Here, θ̃ measures the extent of skill
dispersion or the importance of comparative advantage. As θ̃ decreases, there is a greater
difference between skills across locations. ρ measures the correlation in skills across locations. As ρ increases, individuals with a high draw in destination d are also likely to
have a high draw for destination d0 . The interpretation is that each different location has
a different set of required skills. To the extent that θ̃ is estimated to be high, locations do
not differ greatly in their skill requirements. We allow for correlation between skill draws
to allow for general talent, and the case in which talent is unidimensional is a limiting
case as ρ → 1. Throughout it is useful to work with θ = θ̃ /(1 − ρ) rather than θ̃.
Innate skills are combined with schooling in the location of origin to become human
capital. Location d human capital for individual i born in location o is given by
hido = sid qo .
Throughout, we refer to qo as the quality of schooling in o, but it likely reflects a broader
set of factors that contribute to human capital. The wage per effective unit of labor in
destination d for someone from origin o is given by wdw
do where wd is destination d productivity, and w
d is a mean 1 log normally distributed error which captures any reason
23 Barring

strong evidence of selection and heritability of skills, the assumption that inherent skill does
not depend on location of birth seems a reasonable starting point.

14

why people from origin o may be more productive in destination d. The wage for individual i form origin o is therefore
wageido = wddo hido = wddo sid qo .
Utility for individual i from origin o living in destination d is given by
Uido = αdαdo (1 − τdo )wdw
do sid qo ≡ w̄do sid .

(3)

The term wddo qo sid captures consumption, which is equal to the wage. αd measures the
amenity of location d and captures the need for compensating differentials. Moving to
a location with half the amenity level would be compensated by a doubling of earnings.
Amenities could include natural beauty, the availability of services, or rental rates.24 The
term αdo is assumed to be mean zero and log-normally distributed; it captures differences
in amenity that depend on location of origin.25 τdo captures the utility cost of living away
from home (the origin o), and we refer to it as a moving cost. We assume that τoo = 0
so that moving away from home to a destination d would require an individual to be
compensated with (1 − τdo ) times the income. For example, compared to consumption at
the origin o, the same level of consumption at destination d may be less pleasurable as it is
not undertaken with family and friends. We assume throughout that movement costs are
symmetric, so that τdo = τod . With this background, known results regarding the Fréchet
distribution imply the following results.
First, let πdo be the portion of people from origin o that choose to work in desination
d. We have
πdo =

w̃θdo
θ
∑N
j=1 w̃ jo

(4)

α
where w̃do = wdw
doαddo ( 1 − τdo ). Here w̃do measures the attractiveness of location d
24 Much

work in the tradition of Rosen (1979) and Roback (1982) separate out rents from other amenities.
This is important when considering welfare, because rents are transfers from one person to another which
cannot be considered a loss. Given our emphasis on productivity the difference between rents and amenities
is not important.
25 The error terms α and w mean the model does not perfectly fit the data, and allow us to speak
do
do
meaningfully about endogeneity issues.

15

for someone from o. Equation (4) is the key sorting equation, and it asserts that sorting
depends on relative returns, relative amenities and relative movement costs; it does not
depend on the quality of human capital formation in the origin, qo . That sorting does not
depend on qo is key to our exercise: we wish to distinguish between human capital or
schooling effects which lead to higher production and human capital effects which are
a barrier to migration. Barriers to migration coming from differences in human capital
are, to the extent they are symmetric, captured in τdo .26 To the extent that human capital
differences are a barrier to migration but are not symmetric, they will be captured in do
and will not form part of our counterfactuals.
Second, we can use this characterization to determine the average skill of workers
from o working in d by noting that
−1

E(sd | choose d) = πdo θ Γ̄ ,

(5)



where Γ̄ = Γ 1 − θ(11−ρ) and Γ(·) is the Gamma function. This equation implies that the
more people from o that move to d, the lower is their average skill. This is intuitive as
it implies that there is less selection: the marginal migrant is drawn from further down
the left tail of the talent distribution. Finally, we can work out the average wage in a
particular location for people from a given origin:
−1

wagedo = wddo qo E(sd | choose d) = wddo qo πdo θ Γ̄ .

(6)

Equations (4) and (6) are our main estimating equations. Taking logs of these two equations also shows that the model is consistent with the give reduced form facts discussed
earlier. Fact 1, gravity, is an estimate of equation (4) where distance is substituted for
moving cost. Fact 2 comes from (6) with πdo substituted from equation (4). Facts 3 - 5
come directly from (6).
One important implication of our modeling choices is worth noting. When we observe
large average wages gaps between locations or sectors, it is tempting to think that there
will be large productivity gains to moving people. Our model highlights two reasons why
26 See,

for example, Bazzi et al. (2016) for evidence of this kind of human capital differences.

16

this may not be the case. First, the gaps may reflect selection, as in Young (2013). Second
those in low productivity locations may simply have low human capital in total, captured
by low qo in our model. In our empirical work we will non-parametrically estimate qo ,
allowing for unobservable heterogeneity in the quality of human capital production.

3.2

Production and General Equilibrium

A large number of firms in each location produce a non-differentiated product according
to a linear production technology. Profits for firm j in location d are given by
Π jd = pd Ad h jd − w jd h jd
where Ad is labor productivity in location d, pd is the price, which firms take as given, w jd
is the wage paid by firm j, and h jd is the total amount of human capital employed by firm
j. Firms compete for laborers by setting wages w jd , which implies that in equilibrium
w jd = wd and Π jd = 0 ∀ j and so
wd = pd Ad .
Total economy wide production is given by the CES aggregate
N

Y=

σ −1
σ

!

σ
σ −1

∑ yd

d=1

where yd is the total production in location d, and σ captures the degree of substitutability
between products produced by different locations.

27

Output of good d depends on the amount of human capital in location d according to
the function
yd = Ad Hd
→ ∞ all products are perfect substitutes, so the case in which all locations produce the same good
is a limit case of our model. An alternative specification would be to allow for locations to produce goods
that are perfectly substitutable with a decreasing returns to scale production function. Hsieh and Moretti
(2017) show that the two approaches are isomorphic.
27 If σ

17

where Hd is the total human capital (or effective labor units) available at location d and
Ad = Ād Hdγ
is the productivity of location d. In this formulation, Ād can be thought of as intrinsic
productivity – an exogenous parameter, which may change over time. For example, New
York may presently have high productivity due to its proximity to a port, but this may
have been even more important 100 years ago. Current labor productivity, Ad depends on
intrinsic productivity and the total amount of human capital in location d with γ parameterizing the extent of human capital spillovers, or productive agglomeration externalities.
Finally, amenity is also endogenously determined. We assume
αd = α d L̂λd
where α d is baseline amenity; for example, natural beauty, λ is a measure of congestion
effects and likely to be less than zero, and L̂d is the (endogenously determined) population
of location d.
Before turning to identification, we note one key characteristic of the model. Dividing
through (4) and (6) it is easy to show
wagedo
=
waged0 o



α d0
αd



1 − τ d0 o
1 − τdo


.

Hence, within origin, there are no wage gaps without frictions. We, therefore, rule out
the kind of behavior discussed in Young (2013), where selection alone drives wage gaps.
Our model is somewhere between the work of Young (2013), in which selection is the sole
driver of average wage differences, and the work of Gollin et al. (2014), where raw wage
gaps are used to infer potential gains from movement.

18

4

Identification and Estimation

In this section, we discuss how we identify and estimate the exogenous parameters of the
model {θ, ρ, qo , wd , αd , τdo }. We also note that we do not need to take a stand on the
general equilibrium parameters (γ, λ and σ) for identification. We make several normalizations. First, as noted above, we assume that τoo = 0 and τdo = τod : movement costs are
symmetric, and it is costless to live at home. Second, we normalize α1 = 1: because we
do not observe utility levels, the only variation we have to identify α comes from people’s
relative preferences for locations. Third, we normalize q1 = 1: we identify only relative
qualities of human capital generation. This normalizes productivity wd as well: the wage
wd is what would be earned by someone living at location d who was born in location
1 and who has a skill draw of 1. This means that any on average improvements in human capital generation would be captured in productivities, w, and changes in q capture
changes in the spatial allocation of human capital production possibilities.

4.1
4.1.1

Identification of model parameters
Frechet parameters: {θ, ρ}

Taking the log of equation (6), we have
ln(wagedo ) = ln(Γ ) + ln(wd ) −
|
{z
}

1
ln(πdo )
θ

Destination fixed effect

+

ln(qo )
| {z }

+ ln w
do .

(7)

Origin fixed effect

That is, after controlling for origin and destination fixed effects, the elasticity of the average wage with respect to the proportion of migrants identifies the Fréchet parameter θ.
Intuitively, if people are very similar (or destinations differ little in their skill needs), then
θ is high, so the marginal migrant is not greatly less skilled than the previous migrant,
and average wage will change little with movement. However, if dispersion in talent is
large (or there are large differences in the skill needs in different destinations), then the
marginal migrant is much less skilled than the previous migrant, and so their wage is
significantly lower.

19

Inspection of equation (4) shows that the error term w
do also enters the definition of
πdo . This is intuitive; any random variation that means wages for those from origin o are
relatively high in destination d will encourage migration between the two locations. This
correlation between the error term and the regressor πdo creates an endogeneity problem
that will lead us to underestimate the extent of selection by overestimating θ. We address
this concern with an instrumental variables strategy motivated by our model.
We wish to isolate the variation in πdo that is driven by variation in the relative amenity
of d, and productivity in other locations ¬d. The proportion of people from other origins

¬o that migrate to destination d is affected by these factors, but not by the random error do . The set of migration proportions {πd¬o } are therefore valid instruments for πdo ,
although the first stage relationship between ln πd¬o and ln πdo is non-linear. Therefore,
we follow the advice of Angrist and Pischke (2009) and instrument ln πdo with the fitted value from a “zero stage” regression in which ln πdo is regressed on a polynomial
in ln πd¬o . Monte Carlo estimates based on a roughly calibrated version of our model
confirm that this strategy leads to unbiased estimates and suggests that there are few
efficiency gains to increasing the polynomial beyond a quadratic.28
To separate comparative and absolute advantage, we use a property of the Fréchet
distribution which implies:


2
θ (1−ρ)



Γ 1−
=


2 − 1.
(wagedo ))2
Γ 1 − θ(11−ρ)
var(wdo )

(8)

Using data on the distribution of wages, combined with the θ identified as above, this
equation identifies ρ, the parameter defining absolute advantage. Intuitively, if there is
little correlation in skill types, so that everyone has some destination in which they excel,
then the within destination origin pair wage variance will be low. If, in contrast, ρ is high,
then people of many different skill levels will find the same location to be best and so the
variance in observed wages will be high relative to the mean.
28 Results

of the Monte Carlo simulations are available from the authors on request.

20

4.1.2

Location Characteristic Affecting the Wage: {wd , qo }

Considering again equation (7), with the estimates of ρ and θ in hand, we can identify


wd from the destination fixed effect by noting Γ̄ = Γ 1 − θ(11−ρ) which is identified. We
identify wd in levels using the normalization that q1 = 1. Intuitively, after controlling
for selection through πdo and the quality of human capital through qo any differences
in wages between locations must be driven by differences in productivity. The quality
of the human capital environment qo can be similarly determined. After controlling for
productivity differences at the destination as well as selection, any differences in wages
earned by people from different origins must be accounted for by the relative quality of
human capital formation opportunities.
4.1.3

Characteristics Affecting Movement: {τdo , αd }

Taking the log of (4) gives a gravity equation
!
ln(πdo ) = θ ln(wd ) + θ ln(αd ) + θ ln(1 − τdo ) − ln

∑

α
+θ (ln w
do + ln do ) .

w̃θjo

(9)

j

|

{z

}

origin fixed effect

This equation allows us to identify movement costs. Intuitively, low movement could
be caused by amenity difference, productivity differences, or movement costs. Among
these, movement costs are the only force that leads both people from o to be unlikely to
move to d and people from d to be unlikely to move to o. This intuition is confirmed by
rearranging the gravity equation to give:

(ln πdo − ln πoo ) + (ln πod − ln πdd ) = 2θ ln(1 − τdo ) + ηdo ,
where ηdo is a zero mean shock specific to the locations d and o.29 We see that movement
costs are high when people tend to stay at home, and given an estimate of θ (identified as
above), we can use differences in movement relative to staying at home to identify τdo .
The gravity equation also allows for identification of relative amenities. The multi29 η

do

α
w
α
w
α
α
w
= θ (ln w
do + ln do − ln oo − ln oo + ln od + ln od − ln dd − ln dd ).

21



laterial resistance term, ln ∑ j w̃θjo , is correlated with the error, but can be removed by
differencing the equation. Given this, and having identified wd , θ, and τdo , the only unknown in (9) is αd . Amenities are things that lead to skewed movement in a particular
direction, but which do not cause changes in wages, after controlling for selection. We
can only identify amenities up to a normalization because of the origin fixed effect in the
equation.

4.2

Estimation

We estimate the model using Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood (PPML). The PPML
model has several advantages for estimating migration flows. First, because it estimates
the level of migration, rather than the log, it can rationalize zero observed migration flows
between locations. This is important because in our context, as in most studies of migration and trade flows, zero observed flows are common (Silva and Tenreyro, 2006). Second,
the PPML model respects the general equilibrium adding-up constraints implicit in the
model (Fally, 2015).
Our two estimating equations, Equations (7) and (9), are:

ln(wagedo ) = ln(Γ ) + ln(wd ) −

1
ln(πdo ) + ln(qo ) + ln w
do
θ

(7’)
!

ln(πdo ) = θ ln(wd ) + θ ln(αd ) + θ ln(1 − τdo ) − ln

∑ w̃θjo

+ θ (ln αdo + ln w
do ) . (9’)

j

The identification assumption to estimate Equations (7’) and (9’) by PPML is that the
(level) error terms are mean one and are uncorrelated with the (exponentiated) regressors.
As discussed above, we assume that the errors are mean one, and we deal with correlation
with the regressors through IV and differencing strategies.
We proceed as follows. We first employ an IV procedure to estimate θ. We then take
this estimate of θ and estimate the system of three equations (Equations 7’, 9’ and 8)
using GMM. In implementing the procedure, we drop observations with less than five
observed migrants from the wage data. Although our estimation method rationalizes the
22

presence of zero observed migration between any two locations, we are concerned about
small sample sizes affecting the precision of wage estimates. We bootstrap this entire
procedure to generate standard errors for our estimated values of θ and ρ.

5

Estimation Results

This section presents our parameter estimates. Our main goal is to show that our structurally estimated parameters correlate with proxy measures, and so they appear to measure something real. We show estimates for both Indonesia and the US. We use our
US model to estimate US level movement costs to generate a counterfactual for a highmobility economy. It, therefore, matters whether or not our model does a good job of
estimating these parameters in the US. Our preferred estimates of migration cost use no
structure other than symmetry. We show that this nonparametric estimate correlates with
observable characteristics such as distance. As a robustness check, we re-estimate the
model and repeat all the counterfactual analysis, imposing that migration costs are a linear function of (log) distance; we report these estimates in the Appendix Table 6.30 Recall
that for these estimates, we do not need to take a stand on the value of the GE parameters

{σ, γ, λ }.

5.1

Fréchet Parameters

Table 3 presents estimates of the distributional parameters for both Indonesia and the US.
The skill distribution is summarized by the value θ, which combines both the dispersion
and correlation factor. A higher value of θ means that there is less scope for comparative
advantage, either because skill is less dispersed or because the within-person correlation
is higher. We estimate a value of θ of 28 for the US and 13 for Indonesia.31 Figure 3 shows
random draws from the estimated distributions for Indonesia and the US, where each
30 We

display the distributions of all estimated parameters are displayed in Appendix Figures 2 and 3.
US has slightly more dispersion of skill, with θ̃ equal to 2.7 for the US and 3.2 for Indonesia.
However, the US has a much higher correlation parameter, 0.9 compared with 0.7. The high correlation
factor dominates and leads to a much lower total dispersion of skill.
31 The

23

axis is the productivity level for location 1 or 2. The figure shows that the distribution is
more dispersed in Indonesia than the US.

5.2

Migration costs

We estimate substantial migration costs. Table 3 reports the mean value of τdo , which
is 0.56 for Indonesia and 0.22 for the US. On average, migrants in Indonesia must be
compensated with a 56% higher income, while Americans require a 22% gain. In this
sense, the US is a high-mobility country according to our estimates.
Migration costs, for both the United States and Indonesia, correlate with distance.
Figure 5 plots estimated migration cost τdo against the (log) of distance. Particularly striking is the much lower correlation between distance and movement costs in the US. The
elasticity of cost to distance is 3% in the US, compared to 15% in Indonesia. Several
mechanisms are possible causes. It may be that transportation is cheaper in the US. Alternatively, it may be that people in the US are more welcoming of migrants from physically
distant communities, or that the US is more culturally homogenous.
Measured movement costs also correlate with measures of social distance. Using census data, we construct indices of religious and linguistic similarity.32 Figure 4 plots the
relationship between these indices and movement costs, after controlling for distance.
There is no correlation between migration costs and religion, but migration costs are statistically significantly correlated with linguistic similarity.

5.3

Amenities

Estimated amenities correlate with measured amenities. The left panel of Figure 6 shows
that estimated amenities are negatively correlated with the (standardized) first principal
component of pollution amenities. The right panel shows that estimated amenities corre32 The index is constructed by calculating the probability that a person selected at random from the origin

will have the same characteristic (religion or language) as a person selected at random from the destination.
For example, if the origin is 50% Hindu and 50% Muslim, and the destination is 100% Hindu, then the
religious similarity index would be 0.5. If the destination was also 50% Hindu and 50% Muslim, then the
index would also be 0.5.

24

late positively with the first principal component of health and market access amenities.33

5.4

Quality of human capital formation

Figure 7 shows that estimate of qo (educational quality) correlate with average educational
attainment. This is to be expected if people choose to receive more schooling where there
are higher returns to schooling.

6

Counterfactuals

We now turn to the policy question we posed at the start of the paper: would there be
productivity gains from removing mobility constraints?
To produce counterfactuals, we need to take a stance on the GE parameters. We set
these using estimates from the literature, and then evaluate the robustness of our findings
to different choices.
A large literature estimates the agglomeration parameter (γ). The literature is reviewed in Rosenthal and Strange (2004) and Combes and Gobillon (2015). Recent consensus estimates suggest a γ of between 0.01 and 0.02 for the developed world, although
some studies (e.g. Greenstone et al. 2010) suggest much higher numbers. Estimates for
developing countries are more sparse and suggest a γ up to 1. We present our main estimate for γ = 0.05, but also consider robustness for numbers between 0 and 0.08. We
expect that spatial integration will have a greater impact when γ is high.
A much smaller literature attempts to estimate the congestion parameter λ. On one
hand, the work in Albouy (2012) could be seen as suggesting that λ = 0 in the US. In
contrast, work by Combes and Gobillon (2015) suggests a λ of around −0.04. We take 0
33 Appendix Table 7 correlates the estimated amenities with observed amenities one-by-one. Each entry
in the table is the regression coefficient from separate regression of estimated amenities on amenities. As
we only have 25 estimated parameters we do not expect individual signs to necessarily be statistically significant, but we note the general pattern in these results: overall, measures of pollution are negatively correlated with amenities; measures of health outbreaks such as malaria, tuberculosis and vomiting and also
negatively correlated with amenities, although access to health care facilities seems also be to negatively
correlated, village lighting and commercial banks are positively correlated and we see a mixed pattern for
natural disasters such as flooding and earthquakes.

25

as our starting point and consider values between 0 and −0.08. As λ decreases (and congestion becomes more important), we expect that reducing frictions will have a smaller
impact. It will be hard to move people in to productive areas, even if movement costs are
low.
Accurate estimates the elasticity of substitution across regions are also hard to obtain.
Allen and Arkolakis (2014) use a figure of 8, and we follow them in our main results. We
also consider values between 2 and 8. We expect that as σ increases, there will be larger
benefits to spatial integration: a high elasticity of substitution means that the products
from different locations become less substitutable, and so there are larger costs to low
production of some goods.

6.1

Reducing migration costs

The first policy we consider is removing migration costs. On a practical basis, this might
be achieved by a set of policies depending on the second and the results of future research.
Examples of policies that exist include migration subsidies (Bryan et al. (2014)), migrant
welcome centres, language training, and road building (Morten and Oliveira (2016)). To
estimate possible impacts, we scale our estimated costs by a reduction factor κ, yielding

(^
1 − τ ) = (1 − τ )1−κ , with κ ∈ [0, 1]. When κ = 0 this corresponds to the baseline case
we estimated. When κ = 1 this corresponds to removing migration costs entirely.34
We find modest gains. We predict an 8% output gain from reducing migration costs
to the US level, and a 12% gain from reducing migration costs to zero. The US is usually
considered the archetype of a spatially mobile economy, so the 8% figure is probably the
maximum attainable. These results are illustrated for a range of values of κ in Figure 8.
These modest gains hide substantial heterogeneity across origin populations. While
the average increase from eliminating all migration costs is 12%, the effect ranges from
-12% to 79%.35 That is, the people born in some provinces may see a 79% increase in their
34 The

average value of τus = 0.22 and the average value of τind = 0.56, so the policy experiment of
lowering migration costs in Indonesia to the US level is equivalent to considering κ = 0.3.
35 Recall there is no restriction that reducing migration costs will lead to increases in output. Reducing
migration costs may lead people to migrate away from high-productivity-low-amenity locations towards
low-productivity-high-amenity ones. This is indeed what we see in these counterfactuals.

26

average wage ∑d wagedo . For a move to the US benchmark, the gains range from -5% to
37%. The distribution of gains from complete removal is depicted in Panel A of Figure 9
and the US benchmark is presented in 10.
As noted above, selection plays two roles in our model. On one hand, skill heterogeneity implies that there are gains from sorting. The greater the heterogeneity, the greater the
return to sorting. On the other hand, if each additional migrant earns less than the last,
selection will strongly reduce predicted gains from agglomeration. These two opposing
mechanisms mean that ignoring selection could lead to us to either over – or under – estimate policy gains. To understand the importance of selection, we recompute productivity
changes, shutting down the selection margin.36 Sorting is the main source of output gains
from removing migration costs. Column 1 in Table 4 shows that all estimated gains come
from improving worker sorting (we estimate a 12% gain with sorting compared to a 3%
loss without sorting). Ignoring selection would lead us to underestimate the gains from
removing movement costs.

6.2

Reducing amenity dispersion

The second counterfactual we consider reduces the dispersion of amenities. Again, this
corresponds to the aggregate impacts of a set of possible policies. For example, encouraging home building in high-demand locations (Harari 2016 and Hsieh and Moretti
2017), reducing pollution in cities and providing equal access to schooling and hospitals.
Amenities are estimated to scale. As with movement costs, we rescale amenities by a re 1−κ
α
e
i
duction factor κ, yielding
= αi
, with κ ∈ [0, 1]. When κ = 0 this corresponds
α1

α1

to the baseline case we estimated. When κ = 1 this corresponds to equalizing amenities
across all locations.37
Here we do not compute a US benchmark, this is for two reasons. First, we believe
that it is plausible to have zero amenity differentials; there is no obvious reason why
36 We

do this by setting the endogenous component of human capital equal to 1. This maps to a model
where people are migrating based on preference shocks, such as is considered in Allen and Arkolakis (2014);
Redding (2016).
37 We find little difference in the underlying distribution of amenities between Indonesia and the US, as
shown in Appendix Figures 2 and 3.

27

some locations have to have fewer services and more pollution. Second, inline with the
general argument in Hsieh and Moretti (2017), we find that the US has greater amenity
dispersion than Indonesia. Hsieh and Moretti argue that that restrictive housing policies
lead to high rents in some very productive locations; this would show up in our estimates
as high amenity dispersion. We find that equalizing amenities would lead to an increase
in output of 12.6%. These gains are illustrated in panel B of Figure 8. As with migration
costs, we find substantial heterogeneity. Some origin-locations receive wage gains of up
to 88%.
As above, we ask how these results are affected by selection. We find, in Column 2 of
Table 4 that, in contrast to migration costs, removing the selection margin has very little
effect on predicted gains. As noted above, by ignoring selection, we overestimate the
gains from agglomeration.

6.3

Reducing both migration costs and amenities differentials

Finally, we consider eliminating both barriers – migration costs and compensating differentials – simultaneously. Doing so leads to a 21.5% output gain. The effect of reducing
both barriers is slightly smaller than the sum of their independent effects, suggesting the
policies are very mild substitutes. Under the policy of reducing all barriers to mobility,
the origin that benefits the most would face wage increases of 104%. For this combined
policy, accounting for selection is also important. Table 4 shows that if we do not account
for selection, we understate gains by 40%.

6.4

GE effects

The main results use our baseline parameters for the agglomeration, congestion, and substitution. We undertake robustness over these parameters. Results are reported in Appendix Tables 8 through 10. As expected, when agglomeration is high, congestion forces
are low, and the elasticity of substitution is high, the gains to removing barriers to mobility increase. For the experiment of reducing both migration costs and amenities, our
baseline estimate was an increase in output of 21.5%. The range of results in Appendix
28

Table 10 is from 13.4% to 23.8%.

7

Conclusion

Large spatial wage gaps and recent experimental evidence suggest there may be important productivity gains from encouraging internal migration in developing countries. We
estimate the size of the aggregate gains in Indonesia. Our approach entails using movement data to identify constraints on migration, and considering how removing these constraints would affect locational choices and wages, taking in to account selection and GE
effects. Aggregate output gains are small but important, on the order of 20%. These estimates hide a great deal of heterogeneity, with some more constrained areas seeing gains
of over 100%. Failure to account for selection would lead to an underestimate of the gains;
accounting for selection both reduces estimated gains to agglomerating workers in one location, and allows for larger gains through improved sorting. We find that the latter effect
dominates.
Future research could aim to deepen our understanding of the mechanisms through
which migration affects productivity. Theoretical and macroeconomic research could concentrate on the dynamic effects of encouraging migration. Microeconomic experimental
evidence on the extent and nature of selection among internal migrants, as well as the
strength of comparative advantage effects, would also add to our understanding. Experimental research along these lines is currently taking place as part of the broad research
agenda motivated by Bryan et al. (2014) and related work, including this project.

29

References
Adao, Rodrigo, “Worker Heterogeneity, Wage Inequality, and International Trade: Theory
and Evidence from Brazil,” 2016.
Albouy, David, “Are Big Cities Bad Places to Live? Estimating Quality of Life across
Metropolitan Areas,” 2012.
Allen, Treb and Costas Arkolakis, “Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Economy,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (3), 1085–1140.
Angrist, J and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, Mostly Harmless Econometrics, Princeton University
Press, 2009.
Bazzi, Samuel, Arya Gaduh, Alexander Rothenberg, and Maisy Wong, “Skill Transferability , Migration , and Development : Evidence from Population Resettlement in Indonesia ,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (9), 2658–2698.
Beegle, K, J De Weerdt, and Stefan Dercon, “Migration and economic mobility in Tanzania: Evidence from a tracking survey,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2011, 93 (3),
1010–1033.
Borjas, G J, “Self-selection and the earnings of immigrants,” The American Economic Review, 1987, 77 (4), 531–553.
Bryan, Gharad, Shyamal Chowdhury, and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak, “Under-investment
in a Profitable Technology : The Case of Seasonal Migration in Bangladesh,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (5), 1671–1748.
Carrington, W, E Detragiache, and Tara Vishwanath, “Migration with endogenous moving costs,” The American Economic Review, 1996, 86 (4), 909–930.
Caselli, Francesco, “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences,” in “Handbook
of Economic Growth,” Vol. 1, Elsevier, 2005, pp. 679–741.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe and Laurent Gobillon, “The Empirics of Agglomeration
Economies,” in Gilles Duranton and Will Strange, eds., Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Vol. 5 2015, pp. 247–348.
Desmet, Klaus, Dávid Krisztián Nagy, and Esteban Rossi-hansberg, “The Geography of
Development,” Journal of Political Economy (forthcoming), 2016, pp. 1–54.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica,
2002, 70 (5), 1741–1779.
Fally, Thibault, “Structural Gravity and Fixed Effects,” Journal of International Economics,
2015, (September), 1–26.
Garlick, Julia, Murrary Leibbrandt, and James Levinsohn, “Individual Migration and
Household Incomes,” NBER Working Paper, 2016.
30

Gollin, Douglas, David Lagakos, and Waugh Michael, “The Agricultural Productivity
Gap in Developing Countries,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (2), 939–
993.
Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti, “Identifying Agglomeration
Spillovers: Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plant Openings,” Journal of
Political Economy, 2010.
Harari, Maria, “Women’s Inheritance Rights and Bargaining Power: Evidence from
Kenya,” 2016.
Harris, John and Michael Todaro, “Migration, Unemployment and Develpment: A TwoSector Analysis,” The American Economic Review, 1970, 60 (1), 126–142.
Hicks, Joan Hamory, Marieke Kleemans, Nicholas Li, and Edward Miguel, “Reevaluating
Agricultural Productivity Gaps with Longitudional Microdata,” 2017.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Enrico Moretti, “Housing Constraints and Spatial Misallocation,”
2017.
and Peter J Klenow, “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, pp. 1–60.
, Erik Hurst, Charles Jones, and P Klenow, “The Allocation of Talent and US Economic
Growth,” 2016.
Kennan, J and J Walker, “The Effect of Expected Income on Individual Migration Decisions,” Econometrica, 2011, 79 (1), 211–251.
Kleemans, Marieke and Jeremy Magruder, “Labor markets changes in response to immigration: evidence from internal migration driven by weather shocks,” The Economic
Journal (forthcoming), 2017.
Lagakos, David and Michael E Waugh, “Selection, Agriculture, and Cross-Country Productivity Differences,” American Economic Review, apr 2013, 103 (2), 948–980.
, Mushfiq Mobarak, and Michael E. Waugh, “The Welfare Effects of Encouraging RuralUrban Migration,” 2015.
Lewis, W A, “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour,” The Manchester School, 1954, 22 (2), 139–191.
Morten, Melanie, “Temporary Migration and Endogenous Risk Sharing in Village India,”
2017.
and Jaqueline Oliveira, “The Effects of Roads on Trade and Migration: Evidence from
a Planned Capital City,” 2016.
Redding, S J, “Goods Trade, Factor Mobility and Welfare,” Journal of International Economics, 2016, 101, 148–167.
31

Roback, J, “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life,” The Journal of Political Economy, 1982,
90 (6), 1257–1278.
Rosen, Sherwin, “Wage-Based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life,” in P Mieszkowski and
M Straszheim, eds., Current Issues in Urban Economics1, 1979.
Rosenthal, Stuart S. and William C. Strange, “Evidence on the Nature and Sources of
Agglomeration Economies,” in “Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics,” Vol. 4
2004, pp. 2119–2171.
Silva, J M C Santos and Silvana Tenreyro, “The Log of Gravity,” The Review of Economics
and Statistics, 2006, 88 (November), 641–658.
Tombe, Trevor and Xiadong Zhu, “Trade Liberalization, Internal Migration and Regional
Income Differences: Evidence from China,” 2015.
Young, A, “Inequality, the Urban-Rural Gap, and Migration,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (4), 1727–1785.

32

Density
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

2011

Density
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

1995

4

4.5
5
5.5
Log average monthly wage

6

4

4.5
5
5.5
Log average monthly wage

Density
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

2012

4

4.5
5
5.5
Log average monthly wage

All

6

Rural

Urban

Unit of observation is the regency.
Regency is defined as either rural or urban to match the national share of rural.
Source: 1995 SUPAS, 2011 SUSENAS; 2012 SUSENAS.

Figure 1: Distribution of wages: regency level

33

6

Location A

Should move for comparative
advantage and because A more
productive.

Should move, and do
move

Should move because A more
productive

I
II
III

x

IV
Should not move.

y
z

O

Location B

Figure 2: Productivity and Location Choices of People Born in B

Figure 3: Simulated Frechet Distribution

34

.4
Transport costs
0
−.2

−.4
Beta = .088; t−stat =

32.

−.4

−.2

Transport costs
0

.2
Transport costs
0
−.2
−.4
5
6
7
8
9
Log Euclidean Distance

Religion

.2

.4

Language

.2

.4

Distance

0
.2
.4
.6
.8
Linguistic similiarity | Distance
Beta = −.2; t−stat = −8.4.

0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Religious similiarity | Distance
Beta = 2.4e−04; t−stat = .024.

Data, demeaned by year, from 1995, 2011, 2012.
Graph shows intensive margin transport costs (less than upper bound).

Figure 4: Correlates of iceberg costs in Indonesia

35

1
.8
Migration cost
.4
.6
.2
0

4

5

6
7
Log Euclidean Distance

US (slope: 0.030)

8

9

Indonesia (slope: 0.148)

Data from 1990 and 2010 for the US; from 1995, 2011 and 2012 for Indonesia.

Figure 5: Relationship between iceberg costs and distance in Indonesia and the United
States

36

Correlates of estimated amenities, Indonesia

Relative amenities
−.2
0
−.4

−.4

Relative amenities
−.2
0

.2

Health and market access

.2

Pollution

−1

0

1
Pollution

2

3

−2
−1
0
1
2
Ease of access of health and shopping

Water, land, air and noise pollution.

Hospitals, health care, markets and shopping center.

Estimated amenities from 1995, 2011, 2012.
Variable is first principal component of each group of amenities.

Figure 6: Estimated amenities against measured amenities

37

Estimated schooling quality against schooling attainment

−.1

−.15

Estimated schooling quality
0
.1
.2

Estimated schooling quality
−.1
−.05
0
.05

.3

US

.1

Indonesia

8

9
10
11
Avg. years schooling

12

13.5

Beta is .036; t−stat is 1.8.

14
14.5
Avg. years schooling

Beta is .19; t−stat is

11.

Data is: 1990, 2010 for the US. 1995, 2011, 2012 for Indonesia.
Figure shows a binned scatterplot. Year effects are removed from both graphs.

Figure 7: Schooling quality positively correlated with attainment

38

15

Output gain from reducing barriers to movement

0

.2 .4 .6 .8 1
Percent reduction (κ)

1.05

Relative output
1.1
1.15

1.2

Both

1

1.05

Relative output
1.1
1.15

1.2

Amenities

1

1

1.05

Relative output
1.1
1.15

1.2

Migration cost

0

.2 .4 .6 .8 1
Percent reduction (κ)

0

.2 .4 .6 .8 1
Percent reduction (κ)

Data is average across 1995, 2011, 2012 for Indonesia.
The percent reduction, κ, is defined in the text.
The red dashed line shows the US−level of migration costs.

Figure 8: Output gains from reducing barriers to movement

39

Distributional impacts, Indonesia

0

50
Wage gain

100

20
0

10

20
10
0

0

10

20

30

Both

30

Amenities

30

Migration costs

0

50
Wage gain

100

0

50
Wage gain

100

Figure shows average wage gain. The unit of observation is an origin−year.
National average (weighted by population) shown in red line.
Shows a reduction of costs of 100%. Data is 1995, 2011, 2012.

Figure 9: Distributional effects of fully reducing barriers to migration

40

Distributional impacts, Indonesia

0

10

20

30

Migration costs

0

10

20
Wage gain

30

40

Figure shows average wage gain. The unit of observation is an origin−year.
National average (weighted by population) shown in red line.
Shows a reduction of costs of 40%. Data is 1995, 2011, 2012.

Figure 10: Distributional effects of reducing migration costs to US level

41

Table 1: Migration rates by origin, Indonesia

1995
Migration rate
Moves within category
2011
Migration rate
Moves within category
2012
Migration rate
Moves within category

Rural

Urban

All

32.3
31.1

35.8
74.6

33.7
49.4

38.7
24.4

33.7
84.2

35.7
58.7

38.9
25.4

34.1
83.8

35.8
60.7

Notes: Data source: 1995 Supas; 2011 Susenas;
2012 Susenas. Migration is measured as living in
a regency other than the birth regency. Regencies are classified as rural or urban based on the
share of their population that report being rural;
we choose the cutoff to classify the regency as rural to match the national urbanization rate for each
year.

Table 2: Five facts about migration in Indonesia

Dep. variable
Log distance

Movement costs
(1)
(2)
log πodt
log wodt
-0.717
(0.009)***

Selection
(3)
(4)
log wodt
log wodt

0.029
(0.001)***

Log share migrating

-0.039
(0.001)***

0.007
(0.002)***
-0.031
(0.003)***

Amenities
Destination x Year FE
Origin x Year FE
Destination FE
No. of obs.

Compensating Diff.
(5)
log wodt

-0.023
(0.010)**
yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

25540

25244

25244

25244

no
yes
yes
25050

Notes: log πodt is the log of the share of population migrating from o to d in year t. log wodt is the log of the
average wage of migrants from origin o in destination d in time t. An observation is an origin-destination regency pair. Datasource: 1995 SUSENAS, 2011 SUSENAS, 2012 SUSENAS. Number of observations changes
between columns because not all pairs with positive migration flows have observed wages. Amenity measure is the standardized value of the first principal component. Two-way clustering of standard errors at
the origin-year and destination-year reported in Columns (1)-(4). Clustered standard errors, at the level of
the origin-year, reported in Column (5).

42

Table 3: Estimated Frechet parameters

ρ (correlation)
θ (dispersion)
θ̃ = θ (1 − ρ)
Mean migration cost (iceberg)

(1)
Indonesia

(2)
U.S.

0.74***
(0.031)
12.5***
(1.73)

0.90***
(0.017)
27.6***
(3.42)

3.18
0.50

2.69
0.22

Notes:
Source: estimates from structural estimation of
model. Transport costs estimated non-parametrically. Bootstrapped standard errors reported.

Table 4: Output gain from reducing migration barriers

Indonesia
Baseline
No selection

(1)
Migration costs

(2)
Amenities

(3)
Both

1.117
0.970

1.126
1.125

1.215
1.132

Notes: Table shows the output gain from removing the barrier completely. Data is 1995, 2011, 2012 for Indonesia; 1990
and 2010 for the US. No selection recalculates the output
gain shutting down the role for comparative advantage.

43

Appendices
A

Tables and Figures

44

Density
.2
.4
0

0

Density
.2
.4

.6

2011

.6

1995

−10

−5

0
5
Log monthly wage

10

−10

−5

0
5
Log monthly wage

0

Density
.2
.4

.6

2012

−10

−5

0
5
Log monthly wage

All

10

Rural

Urban

Unit of observation is the individual.
Source: 1995 SUPAS, 2011 SUSENAS; 2012 SUSENAS.

Appendix Figure 1: Distribution of wages: individual level

45

10

Indonesia
B: Amenities

0

1

2

3

0 1 2 3 4 5

A: Migration Costs

0

.2

.4
.6
Migration cost

.8

1

−.3
−.2
−.1
0
.1
.2
Log amenity relative to location 1 (endogenous)

D: Productivities

0

1

2

3

0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5

C: Quality of Human Capital Formation

−.4
−.2
0
.2
.4
Log quality of human capital relative to location 1

13

1995
2012

13.5
14
Log productivity (endogenous)

14.5

2011

Amenities and quality of human capital formation have been normalized to have mean zero.

Appendix Figure 2: Distribution of Estimated Structural Parameters, Indonesia

46

US

0

0

1

2

2

4

3

4

B: Amenities

6

A: Migration Costs

0

.2

.4
.6
Migration cost

.8

1

−.2
0
.2
Log amenity relative to location 1 (endogenous)

D: Productivities

0 1 2 3 4 5

0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5

C: Quality of Human Capital Formation

−.2
−.1
0
.1
.2
.3
Log quality of human capital relative to location 1

7

1990

7.5
8
Log productivity (endogenous)

8.5

2010

Amenities and quality of human capital formation have been normalized to have mean zero.

Appendix Figure 3: Distribution of Estimated Structural Parameters, US

47

Population change

Population change (%)
(92.67847,212.0144]
(64.12415,92.67847]
(36.06034,64.12415]
[−45.41679,36.06034]

Figure shows population change if migration costs went to zero. Data is 1995

Wage change

Wage change, by origin location (%)
(44.17431,78.5889]
(22.67771,44.17431]
(17.68294,22.67771]
[−12.12905,17.68294]

Figure shows wage change experienced by people in an origin if migration costs went to zero. Data is 1995

Appendix Figure 4: Maps of population and wage changes: reduction in migration costs,
Ind

48

Population change

Population change (%)
(−38.51802,392.8717]
(−72.86507,−38.51802]
(−83.82667,−72.86507]
[−95.71681,−83.82667]

Figure shows population change if amenities went to zero. Data is 1995

Wage change

Wage change, by origin location (%)
(49.5304,87.8844]
(29.41565,49.5304]
(17.84531,29.41565]
[−7.999789,17.84531]

Figure shows wage change experienced by people in an origin if amenities went to zero. Data is 1995

Appendix Figure 5: Maps of population and wage changes: reduction in amenities, Ind

49

Population change

Population change (%)
(−42.63651,933.8474]
(−70.86111,−42.63651]
(−86.71304,−70.86111]
[−95,−86.71304]

Figure shows population change if both migration costs and amenities went to zero. Data is 1995

Wage change

Wage change, by origin location (%)
(64.4931,103.7671]
(39.96355,64.4931]
(34.26676,39.96355]
[.2534586,34.26676]

Figure shows wage change experienced by people in an origin if both migration costs and amenities went to zero. Data is 1995

Appendix Figure 6: Maps of population and wage changes: reduction in both migration
costs and amenities, Ind

50

Appendix Table 1: Summary statistics for Indonesia and US sample

Demographic
Average age
Average age (mig)
Years school
Years school (mig)
High education
Financial
Monthly non-zero wage
Monthly non-zero wage (mig)
GDP per capita
Migration
Share migrating
Share low educ migrate
Share high educ migrate
Share migrating (prov)
Number of obs
Sum of sample weights

(1)
1995

Indonesia
(2)
(3)
2011
2012

(4)
1990

United States
(5)
2010

38.58
38.43
8.01
10.17
0.82

39.63
39.31
9.85
11.12
0.92

39.86
39.71
10.12
11.33
0.93

40.78
41.26
13.48
14.03
0.85

44.30
44.95
15.24
15.61
0.93

129.62
174.82
1328.48

188.06
236.25
3177.26

198.72
246.36
3337.69

4424.07
4829.80
39982.11

4985.62
5667.14
48377.39

0.34
0.15
0.39
0.18

0.36
0.19
0.37
0.22

0.36
0.19
0.37
0.23

0.40
0.31
0.42

0.41
0.30
0.46

59,006
13,454,136

68,510
17,324,774

69,330
17,736,228

1,958,123
39,251,152

336,033
32,404,124

Notes: Sample is male head of household, between 15 and 65 years old. Migration defined at the regency
level in Indonesia, and at the state level in the US. Low education is 3 years of schooling or less in Indonesia; 12 years or less in the US. Data source: Indonesia: 1995 SUPAS, 2011 SUSENAS, 2012 SUSENAS. US:
1990 ACS and 2010 ACS. GDP data from the World Bank Development Indicators Database. All financial
values reported in 2010 USD.

51

Appendix Table 2: Summary statistics for IFLS sample

Demographic
Average age
Average age (mig)
Years school
Years school (mig)
High education
Financial
Monthly non-zero wage
Monthly non-zero wage (mig)
GDP per capita
Migration
Share migrating
Share low educ migrate
Share high educ migrate
Share migrating (prov)
Number of obs
Sum of sample weights

(1)
1993

(2)
1997

(3)
2000

(4)
2007

42.27
41.98
5.18
6.42
0.73

43.04
42.87
5.83
6.92
0.79

42.40
42.05
7.27
8.69
0.83

43.41
43.40
7.93
8.74
0.87

149.58
203.82
1181.78

140.18
182.02
1552.12

13.86
13.65
1662.29

7.32
6.59
2276.16

0.32
0.22
0.36
0.14

0.35
0.23
0.38
0.16

0.39
0.27
0.41
0.24

0.47
0.35
0.49
0.23

5,496
5,501

5,625
5,952

7,709
8,430

9,975
10,809

Notes: Sample is male head of household, between 15 and 65 years old. Migration defined at the regency level. Low education is 3 years of schooling
or less in Indonesia. Data source: 1993, 1997, 2000 and 2007 IFLS surveys.
GDP data from the World Bank Development Indicators Database. All financial values reported in 2010 USD.

52

Appendix Table 3: Four facts about migration in the U.S.

Dep. variable
Log distance

Movement costs
(1)
(2)
log πodt
log wodt
-0.553
(0.018)***

0.023
(0.002)***

Log share migrating
Destination x Year FE
Origin x Year FE
Destination FE
No. of obs.

Selection
(3)
(4)
log wodt
log wodt

-0.043
(0.003)***

-0.004
(0.004)
-0.050
(0.006)***

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

5084

5076

5076

5076

Notes: log πodt is the log of the share of population migrating from o to d in year
t. log wodt is the log of the average wage of migrants from origin o in destination d in time t. An observation is an origin-destination state pair. Datasource:
1990 Census, 2010 ACS Number of observations changes between columns because not all pairs with positive migration flows have observed wages. Amenity
measure is the standardized value of the first principal component. Two-way
clustering of standard errors at the origin-year and destination-year reported in
Columns (1)-(4). Clustered standard errors, at the level of the origin-year, reported in Column (5).

53

Appendix Table 4: Five facts about migration in Indonesia, province-level

Dep. variable
Log distance

Movement costs
(1)
(2)
log πodt
log wodt
-0.606
(0.013)***

Selection
(3)
(4)
log wodt
log wodt

0.041
(0.003)***

Log share migrating

-0.066
(0.005)***

0.019
(0.009)**
-0.036
(0.012)***

Amenities
Destination x Year FE
Origin x Year FE
Destination FE
No. of obs.

Compensating Diff.
(5)
log wodt

-0.059
(0.074)
yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

1452

1444

1444

1444

no
yes
yes
1444

Notes: log πodt is the log of the share of population migrating from o to d in year t. log wodt is the log
of the average wage of migrants from origin o in destination d in time t. An observation is an origindestination province pair. Datasource: 1995 SUSENAS, 2011 SUSENAS, 2012 SUSENAS. Number of observations changes between columns because not all pairs with positive migration flows have observed
wages. Amenity measure is the standardized value of the first principal component. Two-way clustering
of standard errors at the origin-year and destination-year reported in Columns (1)-(4). Clustered standard
errors, at the level of the origin-year, reported in Column (5).

54

Appendix Table 5: Four facts about migration in Indonesia, IFLS
data

Dep. variable
Log distance

Movement costs
(1)
(2)
log πodt log wodt
-0.571
(0.018)***

0.023
(0.013)*

Log share migrating
Destination x Year FE
Origin x Year FE
Destination FE
No. of obs.

Selection
(3)
(4)
log wodt log wodt

-0.053
(0.023)**

-0.088
(0.047)*
-0.195
(0.083)**

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

613

228

228

228

Notes: log πodt is the log of the share of population migrating from o to d in
year t. log wodt is the log of the average wage of migrants from origin o in
destination d in time t. An observation is an origin-destination province pair.
Datasource: 1993, 1997, 2000, 2007 IFLS. Number of observations changes between columns because not all pairs with positive migration flows have observed wages. Amenity measure is the standardized value of the first principal component. Two-way clustering of standard errors at the origin-year
and destination-year reported in Columns (1)-(4). Clustered standard errors,
at the level of the origin-year, reported in Column (5).

Appendix Table 6: Estimated Frechet parameters (parameterized model)

ρ (correlation)
θ (dispersion)
θ̃ = θ (1 − ρ)
Mean migration cost (iceberg)

(1)
Indonesia

(2)
U.S.

0.74***
(0.031)
12.5***
(1.73)

0.90***
(0.017)
27.6***
(3.42)

3.18
0.41

2.69
0.18

Notes:
Source: estimates from structural estimation of
model. Transport costs constrained to be a function of log
distance. Bootstrapped standard errors reported.

55

Appendix Table 7: Correlation of estimated amenities with data

Water pollution (past year)
Land pollution (past year)
Air pollution (past year)
Noise pollution (past year)
Main road village lighting
Has movie theater
Ease of reaching hospital
Ease of reaching puskesmas/other health facility
Ease of reaching market with permanent building
Ease of reaching shopping complex
Flooding
Earthquake
Whirlwind/tornado/hurricane
Drought
Outbreak (last year): Vomiting/diarrhea
Outbreak (last year): Malaria
Outbreak (last year): Bird flu (1 case is considered an outbreak)
Outbreak (last year): Tuberculosis

(1)
1995
b/se

(2)
2011
b/se

(3)
2012
b/se

-1.33***
(0.51)
0.91
(1.63)
-0.45***
(0.17)
-1.47
(1.18)
0.23
(0.42)
-6.49
(4.38)
0.18**
(0.080)
0.26*
(0.15)
0.18**
(0.090)
0.22***
(0.077)

-0.57**
(0.25)
-3.09***
(1.03)
0.100
(0.33)

-0.54**
(0.22)
-2.87***
(0.89)
-0.14
(0.29)

0.41*
(0.23)
-19.3
(24.6)
0.058
(0.078)
0.028
(0.12)

0.39**
(0.20)
-45.2**
(20.0)
0.16***
(0.062)
0.20**
(0.099)

-0.28
(0.29)
-0.025
(0.13)
0.36
(0.24)
-0.33
(0.72)
-0.52
(0.43)
0.28
(0.25)
-6.08
(5.18)
-0.37
(0.68)

-0.057
(0.27)
-0.047
(0.11)
-0.12
(0.22)
0.27
(0.64)
-0.47
(0.38)
0.42**
(0.21)
-5.87
(4.57)
-0.98*
(0.57)

Notes: Data source: 1996 and 2011 PODES data and estimates from model. Table shows the regression
coefficient between the estimated amenity value and the amenity measure given in each row. 1996
PODES data are correlated with the model estimates for 1995; 2011 PODES data are correlated with
model estimates for 2011 and 2012.

56

Appendix Table 8: Robustness: effect of migration costs on growth, Indonesia
(1)
Sub. elasticity = 4

(2)
Sub. elasticity= 6

(3)
Sub. elasticity = 8

1.115
1.115
1.114

1.115
1.115
1.113

1.122
1.121
1.119

1.122
1.121
1.117

1.125
1.125
1.121

1.125
1.125
1.118

Productivity spillover = 0
λ = −0.08
λ = −0.05
λ=0

1.115
1.115
1.115

Productivity spillover = 0.05
λ = −0.08
λ = −0.05
λ=0

1.122
1.122
1.121

Productivity spillover = 0.08
λ = −0.08
λ = −0.05
λ=0

1.125
1.125
1.124

Notes: Table shows the effect of reducing migration costs to zero on labor output. Table shows different combinations of amenity and productivity spillovers,
for different values of substitution parameter. Calculated for model with selection.

57

Appendix Table 9: Robustness: effect of relative amenities on growth,
Indonesia
(1)
Sub. elasticity = 4

(2)
Sub. elasticity= 6

(3)
Sub. elasticity = 8

1.046
1.059
1.082

1.054
1.069
1.097

1.057
1.072
1.102

1.068
1.087
1.126

1.065
1.083
1.118

1.080
1.102
1.150

Productivity spillover = 0
λ = −0.08
λ = −0.05
λ=0

1.036
1.046
1.062

Productivity spillover = 0.05
λ = −0.08
λ = −0.05
λ=0

1.042
1.054
1.074

Productivity spillover = 0.08
λ = −0.08
λ = −0.05
λ=0

1.046
1.059
1.082

Notes: Table shows the effect of reducing relative amenities to zero on labor output. Table shows different combinations of amenity and productivity spillovers,
for different values of substitution parameter. Calculated for model with selection.

58

Appendix Table 10: Robustness: effect of both migration costs and
amenities on growth, Indonesia
(1)
Sub. elasticity = 4

(2)
Sub. elasticity= 6

(3)
Sub. elasticity = 8

1.142
1.159
1.176

1.148
1.167
1.187

1.156
1.176
1.197

1.167
1.190
1.215

1.167
1.189
1.213

1.182
1.208
1.238

Productivity spillover = 0
λ = −0.08
λ = −0.05
λ=0

1.134
1.148
1.161

Productivity spillover = 0.05
λ = −0.08
λ = −0.05
λ=0

1.144
1.160
1.176

Productivity spillover = 0.08
λ = −0.08
λ = −0.05
λ=0

1.151
1.169
1.186

Notes: Table shows the effect of reducing both migration costs and amenities to
zero on labor output. Table shows different combinations of amenity and productivity spillovers, for different values of substitution parameter. Calculated for
model with selection.

59

