NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF CASH INJECTIONS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE 1980S FARM DEBT CRISIS
Nittai K. Bergman
Rajkamal Iyer
Richard T. Thakor
Working Paper 23546
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23546

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017

We thank Daron Acemoglu, Jean-Noel Barrot, Douglas Diamond, Mike Duffy, Emre Ergungor,
Mariassunta Giannetti, Radha Gopalan, Michelle Hanlon, Richard Hornbeck, Dirk Jenter,
Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, Debbie Lucas, Atif Mian, Anna Mikusheva, Ben Olken, Jonathan Parker,
David Robinson, Greg Salton, Antoinette Schoar, Alp Simsek, Jeremy Stein, James Stock, Anjan
Thakor, Sharon Waltman, the Farm Credit System Associations, and seminar participants at
HEC, INSEAD, IDC, MIT, Ohio State University, Oxford, Tel Aviv University, University of
Minnesota, Washington University in St. Louis, the 2016 American Economic Association
Meetings, the NBER Monetary Economics Summer Institute, and the Financial Intermediation
Research Society Conference for helpful discussions and comments. We also thank John
Schroeter and Iowa State University for their assistance with coordinating data collection. The
usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Nittai K. Bergman, Rajkamal Iyer, and Richard T. Thakor. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Cash Injections: Evidence from the 1980s Farm Debt Crisis
Nittai K. Bergman, Rajkamal Iyer, and Richard T. Thakor
NBER Working Paper No. 23546
June 2017
JEL No. D22,D24,D31,E23,E24,E51,G01,G21
ABSTRACT
What is the effect of cash injections during financial crises? Exploiting county-level variation
arising from random weather shocks during the 1980s Farm Debt Crisis, we analyze and measure
the effect of local cash flow shocks on the real and financial sector. We show that such cash flow
shocks have significant impact on a host of economic outcomes, including land values, loan
delinquency rates, the probability of bank failure, employment, and wages. Estimates of the effect
of local cash flow shocks on county income levels during the financial crisis yield a multiplier of
1.63.
Nittai K. Bergman
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-632
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
nbergman@mit.edu
Rajkamal Iyer
Imperial College
riyer@MIT.EDU

Richard T. Thakor
University of Minnesota,
321 19th Avenue South, 3-255
Minneapolis, MN 5545
rthakor@umn.edu

1 Introduction
A large theoretical literature exists showing that in the presence of financial frictions, weak
firm balance sheets detrimentally affect economic activity (see e.g., Bernanke and Gertler 1989, 1995;
Shleifer and Vishny 1992; Gertler and Gilchrist 1994; and Kiyotaki and Moore 1997). Strengthening
firm balance sheets during a financial crisis is thus a much discussed and debated question. 1 By
reducing financial frictions, such interventions may increase investment, support lending, raise
employment, and mitigate the severity of a financial crisis.
Estimating the economic effect of interventions meant to strengthen firm balance sheets
during a financial crisis is a difficult task – the timing and strength of such interventions are likely to
be endogenous and driven by the severity of the crisis itself. Since interventions generally occur in
response to severe crises, a simple correlation would suggest, likely erroneously, that such
interventions have detrimental effects on the economy.
To understand the effect of interventions that strengthen firm balance sheets during financial
crises, we focus on the farm debt crisis of the 1980s. Assembling a yearly, county-level dataset of
weather and farm data in Iowa, our identification strategy relies on exploiting variation arising from
random weather shocks. As a large literature in agronomics shows, weather shocks affect crop yields
and hence farm income. Geographic variation in weather realizations thus provide plausibly
exogenous variation in local cash flow and are akin to cash injections to the farming sector operating
within a county. In this paper, we analyze and measure the effect of such exogenous cash injections
during a financial crisis on both the real and financial sector.
Spanning the period 1981-1987, the farm debt crisis resembled in many ways the financial
crisis of 2008-2009, with agricultural land prices and farm debt – much of it collateralized by land –
1 See e.g. the substantial debate during the 2008-2009 financial crisis regarding the effectiveness of stimulus bills such as
the Economic Stimulus Act of 2008 and the American Economy and Reinvestment Act of 2009, which, among other
provisions, reduced firms’ tax obligations and in so doing strengthened real sector balance sheets.

1

increasing substantially prior to the crisis onset. Subsequently, during the crisis itself, land prices in the
U.S. corn-belt plummeted by nearly 50 percent. The farming sector saw severe deleveraging – total
agricultural debt declining by 29 percent from 1984 to 1988 – and experienced substantial disruptions
with numerous farm bankruptcies as well as agricultural bank failures throughout the period.2
As a first step in our empirical analysis, we confirm that county-level weather variation is
related to farm yields in our data. Focusing on corn production in Iowa, we measure how temporary
shocks in weather during the corn growing season affect yields. Consistent with a large literature in
agronomics, we find that corn is highly sensitive to small changes in temperature, with a few additional
hot days during the growing season reducing annual corn yields substantially.
Since local weather affects yields, weather shocks provide exogenous variation in local cash
flows and balance sheets during the debt crisis. We exploit this variation in our empirical strategy by
relating weather-driven cash flow shocks to a host of real and financial variables – both during the
farm debt crisis as well as outside of it. Our analysis focuses on land markets, the propagation of
shocks into the financial sector, and on labor markets. While during normal times, firms should be
able to smooth temporary shocks, in financial crises and other periods of large financial frictions, such
smoothing is difficult as external finance is often prohibitively costly or unavailable.3 An inability to
smooth shocks during a crisis is predicted, therefore, to translate to a host of market outcomes, both
real and financial. Consistent with financial accelerator theories, our results show that cash injections
during the crisis positively affect land markets, the financial sector, and labor markets in an
economically meaningful manner, and ultimately translate into increases in county per-capita income.
We start by examining the effect of cash-flow driven weather shocks on agricultural land
prices. We expect that during a financial crisis, increases in cash available to firms will support asset

For an analysis of the farm debt crisis see e.g. Calomiris, Hubbard, and Stock (1986) and Barnett (2000).
Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) provide a model consisting of two regimes – crisis and non-crisis – in which, in the
former, small shocks are amplified, while in the latter these shocks are absorbed by agents.
2

3

2

prices by mitigating fire sales. When financial frictions are high, asset prices will be affected by cashin-the-market pricing, as economic agents cannot raise external finance to bring prices to fundamental
value (Allen and Gale 1994, 1998; Shleifer and Vishny 1992; Kiyotaki and Moore 1997).4
Consistent with cash-in-the-market pricing, we show that weather-induced cash flow
injections do indeed increase land prices. Since our specifications include both year and county fixed
effects, our identification strategy is driven by comparing, within a given year, counties that received
differential weather shocks, as compared to their sample mean. We find that counties that received a
positive cash flow injection – driven by relatively good weather – exhibit higher land values than
counties that receive a negative cash flow shock – driven by a few additional days of high temperature
weather during the growing season. Instrumenting for county-level crop yields with our weather shock
variable, we find an elasticity of land prices to yields during the farm debt crisis of 0.33. As a placebo
test, we rerun our analysis on the period outside of the farm debt crisis and find no statistically
significant relation between land values and weather shocks. To our knowledge, this is the first study
that provides causal evidence of cash-in-the-market pricing.
We continue our analysis by examining how cash flow injections propagate into the financial
sector. We first show that during the crisis, counties that experience reduced crop yields due to bad
weather shocks exhibit higher agricultural loan delinquencies: as would be predicted, farms in these
counties find it more difficult to repay their obligations. We then show that county level (weatherdriven) cash injections reduce the probability of bank local bank failure during the crisis. The effect is
economically significant, with a 10 percent drop in crop yields increasing the probability of a county

4

As in all models of cash-in-the-market pricing, an implicit assumption here is that asset markets are at least partially
segmented in that capital cannot flow seamlessly from one market to the other (see e.g. Shleifer and Vishny 1992; Allen
and Gale 1994, 1998; Duffie 2010). The market for agricultural land is thought to fit this assumption well, as land is often
purchased by neighboring local farms—a hypothesis we confirm below with a hand-gathered, micro-level dataset of land
transaction records. See also Chaney, Sraer, and Thesmar (2012) for the impact of changes in real estate prices on corporate
investment via a collateral channel.

3

bank failure by 3.2 percent.5 Banks thus appear unable to smooth temporary shocks to their balance
sheets during the debt crisis, consistent with the existence of financial constraints and an external
finance premium at the bank level.6
We then turn to the effect of cash flow injections during crises on labor markets. We begin by
focusing on the labor market in the agricultural sector and then examine spillovers into labor markets
in other sectors. The results show that counties that experience a negative weather-driven cash flow
shock during the crisis exhibit lower agricultural employment rates as well as a reduction in average
county agricultural wages, consistent with a reduction in farms’ labor demand.7 During the debt crisis
when financial frictions are high, lower firm cash balances thus translate into labor market disruptions
and decreased employment. Alternatively, exogenous cash injections during times of high financial
frictions serve to support employment. We rerun the analysis outside of the farm debt crisis, and show
that exogenous cash flow shocks do not effect employment and wages during this time period,
consistent with firms’ greater ability to smooth shocks when financial frictions and the cost of external
finance are lower.
We next examine labor market spillover effects of cash flow shocks in the agriculture sector
on the service sector.8 We hypothesize that during the debt crisis disruptions in agricultural labor
markets following cash flow shocks will spill over into other labor markets. This is indeed what we
find. During the debt crisis, county-level weather-driven negative cash flow shocks in the agricultural
sector are related to employment increases, as well as average wage decreases, in the local service sector.

As a placebo test, we rerun the analysis relating cash flow shocks to bank failures and loan delinquencies outside of the
crisis. As expected, we find no significant relations.
6 For an analysis of the implications of bank-level financial constraints see, e.g., Bernanke and Blinder (1988); Kashyap
and Stein (2000); and the literature on the bank-lending channel of monetary policy.
7 We confirm that outside of the crisis period, weather driven cash flow shocks have no effect on employment or on
average wages in the agricultural sector.
8 Examining wages and employment in manufacturing, we do not find any significant effects.
5

4

During the crisis, a negative cash flow shock in agriculture appears, therefore, to increase labor supply
in the service sector, with workers reallocating from agriculture to services.
We continue by examining whether these labor market spillovers in the service sector depend
on the share of agriculture in the local economy. Our hypothesis is that when the agriculture sector is
large within a given county, reductions in agricultural employment following a negative cash flow
shock will reduce local demand, and hence employment, in the service sector.9 Running interaction
specifications conditioning on the share of agricultural income within the county, we find results
consistent with this demand channel: in counties where farming is more dominant, during the farm
debt crisis negative cash flow shocks in agriculture have a negative effect on employment within the
service sector. Firms’ inability to smooth cash flow shocks during the debt crisis is thus transmitted
to other industries located within the same area, as employees are dislocated within the economy.
We conclude by analyzing whether and to what extent exogenous cash flow shocks ultimately
affected county-level income during the debt crisis. Using local weather shocks to obtain exogenous
variation in county level cash flow, we calculate the local-level cash-flow to income multiplier – i.e.
the increase in income associated with an exogenous dollar injection of cash flow. The results show
that positive cash flow shocks during the debt crisis did indeed increase local income levels, with our
estimates pointing to a multiplier of approximately 1.63. In periods outside of the debt crisis, we do
not find a statistically significant relation between (weather-driven) cash flow shocks and county
income levels. The size of the cash flow to income multiplier is thus state dependent, and larger during
crises.10

See Mian and Sufi (2014) for an examination of the relation between local household demand shocks and employment
within the tradable and non-tradable sectors during the 2008-2009 recession.
10 For a discussion of the difficulty in estimating state-dependent fiscal multipliers, see Parker (2011). Auerbach and
Gorodnichenko (2012) use a smooth transition VAR to estimate fiscal multipliers over the business cycle, finding a
multiplier of between 1.5 and 2 in recessions. See also Ramey and Zubairy (2014), which employs a long time series of
U.S. data to estimate state-dependent fiscal multipliers and Chodorow-Reich et al. (2012) which examines the effect of
state-level fiscal policy on employment. Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) estimate government spending multipliers using
9

5

Taken together, our results show how cash injections into an economy during a debt crisis can
have important effects on a host of real and financial outcomes. When cash balances are reduced,
asset prices decline, delinquency rates rise, banks are more likely to fail, labor market disruptions ensue,
and income levels decline. Conversely, increased cash balances during the crisis improve conditions
in local land markets, financial markets, and labor markets, and ultimately raise income levels. From a
policy perspective, our results thus point to the potential value of cash injections during a financial
crisis that serve to strengthen firm balance sheets, thereby aiding firms in overcoming frictions in
financial markets.
The paper proceeds as follows. The next section presents the empirical strategy, data, and a
description of the farm debt crisis, along with the summary statistics. Section 3 presents the empirical
analysis: Section 3.1 confirms that weather shocks affect crop yields; Section 3.2 analyzes the effect of
weather-driven county-level cash flow shocks on land markets; Section 3.3 focuses on the propagation
of cash flow shocks into the banking sector; Section 3.4 analyzes the effect of cash flow shocks on
labor markets, focusing on employment and wages; and Section 3.5 investigates the multiplier of cash
flow shocks on income-per-capita. Section 4 concludes.

2 Empirical Methodology and Data
2.1 Empirical Strategy
Our empirical strategy employs idiosyncratic weather shocks and their attendant effect on
agricultural growing productivity as a source of variation in local cash flow. An extensive body of
literature has shown that variation in weather has a strong effect on agricultural productivity (see, e.g.,

variation driven by military procurement. See also the literature on fiscal policy at the zero lower bound (e.g. Krugman
1998; Eggertsson and Woodford 2003; and Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo 2011).

6

Dell, Jones, and Olken 2014, for a review). This variation is plausibly exogenous to farm-level activity,
certainly within the frequency we study.
The analysis focuses on the state of Iowa, which provides an ideal setting for examining the
effects of weather on agricultural outcomes. Agricultural production is significant in Iowa and
constitutes a large portion of economic activity in the state.11 Iowa also ranks first out of all states in
production of corn – an important U.S. crop whose response to temperature fluctuations is well
understood. Finally, agricultural data for Iowa are available at a more detailed level and for a longer
time period compared to other states, allowing for a more complete time series of our empirical tests.
Our main empirical strategy uses an instrumental variable approach to relate exogenous
weather-driven changes in crop yields to economic outcomes in various markets of interest: the market
for land, the local financial sector, and labor markets. In doing so, we rely on an extensive prior
literature in agricultural economics showing that corn is highly sensitive to variation in temperature
during the growing season – the months from April through September – with even a few additional
days of hot weather significantly reducing annual corn yields (see e.g. Schlenker and Roberts 2006,
2009). Thus, the variation exploited in our identification strategy is not periods of drought or extreme
heat throughout the growing season, but rather relatively small variation in temperature across
counties within a given year. We measure county-level annual exposure to harmful temperature using
the cumulative number of days in the growing season with average daily temperature above 83 degrees
Fahrenheit (83qF), a threshold corresponding to that identified in the literature.12 Annual county-level
corn yields are instrumented in a first stage regression with the days-above-83qF weather shock

11 According to the Iowa Farm Bureau, the agriculture sector accounts for $72 billion in Iowa's economy annually and
creates one out of every six new jobs.
12 Schlenker and Roberts (2009) find that hot temperature is harmful to corn yields past a threshold of 28qC to 29qC
(depending on the geographical region), i.e. 82.4qF to 84.2qF. They show that an additional day of weather at 40qC (104qF)
instead of 29qC (84.2qF) leads to an approximately 7% predicted decline in annual yields.

7

variable – i.e. the number of days in the growing season with temperature above 83qF – and in a
second stage regression various variables of interest (described below) are related to the instrumented
yields. The first-stage regression in our analysis is thus given by:
log Corn Yieldi,t = β0 + β1 (Days Above 83) + δt + γi + εi,t ,
i,t

(1)

where Corn Yieldi,t is annual county-level bushels per acre in county i in year t, and Days Above 83 is the
annual number of days in the corn growing season in each county which have an average temperature
above 83qF. Regression (1) is run at the county-year level and includes year fixed effects, δt , as well as
county fixed effects, γi , to absorb time-invariant omitted characteristics at the county level as well as
shocks common to all counties within a given year. Our second-stage regression specification
examines the effect of instrumented corn yields, given by (1), on various outcome variables:
Yi,t = β0 + log Yieldi,t + δt + γi + εi,t ,

(2)

where Yi,t is the outcome variable of interest for county i in year t, log Yieldi,t is predicted log corn
yield as instrumented via regression (1), δt are year fixed effects, and γi are county fixed effects.13 The
outcome variables examined are average agricultural land values, agricultural loan delinquency rates,
number of bank failures, average wages, and employment, all at the county-level. The exclusion
restriction underlying the identification strategy is that temperature shocks are exogenous and only
affect the outcome variables in (2) through their impact on corn yields and farm cash flow. As
discussed below, in support of this assumption, using placebo regressions we do not find any effects
of weather shocks on the various outcome variables in non-crisis periods when financing frictions are
less likely to bind, despite the fact that weather shocks continue to affect yields.

We cluster standard errors at the year level in order to account for spatial correlation between counties. By doing so, we
are assuming that all counties in Iowa are correlated, regardless of their distance to one another – a stronger assumption
than a typical spatial correlation adjustment of standard errors (e.g. Conley 1999) which assumes that the correlation decays
with distance.

13

8

One potential concern in the interpretation of our results stems from farmers’ ability to hedge
weather shocks by purchasing crop insurance. However, due to the relatively late development of crop
insurance in the United States, hedging is of limited concern in our empirical setting. Indeed, while
crop insurance markets have been available since the 1930s, they operated on a limited basis until the
1990s, during which time the U.S. government passed a number of laws that greatly expanded the
insurance market.14 Further, the presence of hedging would bias our effects downward, as any crop
insurance or weather-related governmental transfers to the agricultural sector would make farm net
worth less sensitive to the effect of weather shocks.

2.2 Data Sources
We construct a novel dataset of county-level outcome variables in Iowa using a variety of
sources. For our temperature data, we collect daily weather station data for Iowa from the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) from 1950 to 2010. Using this daily data, we
calculate for each weather station the number of days in the corn growing season (from April 1st to
September 30th) with an average daily temperature above 83qF. 15 We then construct county-level
estimates of this temperature measure for Iowa following the procedure in Deschênes and Greenstone
(2012): Using geographical data for each county in Iowa from the U.S. Census Bureau, we construct
a county-level estimate of the annual number of hot days (i.e. above 83qF) in the growing season by

Federally subsidized crop insurance was introduced by the Federal Crop Insurance Act of 1980. However, this law did
not result in significant growth in crop insurance participation, which remained very low throughout the 1980s (Glauber
2013; Hart and Babcock 2000). In the 1990s, laws such as the Federal Crop Insurance Reform Act of 1994 provided for
greatly expanded governmental subsidies in support of crop insurance and also implemented mandatory catastrophic
coverage in order to protect producers against major losses. As a result of this law, as well as other laws passed in the
1990s, crop insurance coverage rose substantially to more than two thirds of total planted field crop acreage by the end of
the decade (see the USDA Risk Management Agency, http://www.rma.usda.gov/aboutrma/what/history.html). It should
be noted that a key driver in passing the series of crop insurance laws in the 1990s was the 1980s farm debt crisis itself
(see, e.g., Stam and Dixon 2004).
15 As is common in the literature, in any given year we only use weather stations that have non-missing data for every day
in July.
14

9

using a weighted average of all weather station estimates within a 50 kilometer radius of the
geographical center of each county. The weights used are the inverse of the squared distance from
each weather station to the geographical center of the county. As there are 99 counties in Iowa, this
process yields a total of 6,032 county-year temperature observations for the sample period 1950–2010,
and 693 observations for the crisis period 1981–1987.
Our measure of corn yields comes from the USDA's National Agricultural Statistics Service
(NASS) yearly crop surveys. The NASS provides yearly county-level data of average corn yields from
1950 to 2010, measured in bushels per acre harvested. Our measure of farmland values come from
the Iowa State University Farmland Value Survey, which provides yearly county-level estimates of the
average value per acre of Iowa farmland from 1950 to 2010.16 Studies have shown that these survey
values closely track actual land sales prices (see e.g. Stinn and Duffy 2012; and Kuethe and Ifft 2013).
We use two different data sources to examine the effect of weather-driven shocks on banks.
The first source is data on agricultural loan delinquencies from the Federal Reserve's Commercial
Bank Data Call Reports. Delinquent loans are defined at the bank level as the outstanding balance of
agricultural loans that are 90 days or more past-due and upon which the bank continues to accrue
interest (these data are available from 1984 to 2000). For each county in Iowa, we aggregate delinquent
balances of all banks headquartered in that county, to obtain a county-level measure of delinquent
agricultural loans.17 In addition, we use data on bank failures for each county taken from the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). These data run from 1950 to 2010. In order to properly
attribute the effects of temperature shocks during the growing season to subsequent bank failures, we

A potential concern with the estimates of farmland value is that some parcels of land may be irrigated (thus leading to a
higher value) while others may not. However, very little of the farmland in Iowa is irrigated, implying that this is not a
concern for our sample. For example, according to data from the U.S. Agricultural Census and the NASS, only 2.6% of
total Iowa farmland was irrigated in 2012.
17
Note that Call Report data do not provide information by borrower location. However, since most banks headquartered
in Iowa are relatively small, loans by these banks are generally originated to borrowers located in the vicinity of bank
headquarters.
16

10

mark a bank failure as occurring in year t if it occurred within the period from the end of the growing
season in year t (October and onwards) through the growing season of year t+1.
Our final data source is the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages taken from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics. We collect data on county-level employment, average annual wages, and
total county-level wages. The data are available for the period 1975–2000. The agricultural crop
production sector is defined as SIC code 01. In addition, we use the services sector (SIC division 0I)
and manufacturing sector (SIC division 0D). A caveat with our agricultural wage and employment data
is that the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages only covers larger farms – it does not cover
most agricultural workers in small farms or self-employed agricultural workers.18

2.3 The Farm Debt Crisis
The period preceding the 1980s farm debt crisis exhibited sharp increases in debt levels and
land values, as common in many financial crises.19 During the 1970s, increasing commodity prices
along with an expansion in demand for U.S. exports of agricultural commodities led to increased farm
production and greater investment in farmland. Between 1971 and 1980, agricultural exports roughly
doubled, the real price of commodities such as corn increased by over 35 percent, while farmland
values rose by 88 percent (see Calomiris, Hubbard, and Stock 1986). During this period of land price
appreciation, leverage played an increased role in the financing of agricultural land purchases.20 For
example, whereas in 1950, 42 percent of all agricultural land transactions occurred with no debt
financing, by 1978 only 11 percent of transactions occurred without relying on debt capital. The

In particular, the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages data do not include farms which consistently employed
fewer than 10 individuals in agricultural labor or which paid less than $20,000 in total cash wages to individuals employed
in agricultural labor during the current or preceding calendar year.
19 For a historical survey of the 1980s farm debt crisis, see Harl (1990) and Barnett (2000).
20 See FDIC Division of Research and Statistics (1997).
18

11

increased reliance on debt, coupled with rising farmland prices, led to a 66 percent increase in aggregate
farm debt levels over the period 1971-1980 (Calomiris, Hubbard, and Stock 1986).
The farm debt crisis is generally thought to have been triggered in the early 1980s by the
combination of several factors. The first was a tightening of monetary policy undertaken by the
Federal Reserve in 1979 under Paul Volcker, which increased interest rates and raised the burden of
farmer debt repayment. The interest rate increase also contributed to a strengthening of the U.S. dollar,
making U.S. agricultural exports less competitive in the global market. Finally, the U.S. implemented
a ban on grain exports to the Soviet Union in 1980, which contributed to a further decline in exports.
As a result of these factors, many farmers who had invested heavily in production over the previous
decade, often increasing their leverage in the process, faced a sudden reduction in demand for
agricultural commodities coupled with a large increase in the cost of borrowing. The result was a
period of severe financial distress and deleveraging in the agricultural sector with significant drops in
farm income, sharp declines in farmland values, impaired farm balance sheets, and an erosion in farm
credit conditions.
From 1981 to 1987, the average value of farmland dropped by 50 percent across corn-belt
states (Barnett 2000). Nationwide, non-performing loans at agricultural banks rose from 2.8 percent
of total loans in 1982 to 6.7 percent in 1986, and 100 small agricultural banks failed in 1984 and 1985
alone (see Calomiris, Hubbard, and Stock 1986; and FDIC Division of Research and Statistics 1997).
The farming sector saw significant deleveraging with total real agricultural debt declining by 37 percent
from 1981 to 1987. In Iowa, real farmland prices dropped by an average of 67 percent across all
counties between 1981 and 1987, with 39 commercial bank failures in that period. Furthermore, the
majority of bank failures – 34 of the 39 – occurred between 1984 to 1987, considered to be the peak
of the crisis.

12

2.4 Summary Statistics
Table 1 presents summary statistics of the main variables. Panel A provides summary statistics
for the debt crisis period defined from 1981 to 1987, while Panel B provides summary statistics for
the height of the crisis from 1984 to 1987. For comparison, Panel C provides summary statistics for
the non-crisis period.
During the crisis years of 1981 to 1987, the average number of days in the growing season
with an average temperature exceeding 83qF is 3.25, while the average number of days above 83qF
outside of the crisis is 2.51. As would be expected, the average annual number of days above 83qF
during the growing season does not differ substantially in the crisis period as compared to the noncrisis period.21 Figure 1 reports density plots of the distribution of days above 83qF over our entire
sample. As can be seen from the figure, roughly 45 percent of the county-year observations have one
or fewer days with an average temperature above 83qF, while the density function is monotonically
decreasing. As our main specifications include county and year fixed effects, Figure 1 exhibits variation
which we do not exploit in our identification strategy. Figure 2, therefore, presents density plots of
temperature variation demeaned with year and county fixed effects. The distribution of demeaned
days above 83qF appears symmetric around zero, but also exhibits substantial variation. Density plots
for individual years (Figure 3) in the crisis and non-crisis period indicate substantial variability across
counties for any given year, with some years exhibiting a significantly higher number of days above
83qF.
As can further be seen in Table 1, corn yields range from 105.7 to 123.8 bushels per acre. The
mean land value during the 1981-1987 period is $2,947 per acre and is $1,978 per acre during the 19841987 period (all in real 2010 dollars). Finally, agricultural loan delinquencies are higher during the crisis,

21

A comparison of means is unable to reject equality.

13

as would be expected. Figure 4 depicts the evolution of average corn yield, land value, and agricultural
debt across all counties during the sample. Average corn yields increase over the sample period, while
land values increase gradually from 1950 to 1970, and then substantially from 1970 to 1980. In the
early 1980s, corresponding to the period of the farm debt crisis, land values drop precipitously. By
contrast, corn yields do not exhibit such a trend during the debt crisis. Finally, agricultural debt
increases steadily from 1960 to 1980 but drops significantly during the farm debt crisis, as would be
expected by a deleveraging process common in financial crises.

3 Empirical Results
As explained in Section 2, we analyze the effect of cash flow injections during a debt crisis by
exploiting variation in weather shocks across counties and over time in Iowa. These weather shocks,
and the associated effect on corn yields, provide an exogenous source of variation in cash flow, and
hence farm balance sheets, during the crisis. We begin by confirming that county-level weather
variation is indeed related to farm yields in our data.

3.1 Weather Shocks and Crop Yields
As described above, to measure weather shocks we construct a variable, Days Above 83, defined
at the county-year level, which equals the number of days during the growing season where the average
daily temperature within the county was above 83qF. This temperature threshold is taken from
Schlenker and Roberts (2009), although our results are robust to alternate definitions of high
temperature values.
We confirm in our data the relation between yield and weather shocks found in the agronomics
literature by running the following reduced-form specification:

14

log Yi,t = β0 + β1 (Days Above 83) + δt + γi + εi,t .
i,t

(3)

Yi,t is corn yields (bushels of corn produced per acre) in county i in year t, and Days Above 83 is the
weather shock variable capturing hot average-temperature years. Regressions include a vector of year
fixed effects (δt) and a vector of county fixed effects (γi ). A potential concern with the regression above
is that the error terms may be correlated across nearby geographical regions. To address this, we follow
the literature in agronomics (e.g. Deschênes and Greenstone 2007; Schlenker and Roberts 2006, 2009)
and calculate standard errors correcting for spatial correlation as in Conley (2008).
Table 2 reports the results of regression (3) over the farm debt crisis sample period of 1981 to
1987. Employing year, but not county, fixed effects, Column 1 shows that high temperature is indeed
detrimental to corn yields. Column 2 shows that adding county fixed effects does not substantially
change the results. As the coefficient on the weather shock variable, Days Above 83, shows, adding an
extra day during the growing season with an average temperature above 83qF reduces annual corn
yields by 3.3 percent. While seemingly high, this result is consistent with much prior work in the
agronomics literature, such as Schlenker and Roberts (2009). Corn is extremely sensitive to high
temperature values during the growing season – an established fact that lies at the heart of our
identification strategy.
In Column 3, we report the results for the period of 1984 to 1987 – the peak of the farm debt
crisis – and find similar results. In Column 4 we estimate the results for the non-crisis period. The effect
of weather on yields is biological and hence, as expected, the estimated coefficient on the weather
shock variable during the non-crisis period (Colum 4) is similar to those during the crisis period
(Columns 1-3).

15

3.2 Cash Flow Shocks and Asset Prices
Having confirmed the effect of temperature on yields, we analyze how temperature shocks,
and the variation they induce in farm cash flows, affect local land prices. Following cash-in-the-market
pricing theories (Shleifer and Vishny 1992; Allen and Gale 1994; and Kiyotaki and Moore 1997), we
hypothesize that during debt crises, when financial frictions and the cost of external finance are high,
counties that receive negative cash flow shocks stemming from weather variation will exhibit lower
agricultural land prices: negative weather shocks reduce the net worth of local buyers – i.e. nearby
farmers – who will thus have less funds to purchase land.
As in all models of cash-in-the-market pricing, an implicit assumption required for land prices
to be affected by local liquidity conditions is that the market for land is at least partially segmented, in
that capital cannot flow seamlessly from afar (see, e.g., Shleifer and Vishny 1992; Allen and Gale 1994,
1998; Duffie 2010). This assumption is likely satisfied in the market for agricultural land, which is
generally thought to be highly localized. However, to confirm this assumption, we hand-collect a
micro-level dataset on land transactions within one county in Iowa – Hamilton county – between the
years 1970 and 1988.22 For each of the 1,971 sales of agricultural land in Hamilton county, we mark
the county of the buyer and calculate the monthly fraction of out-of-county buyers. As can be seen in
Figure 5, the data confirm that agricultural land sales are highly localized: only 9.4 percent of
transactions occur with an out-of-county buyer. Interestingly, the fraction of out of county buyers
increases substantially during the financial crisis, reaching 25 percent in 1985. This spike in out-ofcounty purchases is very much consistent with, and in fact would be predicted by, the existence of fire
sales, in which capital from afar flows into the market to buy liquidated assets.
Having confirmed that agricultural land markets are localized, we examine the effect of
exogenous county-level weather-induced cash flow shocks on the price of land during the crisis. Table
22

The data are hand-collected from the Hamilton county courthouse where they are located in non-electronic form.

16

3 reruns the reduced form specification in regression (3) but employs log(Land Value), the average
county-level price per acre of farmland (in 2010 dollars), as the dependent variable. Consistent with
the prediction of cash-in-the-market pricing, we find that counties that received a positive cash flow
injection – driven by relatively good weather – exhibit higher land values than counties that receive a
negative cash flow shock – driven by a few additional days of high temperature weather during the
growing season.23 Focusing on Column 2, which includes county fixed effects, an additional day during
the growing season with an average temperature greater than 83qF reduces average price per acre by
0.4 percent. In Column 3, which reports the results for the period during the peak of the farm debt
crisis, 1984-1987, the estimated magnitudes are even larger: during the growing season, an additional
day with average temperature exceeding 83qF reduces land values by 0.7 percent. To our knowledge,
this is the first study that provides causal evidence of cash-in-the-market pricing.
To provide intuition as to why land prices move following a negative weather shock, it is
instructive to conduct a back-of-the-envelope estimate of the effect of weather variation on farm
balance sheets. First, it should be noted that farming involves relatively low profit margins – on the
order of 6 percent.24 Consider then a shock that adds an extra day of high temperature, i.e. with average
temperature above 83qF, during the growing season. Based on our estimates above, and consistent
with prior literature, this incremental hot day reduces average annual yield by 3.3 percent. Assuming
that costs are unaffected by the bad weather shock (in fact, costs tend to rise following such a shock)
annual profits are expected to decline by approximately 50 percent.25 Due to small profit margins,
variation in weather can have a large influence on farm cash positions – a standard operating leverage

To reiterate, a reduction in the weather shock variable, Days Above 83, captures exogenous positive cash flow injections
into a county.
24 See Hoppe and Banker (2006).
25 With a 6 percent profit margin, P = 0.06 × R and C = 0.94 × R, where P, R, and C are profit, revenue, and cost,
respectively. Since the weather shock reduces revenue by 3.3 percent, the resultant profit – i.e. post-weather shock – will
be 0.027R rather than 0.06R. Profit thus declines by approximately fifty percent.
23

17

effect – which then feeds into land prices as shown in Table 3.
The results in Table 3 regarding the relation between weather shocks and land prices focuses
on the farm debt crisis period. At the center of the theoretical argument behind this result is the
assumption that financial frictions prevent firms from raising external financing to smooth shocks or
make it prohibitively costly for them to do so. According to this argument, we thus expect that outside
of the crisis, the effect of weather shocks on land prices is greatly diminished (or non-existent), even
while these shocks continue to affect yields and hence cash flows. Column 4 conducts this test by
considering the impact of exogenous weather shocks outside of the 1980s farm debt crisis. As can be
seen, in contrast to the results in Columns 1-3 of Table 3, weather variation outside of the crisis years
has no statistically significant relationship with land prices, consistent with an increased ability of firms
to smooth cash flow shocks. Thus, even though negative weather shocks continue to detrimentally
affect yields outside of the crisis (see Table 2, Column 4), they have no effect on land values outside
the crisis.26
Table 3 provides a reduced form estimation of the relation between weather shocks and land
values. To estimate the elasticity of land values to exogenous variation in yields during the debt crisis,
we employ the following instrumental variable approach. The first stage instruments for yields using
exogenous weather shocks, as in regression (1) above, while the second stage relates county average
land values to the predicted yields taken from the first stage. Specifically, we run:
log Land Valuei,t = β0 + log Yieldi,t + δt + γi + εi,t ,

(4)

One concern regarding the relation between land values and weather-driven cash flow shocks is that potential buyers
might mistakenly believe that temporary weather shocks are indicative of longer-term shifts in weather activity. This, for
example, could arise due to a behavioral bias by which, following a negative weather shock, potential land buyers
overestimate the conditional probability of future negative weather shocks. However, this expectation-driven explanation
is not consistent with the fact that land values exhibit no relation with weather shocks outside of the crisis.

26

18

where log Yieldi,t is instrumented log corn yield in county i in year t estimated via (1), and Land Valuei,t
is the average land value (in 2010 dollars per acre) of county i in year t. As in all specifications, δt,
represents a vector of year fixed effects, and γi represents a vector of county fixed effects.
The results are shown in Table 4. Column 1 of the table provides the first-stage estimation.
Column 2 of the table exhibits the results of the second stage, finding an elasticity of land values to
yields of 0.114 – a 10 percent exogenous increase in county yields is thus associated with a 1.14 percent
increase in land values during the debt crisis. Columns 3 and 4 conduct the instrumental variable
strategy starting from 1984 – the height of the crisis years – and up to its end in 1987. Consistent with
higher financial constraints during the height of the crisis, the second stage elasticity of land prices to
yields is 0.33, or roughly three times larger than the effect during the full crisis period.

3.3 Cash Flow Shocks and the Financial Sector: Delinquencies and Bank Failures
Having shown how weather shocks affect yields and land prices, in this section we analyze
how temporary shocks to cash flow during the debt crisis propagated into the financial sector. In the
presence of financial frictions, negative weather shocks are expected to reduce farms’ ability to repay
loans. Cash flow shocks in the real sector will thus transmit into balance sheet shocks in the financial
sector. If financial constraints amongst banks during the crisis are sufficiently severe, raising external
capital to smooth temporary shocks will be difficult, leading to increased bank failure rates.27 Cash
injections and the strength of firm balance sheets in the real sector can therefore impact and spill over
into the financial sector.
To analyze the propagation of shocks from the real sector to the financial sector during a debt
crisis, we first verify that negative cash flow shocks do indeed translate into higher delinquencies on

For the importance of bank-level financial constraints, see, e.g., Bernanke and Blinder (1988); Kashyap and Stein
(2000); and Bernanke and Gertler (1995).
27

19

agricultural loans during the crisis. For each county-year we calculate the aggregate outstanding balance
of agricultural loans that are 90 days or more past due. Data on agricultural loan delinquencies are
taken from the Federal Reserve Call Reports. As in the prior section, we employ an instrumental
variable approach that runs a first-stage regression in which county average corn yields are
instrumented with Days Above 83, the weather shock variable. The second stage then relates countylevel aggregate balance of delinquent loans to county average yields.28 Specifically we run:
log Ag Delinquenciesi,t = β0 + log Yieldi,t + δt + γi + εi,t ,

(5)

where, as in prior regressions, log Yieldi,t is instrumented log corn yield in county i in year t estimated
via (1), δt, represents a vector of year fixed effects, γi represents a vector of county fixed effects, and
Ag Delinquencies is the total outstanding balance of delinquent agricultural loans.
Panel A of Table 5 presents the results. As can be seen in Column 1 of the table, delinquency
levels vary negatively with yields. The results imply an elasticity of 3 between county aggregate
delinquent loans and county average yields: during the crisis, counties which experience a 10 percent
weather-driven exogenous increase in yields (as compared to their mean) exhibit a 30 percent decrease
in aggregate delinquency rates. As would be predicted, exogenous positive cash injections translated
into reduced delinquencies among borrowers.
Loan delinquencies represent, of course, shocks to bank balance sheets. As a next step, we
examine to what extent exogenous variation in loan delinquencies transmit into the local financial
sector in the form of subsequent county bank failures. We employ our standard instrumental variable
approach, first instrumenting county average yields with the weather shocks, and then relating the
instrumented yields to bank failure rates at the county-level. Specifically we run the following
instrumental variable linear probability model:

28

See Column 3 of Table 2 for the first stage results.

20

Bank Failurei,t = β0 + log Yieldi,t + δt + γi + εi,t ,

(6)

where Bank Failurei,t takes on the value of one if there was a bank failure in county i in the period
following the growing season in year t up to the end of the growing season in the following year, and
zero otherwise. As usual, log Yieldi,t is instrumented log corn yield in county i in year t estimated via
(1), δt is a vector of year fixed effects, and γi is a vector of county fixed effects.
Column 2 of Table 5A presents the results. As the table shows, a 10 percent increase in yields
leads to an approximately 3.2 percentage point increase in the probability of bank failure. The effect
is economically sizeable, as 28 percent of the county-year observations during the period of 1984 to
1987 exhibit a bank failure. Consistent with the hypothesis, temporary cash flow variation driven by
exogenous weather shocks did indeed lead to spillovers into the financial sector in the form of bank
failures.
Column 3 of the table repeats the analysis, but allows a lag in the time to bank failure.
Specifically, we define an indicator variable, Bank Failure Crisis, that takes on the value of one if there
was a bank failure from the given year until the end of the crisis (i.e. to 1987), and zero otherwise. As
can be seen, the effect of predicted yields on bank failures rises when a time lag to failure is accounted
for, with a coefficient in the level-log specification that is approximately -0.4.
As a placebo test, Panel B of Table 5 examines the effect of temporary cash flow shocks
outside of the debt crisis. Lower financial frictions and stronger balance sheets during this period
would predict muted effects. This is indeed what the results indicate. As can be seen in Column 1 and
Column 2 of Table 5B, cash flow shocks outside of the crisis are not related to delinquency rates or
bank failure rates in a statistically significant manner.

21

3.4 Cash Flow Shocks and Labor Markets: Employment and Wages
We continue by analyzing the effect of temporary cash flow shocks during the crisis on local
employment and wages, focusing first on the agricultural sector itself. Panel A of Table 6 focuses on
the debt crisis years, examining the relation between weather-driven variation in yields and labor
markets outcomes within the agricultural sector. We analyze county average pay and county
employment levels, as obtained from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages. All regressions
employ the instrumental variable approach, whereby county average yields are instrumented first with
the weather shock variable, and then predicted yields are related to either wages or employment.
Specifically, we run:
Yi,t = β0 + log Yieldi,t + δt + γi + εi,t ,

(7)

where Yit is a county-level labor-market outcome, and log Yieldi,t is instrumented log corn yield in
county i in year t estimated via regression (1). We examine three labor-market outcomes: total countylevel wages in the agricultural crop sector (Ag Total Wages), average county-level annual wage for an
employee in agricultural crop production (Ag Avg Wages), and total county-level employment in
agricultural crop production (Ag Employment).
Column 1 of Table 6A exhibits results using total county-level employment as the dependent
variable.29 As can be seen, there is a positive relation between yields and total county employment.
Estimating the economic magnitude of the effect, a one percent drop in yields reduces agricultural
employment by 4.3 percent of the sample mean. Thus, during the crisis, farms in counties that received
a positive cash flow injection (driven by relatively good weather) reduce their total agriculture
employment by less than those that received a negative cash flow shock. Consistent with increased

Note that the data from QCEW does not include information for small farms. As small firms are generally thought to
be more financially constrained (see, e.g., Gertler and Gilchrist 1994; Beck, Demirgü-Kunt, and Maksimovic 2005; and
Hadlock and Pierce 2010), this suggests that the results here underestimate the true relation between yields and labor
market outcomes.

29

22

financial frictions during the crisis, temporary shocks to firm balance sheets affect employment rates.
When financial constraints bind and external capital is costly, labor demand can be influenced by firm
net worth.
Continuing with labor market outcomes, Column 2 of Table 6A replaces employment with
average county wages per employee as the dependent variable. As can be seen, predicted crop yields
are positively related to average wages per employee. Counties that experienced a negative weatherinduced cash flow shock exhibit a relative decline in average wages per employee, consistent with a
drop in labor demand stemming from reduced ability to finance employee wages out of internal capital.
The elasticity of yields to average county pay is 2.9: a one percent reduction in yields is associated with
approximately a three percent relative reduction in average wage per employee. Column 3 analyzes
total county wages, which combines variation in total county employment as well as variation in county
average wage per employee. Unsurprisingly, given the results in the prior two columns, we find that
weather driven cash flow injections are positively related to total county wages.
Panel B of Table 6 repeats the analysis but focuses on the period outside of the farm debt
crisis. Outside of financial crises, firms’ ability to smooth temporary cash flow shocks is greatly
enhanced, and so we expect the relation between employment and predicted yields to be dampened.
Consistent with this, the results show that outside of the debt crisis, county level employment, average
wage per employee, and total wages are unrelated to exogenous (weather-driven) variation in yields.
While the strength of a firm’s balance sheet, and variation in it, plays a role in determining labor market
outcomes during periods of high financial constraints, they play no role outside of the crisis. The
results thus suggest that cash injections into the real sector affect labor market outcomes during a debt
crisis, but not outside of it.
Table 7 continues by analyzing how cash flow shocks spill over into other labor markets during
the debt crisis. Specifically, we use the instrumental variable strategy from above to relate variation in
23

predicted yields to local level employment and wages in the service sector – a natural sector where
employees dislocated from farming might seek employment.30 Column 1 of Table 7A shows that total
county-level employment in the service sector is negatively related to weather-driven cash flow shocks
in the agricultural sector: when a county is hit with a negative cash flow shock in the agricultural sector,
the data show that agricultural employment declines while employment in services rises (compared to
the mean county level). Following a negative cash flow shock, workers thus appear to shift from the
adversely affected agricultural sector towards other industries. The results in Column 1 of the table
show that a one percent reduction in county predicted yields is associated with a 0.34 percent increase
in county-level service sector employment.
Still focusing on the debt crisis period, Column 2 of Table 7 examines how average wages in
the service sector relate to cash flow shocks in the agricultural sector. Consistent with an outward shift
in the supply of workers in services, the coefficient on predicted yields shows that counties that
experienced an exogenous negative (weather-driven) cash flow shock in agriculture exhibit a relative
decline in wages in the service sector. As workers shift from agriculture to services, labor supply rises
and, correspondingly, wages in the sector decline. The elasticity of average county wages in the service
sector to county yields is 0.075 – i.e., a ten percent decline in agricultural yields translates into a 0.75
percent drop in service sector wage.
Column 3 of the table examines total county wages in the service sector and finds that these
are unrelated in a statistically significant manner to yields. This is not altogether surprising, as the effect
on wages and employment run in opposite directions following a negative shock to yields: while
average wages in the service sector falls, county employment in the sector rises.
Taken together, the results in Panel A of Table 7 paint a picture by which, during a debt crisis,

We note that we find no statistically significant adjustments in manufacturing employment in response to weather-driven
dislocation in the agricultural sector. Data are taken from QCEW as discussed earlier.
30

24

firms’ inability to smooth shocks in one sector create externalities in other sectors within the labor
market. Workers shift away from firms hit by temporary cash flow shocks, increasing the supply of
labor in other sectors. The result is higher employment and lower wages in sectors unrelated to the
original cash flow shock.
For completeness, Panel B of Table 7 conducts a placebo test and reruns the specifications of
Panel A focusing on the period outside of the crisis. As was shown in Panel B of Table 6, outside of
the crisis weather shocks do not affect agricultural employment. Because the agriculture sector is able
to smooth cash flow shocks, we expect to find no effect on labor outcomes in the services sector
outside of the crisis. This is indeed what the results show. Using the instrumental variable specification
outside of the crisis, none of the service sector labor market outcomes are related in a statistically
significant manner to (predicted) county level yields.
We next test a second channel – related to shifts in demand – through which cash flow shocks
during a financial crisis can spill over into other sectors. The results in Table 6 show how sectoral cash
flow shocks during a financial crisis translate into labor market dislocation within the agriculture
sector, as firms find it difficult to utilize capital markets to smooth temporary funding shortages.
Accordingly, we test the following demand channel for inter-sector spillovers during financial crises:
once a given sector is hit by a cash flow shock, firms in the sector cut employment, causing dislocated
employees to reduce overall consumption. The shock to the first sector thus propagates into other
sectors, which, faced with a reduction in demand, cut employment in their respective sectors.31
To test this mechanism, we run similar regressions to those in Table 7 relating employment
and wages in the service sector to weather-induced cash flow shocks in agriculture, but interact the
weather-driven cash flow shocks with a measure of the importance of agriculture within each county.

Examining a demand channel, Mian et al. (2013) analyze how local-level shocks to household balance sheets driven by
the 2006-2009 collapse in housing prices affect household consumption, while Mian and Sufi (2014) analyze how this
household balance sheet shock reduced employment during the 2008-2009 crisis.

31

25

Weather shocks are measured, as usual, using the number of growing season days with average
temperature above 83qF, while the importance of agriculture within each county is measured by the
ratio of farm crop income to total income within each county. We predict that in counties with a
dominant agriculture sector, negative (weather-driven) cash flow shocks will lead to greater declines
in overall demand, which will tend to reduce employment in the service sector. This demand-driven
effect goes in the opposite direction to the reallocation effect analyzed above whereby workers from
agriculture move into other sectors following a cash flow shock in the agriculture sector.
Column 1 of Table 8A presents the results of the interaction specification, analyzing the effect
of weather-driven cash flow shocks on service sector employment. As can be seen, the coefficient on
the non-interacted weather shock is positive, but the coefficient on the interaction term between the
weather shock and the county-level agricultural importance is negative. Thus, as in Table 7 above, in
counties where farming plays a relatively small role, negative cash flow shocks in agriculture tends to
increase employment in services—a reallocation channel. However, if agriculture plays a sufficiently
large role in a county, cash flow shocks in the agriculture sector reduce employment in services. At the
25th percentile of agricultural importance within the county (captured by the ratio of farm crop income
to total income), an additional hot day with temperature above 83qF increases service sector
employment by 1.3 percent of the sample mean, but in contrast, at the 75th percentile of agricultural
importance such a weather shock reduces service sector employment by 0.8 percent. Thus, during a
debt-crisis, aggregate county-level cash flow shocks in one sector impose employment externalities on
other sectors operating within the same geography. The sign of these externalities depends on the
relative importance within the economy of the sector receiving the shock.
Column 2 of Table 8A repeats the analysis but analyzes the impact on service sector wages
(rather than employment). We predict that detrimental weather-driven cash flow shocks reduce wages
and that this effect will be greater when agriculture plays a larger role within a county. However, as
26

can be seen in the table, while the non-interacted coefficient on weather shocks does indeed predict a
reduction in wages following a negative cash flow shock, the coefficient on the interaction term with
the fraction of county-level farm income is not statistically significant.
Panel B of Table 8 repeats the interaction specification in Panel A of the table, but uses the
instrumental variable strategy relating labor market outcome variables to predicted log yields (as in
Table 7 above). To this end, we separate the sample into two based on median county-level farm
importance, and rerun instrumental variable specifications for below median and above median farm
importance counties.32 The results are consistent with those in Table 7. Employment in services is
positively related to predicted yields in counties with above-median farming importance but is
negatively related to predicted yields in counties with below-median farming importance. Negative
weather-driven cash flow shocks thus decrease employment in services amongst counties where
farming plays a large role – consistent with a demand-channel effect – but increases employment in
counties where farming plays a relatively smaller role – consistent with a reallocation effect. Further,
as can be seen from Columns 3 and 4 of Table 8B, wages are positively related to predicted yields,
although the effect is not statistically significant in above-median farming importance counties.

3.5 Cash Flow Shocks and Income Per Capita: The Income Multiplier During the 1980s Farm
Debt Crisis
The results of the prior sections show how county-level cash flow shocks during the debt crisis
had a sizeable effect on a host of real outcomes across a number of markets. These include the market
for land, labor markets, and the local banking sector. A natural question to ask, then, is whether and
to what extent exogenous cash flow shocks ultimately affect county-level income during the debt
crisis. To investigate this question, we use our standard instrumental variable approach regressing the
32

The median ratio of farm income to total county income is 0.226.

27

log of county income per capita on the log of county-level yields, with yields instrumented by the
exogenous weather shock variable Days Above 83.
The results are presented in Table 9. As can be seen, during the farm debt crisis, instrumented
yields are positively related to income per capita, with an elasticity of 0.138. In contrast, the point
coefficient on predicted yields outside of the farm debt crisis period is approximately one third smaller
and not statistically significant.
It is instructive to use the results in Table 9 to conduct a back-of-the-envelope calculation of
the local-level cash flow to income multiplier – i.e., the increase in county-level income associated with
an exogenous dollar injection of cash flow. Based on the elasticity of 0.138 in Table 9, a ten percent
weather-driven drop in yields during the crisis is associated with a 1.38 percent drop in county income
per capita. This 1.38 percent drop is equivalent to a per-capita reduction of $356.8 from the average
county-level income-per-capita during the crisis ($25,855 in 2010 real dollars). Since the 10 percent
drop in yields is equivalent to a reduction of $219.55 in county per capita corn sales, our results indicate
that during the debt crisis, the multiplier between the exogenous county level cash flow shock and
county-level income is $356.80/$219.55 = 1.63.33 Based on these estimates, cash flow injections had
a significant impact on local economic income during the crisis.34
As a consistency check, the county-level income-to-cash-flow shock multiplier can also be
calculated employing the reduced form specification relating yields to the number of high temperature
days during the growing season. As can be seen in Column 3 of Table 9, an additional growing season
day with temperature above 83qF leads to a 0.3 percent reduction in income per capita, or equivalently,

To calculate the effect of a 10 percent drop in yields on county corn sales, note that the average yield during the crisis
was 123.8 bushels per acre while the average real price of corn was $4.10 per bushel. The 10 percent drop in yields is thus
equivalent to a 12.38 × 4.10 = $50.76 drop in sales per acre. The average acreage of grown corn per county was 122,854
while the average county population was 28,402. This implies that a 10 percent drop in yields was associated with a $219.55
(= $50.76 × 122,854 / 28,402) drop in county per capita sales.
34 As Table 9 shows, outside of the debt crisis, the point estimate of the income-per-capita to yield elasticity is 0.34 with a
95 percent confidence interval of -0.26 to 0.94.
33

28

a reduction of $77.57 as compared to the mean income per capita of $25,855 during the crisis. From
Table 2, an additional growing season day with temperature above 83ºF leads to a 2.2 percent drop in
corn yields during the crisis, which in turn is equivalent to a $48.30 (in 2010 real dollars) drop in county
per capita sales.35 The multiplier between the exogenous cash flow shock and county-level income is
thus $77.57/$48.30 = 1.61, which is similar to the 1.63 estimate obtained above.

4 Conclusion
In this paper, we examine the general equilibrium effects of cash flow injections during a
financial crisis. Analyzing the 1980s farm debt crisis, our empirical strategy exploits random weather
shocks as a source of exogenous cash flow variation. Our analysis tracks the effect of weather induced
cash flow shocks during the crisis on a host of outcomes in the real and financial sector. We find that
exogenous cash flow shocks during the crisis have significant effects on land values, loan delinquency
and bank failure rates, as well as on employment and wages.
Consistent with cash-in-the-market pricing, during the debt crisis, farms in counties that
received a positive cash flow injection – driven by relatively good weather – exhibit higher land values
than those that received a negative cash flow shock. Placebo regressions show that the cash-in-themarket pricing effect does not arise outside of the debt crisis when financial frictions are expected to
be lower.
Examining the financial sector, we show that exogenous shocks to the real sector propagate
into the financial sector during the debt crisis: counties that receive negative cash flow shocks exhibit
higher delinquency rates on loans as well as more bank failures. Consistent with financial constraints

With an average real price of corn of $4.10 per bushel and an average yield of 123.8 bushels per acre during the crisis, a
2.2 percent drop in corn yields leads to a drop of $4.1 × 123.8 × 0.022 = $11.17 in sales per acre. Given an average acreage
of corn grown of 122,854 acres and an average population of 28,402, this gives a drop of $11.17 × 122,854 / 28,402 =
$48.30.

35

29

at the bank level, banks thus appear unable to smooth temporary shocks to their balance sheets during
the debt crisis.
We also find that exogenous shocks to cash flow have important general equilibrium labor
market effects. First, we find that negative shocks to the agricultural sector during the farm debt crisis
reduce both employment and wages in that sector. In addition, we find that there are spillover effects
into other sectors. In particular, in counties that experience negative shocks during the crisis,
employment in the services sector increases due to workers being displaced from farming, while the
average wage of employees in services drops, consistent with an increase in labor supply. Overall, we
find evidence that temporary shocks that affect balance sheets of firms in the agricultural sector during
a crisis create externalities for other sectors.
Our results highlight the potential importance of cash injections to firms during a financial
crisis when balance sheets are impaired and financial frictions are high. The results also underscore
how cash injections in one sector can spill over into other sectors of the economy, both real and
financial. Income multipliers during financial crises are shown to be high. Importantly, the economic
impact of interventions meant to strengthen real sector balance sheets is state dependent and
countercyclical, consistent with financial accelerator models.

30

References
1. Allen, F., & Gale, D. (1994). "Limited Market Participation and Volatility of Asset Prices."
American Economic Review 84 (4), 933-955.
2. Allen, F., & Gale, D. (1998). Optimal financial crises. The Journal of Finance, 53(4), 1245-1284.
3. Auerbach, A. J., & Gorodnichenko, Y. (2012). Measuring the output responses to fiscal policy.
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(2), 1-27.
4. Barnett, B.J. (2000). “The US farm financial crisis of the 1980s.” Agricultural History, 74(2), pp.366380.
5. Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A. S. L. I., & Maksimovic, V. (2005). Financial and legal constraints to
growth: Does firm size matter? The Journal of Finance, 60(1), 137-177.
6. Bernanke, B. S., & Blinder, A. S. (1988). “Credit, Money, and Aggregate Demand.” The American
Economic Review, 78 (2), 435-39.
7. Bernanke, B. S., & Gertler, M. (1989). “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations."
The American Economic Review 79 (1), 14-31.
8. Bernanke, B. S., & Gertler, M. (1995). “Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of Monetary
Policy Transmission." The Journal of Economic Perspectives 9 (4), 27-48.
9. Brunnermeier, M.K. and Sannikov, Y. (2014). “A macroeconomic model with a financial sector.”
The American Economic Review, 104 (2), 379-421.
10. Calomiris, C. W., Hubbard, R. G., & Stock, J. (1986). “The Farm Debt Crisis and Public Policy."
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1986 (2), 441-485.
11. Chaney, T., Sraer, D., & Thesmar, D. (2012). "The Collateral Channel: How Real Estate Shocks
Affect Corporate Investment." American Economic Review 102 (6), 2381-2409.
12. Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Relebo (2011). “When is the Government Spending
Multiplier Large?,” Journal of Political Economy, 119(1), 78—121.
13. G. Chodorow-Reich, L. Feiveson, Z. Liscow, and W. Woolston, "Does State Fiscal Relief During
Recessions Increase Employment? Evidence from the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4 (3), 2012, pp. 118-45.
14. Conley, T. G. (1999). GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence. Journal of Econometrics,
92(1), 1-45.
15. Conley, T. G. (2008). “Spatial Econometrics." New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 741-7.
16. Dell, M., Jones, B. F., & Olken, B. (2014). "What Do We Learn from the Weather? The New
31

Climate-Economy Literature." Journal of Economic Literature 52 (3), 740-98.
17. Deschênes, O., & Greenstone, M. (2007). “The Economic Impacts of Climate Change: Evidence
from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather." The American Economic Review 97
(1), 354-385.
18. Deschênes, O., & Greenstone, M. (2012) “The economic impacts of climate change: Evidence
from agricultural output and random fluctuations in weather: Reply." The American Economic Review
102 (7), 3761-3773.
19. Duffie, D. (2010). Presidential Address: Asset Price Dynamics with Slow‐Moving Capital. The
Journal of Finance, 65(4), 1237-1267.
20. Eggertsson, G. B., & M. Woodford (2003): “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal
Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 34(1), 139-235.
21. FDIC Division of Research and Statistics, History of the Eighties—Lessons for the Future, Volume I: An
Examination of the Banking Crises of the 1980s and Early 1990s. (1997): 259-290.
22. Gertler, M., & S. Gilchrist (1994) “Monetary Policy, Business Cycles, and the Behavior of Small
Manufacturing Firms.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(2), 309-340.
23. Glauber, J. W. (2013) "The growth of the federal crop insurance program, 1990–2011." American
Journal of Agricultural Economics 95 (2), 482-488.
24. Hadlock, C. J., & Pierce, J. R. (2010). New evidence on measuring financial constraints: Moving
beyond the KZ index. Review of Financial Studies, 23(5), 1909-1940.
25. Harl, Neil E. The farm debt crisis of the 1980s. Iowa State University Press, 1990.
26. Hart, Chad E., and Bruce A. Babcock. "The impact of crop insurance on the Iowa economy."
Iowa Ag Review 6, no. 1 (200): 1.
27. Hoppe, R. A., & Banker, D. E. (2006). “Structure and Finances of US Farms: 2005 Family Farm
Report” (No. 33895). United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.
28. Hornbeck, R. (2012). "The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short-and Long-Run
Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe." The American Economic Review 102: 1477-1507.
29. Kashyap, A. K., & Stein, J. C. (2000). What do a million observations on banks say about the
transmission of monetary policy?. The American Economic Review, 90 (3), 407.
30. Kiyotaki, N., & Moore, J. (1997). Credit Cycles. The Journal of Political Economy 105 (2), 211-248.
31. Krugman, P. (1998): “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 137-187.

32

32. Kuethe, T. H., & Ifft, J. (2013). The information content of farmland value surveys. Agricultural
Finance Review 73 (1), 45-57.
33. Mian, A., Rao, K., & Sufi, A. (2013). Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic
Slump. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4), 1687-1726.
34. Mian, A. & Sufi, A. (2014). What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment? Econometrica,
82(6), pages 2197-2223.
35. Nakamura, A. & Steinsson, J. (2014). Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from U.S.
Regions. The American Economic Review, 104(3), pages 753-792.
36. Parker, J. A. (2011). “On measuring the effects of fiscal policy in recessions.” Journal of Economic
Literature, 49(3), 703-718.
37. Ramey V.A. & S. Zubairy, "Government Spending Multipliers in Good Times and in Bad:
Evidence from U.S. Historical Data," NBER Working Paper No. 20719, November 2014.
38. Schlenker, W., & Roberts, M.J. (2006). Nonlinear Effects of Weather on Corn Yields. Applied
Economic Perspectives and Policy 28 (3), 391-398.
39. Schlenker, W., & Roberts, M.J. (2009). Nonlinear Temperature Effects Indicate Severe Damages
to US Crop Yields Under Climate Change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106 (37),
15594-15598.
40. Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R.W. (1992). Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market equilibrium
approach. The Journal of Finance 47 (4), 1343-1366.
41. Stam, Jerome M., and Bruce L. Dixon. Farmer Bankruptcies and Farm Exits in the United States, 18992002. US Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, 2004.
42. Stinn, M., & Duffy, M. (2012). What is the Precision of Land Survey Values? Choices 27, 1-4.

33

Table 1: Summary Statistics
This table contains summary statistics for all variables, split between crisis and non-crisis years. All
variables are at the county-year level. Days Above 83 is the number of days where the average
temperature is above 83qF during the growing season. Corn Yield is defined as bushels of corn
produced per acre of harvested land. Land Value is the dollar value of farmland per acre. Income is
county income-per-capita. Ag Delinquencies is the total outstanding balance of agricultural loans that
are 90 days or more past-due and upon which the bank continues to accrue interest, in thousands of
dollars. Statistics for the non-crisis period are presented from 1950-1980 and from 1988-2010, except
for Income (which is from 1959, 1969-1980, and 1988-2010) and Ag Delinquencies (which is from 19882000). Statistics for the crisis period are presented from 1984 to 1987. All dollar amounts are scaled
by the consumer price index (CPI), and are in real 2010 dollars.

Panel A: Crisis Years, 1981–1987
Variable
Days Above 83
Corn Yield
Land Value
Income

# Obs
693
693
693
693

Mean
3.25
116.84
2,947.27
24,827.96

Std. Dev.
4.63
22.07
1,511.82
2,720.39

p25
0.50
108.70
1,759.38
23,093.07

Median
1.62
121.50
2,447.81
25,054.18

p75
3.73
131.60
4,055.71
26,675.79

Median
1.22
125.75
1,868.92
25,825.22
526.12

p75
3.05
134.30
2,299.06
27,477.96
1,084.87

Median
1.07
100.70
2,424.75
27,490.18
54.04

p75
3.22
139.10
3,127.98
32,435.73
214.88

Panel B: Crisis Years, 1984–1987
Variable
Days Above 83
Corn Yield
Land Value
Income
Ag Delinquencies

# Obs
396
396
396
396
396

Mean
2.38
123.83
1,977.86
25,855.09
710.61

Std. Dev.
3.07
15.21
751.78
2,379.82
684.66

p25
0.29
115.15
1,488.39
24,558.87
185.47

Panel C: Non-Crisis Years
Variable
Days Above 83
Corn Yield
Land Value
Income
Ag Delinquencies

# Obs
5,339
5,346
5,346
3,465
1,279

Mean
2.51
105.67
2,753.98
28,099.30
164.90

Std. Dev.
3.64
41.48
1,361.00
6,756.46
276.59

34

p25
0.05
71.10
1,893.49
23,842.11
1.26

Table 2: Temperature Shocks on Corn Yields
This table provides regression results for the effects of temperature shocks on corn yields. All variables
represent county-level values in the indicated year. Corn Yield is defined as bushels of corn produced
per acre of harvested land. Days Above 83 is the number of days where the average temperature is
above 83qF during the growing season. Standard errors are given in parentheses, and are corrected for
spatial correlation (as in Conley 2008), as indicated. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10
percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions include an intercept term (not
reported). The crisis period is defined from 1981-1987 in columns 1 and 2, and from 1984-1987 in
column 3; the non-crisis period runs from 1950-1980 and 1988-2010; the full sample runs from 1950
to 2010.

Time Period:
Days Above 83

Year FE
County FE
Standard Errors
Observations
R2

Dependent Variable: log(Corn Yield)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Crisis, 1981-1987
Crisis, 1984-1987
-0.034***
-0.033***
-0.022***
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.004)
Yes
No
Spatial
693
0.66

Yes
Yes
Spatial
693
0.80

35

Yes
Yes
Spatial
396
0.75

(4)
Non-crisis
-0.026***
(0.003)
Yes
Yes
Spatial
5,339
0.93

Table 3: Temperature Shocks on Land Values
This table provides regression results for the effects of temperature shocks on farm land values. All
variables represent county-level values in the indicated year. Land Value is the dollar value of farmland
per acre, in real (2010) dollars. Days Above 83 is the number of days where the average temperature is
above 83qF during the growing season. Standard errors are given in parentheses, and are corrected for
spatial correlation (as in Conley 2008), as indicated. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10
percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions include an intercept term (not
reported). The crisis period is defined from 1981-1987 in columns 1 and 2, and from 1984-1987 in
column 3; the non-crisis period runs from 1950-1980 and 1988-2010; the full sample runs from 1950
to 2010.

Time Period:
Days Above 83

Year FE
County FE
Standard Errors
Observations
R2

Dependent Variable: log(Land Value)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Crisis, 1981-1987
Crisis, 1984-1987
-0.031***
-0.004***
-0.007***
(0.008)
(0.001)
(0.002)
Yes
No
Spatial
693
0.71

Yes
Yes
Spatial
693
0.996

36

Yes
Yes
Spatial
396
0.99

(4)
Non-crisis
-0.001
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
Spatial
5,339
0.98

Table 4: Temperature Shocks, Instrumental Variable Regressions during the Crisis
This table provides instrumental variable regression results for the effects of temperature shocks on
corn yields and land values during the farm debt crisis. All variables represent county-level values in
the indicated year. Corn Yield is defined as bushels of corn produced per acre of harvested land. Land
Value is the dollar value of farmland per acre, in real (2010) dollars. Days Above 83 is the number of
days where the average temperature is above 83qF during the growing season. log(Yield) is
instrumented log corn yield. Standard errors are given in parentheses, and are clustered at the year
level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent level, respectively.
All regressions include an intercept term (not reported).
(1)
Time Period:
IV Stage:
Dependent Variable:
Days Above 83
log (Yield)

Year FE
County FE
Observations
R2

(2)

1981-1987
First Stage
Second Stage
log(Corn Yield)
log(Land Value)
-0.033***
(0.004)
0.114***
(0.031)
Yes
Yes
693
0.80

Yes
Yes
693
0.996

37

(3)

(4)

1984-1987
First Stage
Second Stage
log(Corn Yield)
log(Land Value)
-0.022***
(0.002)
0.330***
(0.057)
Yes
Yes
396
0.75

Yes
Yes
396
0.99

Table 5: Agricultural Loan Delinquencies and Bank Failures
This table provides second-stage instrumental variable regression results for the effects of temperature
shocks on bank failure rate during the farm debt crisis and non-crisis years. All variables represent
county-level values in the indicated year. Ag Delinquencies is the outstanding balance of agricultural
loans that are 90 days or more past-due and upon which the bank continues to accrue interest, in real
(2010) dollars. Bank Failure is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if there was a bank failure in
the given year, and 0 otherwise. Bank Failure Crisis is a dummy variable which takes a value of 1 if there
was a bank failure from the given year until the end of the crisis, and 0 otherwise. log(Yield) is
instrumented log corn yield. Standard errors are given in parentheses, and are clustered at the year
level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent level, respectively.
All regressions include an intercept term (not reported). Panel A runs from 1984 to 1987, the peak of
the farm debt crisis, while Panel B runs from 1988-2000 for column 1 and from 1950 to 1980 and
1988-2010 for column 2, periods outside the farm debt crisis.

Panel A: Crisis
Dependent Variable:
log (Yield)

(1)
log(Ag Delinquencies)
-3.249***
(0.836)

(2)
Bank Failure
-0.324**
(0.144)

(3)
Bank Failure Crisis
-0.402***
(0.064)

Yes
Yes
396
0.50

Yes
Yes
396
0.24

Yes
Yes
396
0.74

Year FE
County FE
Observations
R2

Panel B: Non-Crisis
Dependent Variable:
log (Yield)

Year FE
County FE
Observations
R2

(1)
log(Ag Delinquencies)
-0.707
(1.276)

(2)
Bank Failure
0.015
(0.022)

Yes
Yes
1,273
0.38

Yes
Yes
5,339
0.04

38

Table 6: Agricultural Wages and Employment
This table provides second-stage instrumental variable regression results for the effects of temperature
shocks on agricultural wages and employment during the farm debt crisis and non-crisis years. All
variables represent county-level values in the indicated year. Ag Employment is the total employment in
agricultural crop production. Ag Avg Wage is the average annual wage for an individual in agricultural
crop production. Ag Total Wages is the sum total of all wages for agricultural crop production. log(Yield)
is instrumented log corn yield. All dollar amounts are in real (2010) dollars. Standard errors are given
in parentheses, and are clustered at the year level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10 percent,
5 percent, and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions include an intercept term (not reported).
Panel A runs from 1984 to 1987, the peak of the farm debt crisis, while Panel B runs from 1975-1980
and from 1988-2000, the period outside the farm debt crisis.

Panel A: Crisis
(1)

Sector:
Dependent Variable:
log (Yield)

Year FE
County FE
Observations
R2

(2)
(3)
Agricultural Crop Production
Ag Employment log(Ag Avg Wage) log(Ag Total Wages)
29.96**
2.87**
4.37**
(14.73)
(1.36)
(2.01)
Yes
Yes
396
0.66

Yes
Yes
396
0.75

Yes
Yes
396
0.74

Panel B: Non-Crisis
(1)

Sector:
Dependent Variable:
log (Yield)

Year FE
County FE
Observations
R2

(2)
(3)
Agricultural Crop Production
Ag Employment
log(Ag Avg Wage)
log(Ag Total Wages)
-6.39
1.13
1.42
(7.15)
(0.92)
(1.18)
Yes
Yes
1,875
0.37

Yes
Yes
1,875
0.44

39

Yes
Yes
1,875
0.45

Table 7: Wages and Employment in the Services Sector
This table provides second-stage instrumental variable regression results for the effects of temperature
shocks on wages and employment in the services sector during the farm debt crisis and non-crisis
years. All variables represent county-level values in the indicated year. Services Employ is the total
employment in the services sector. Services Avg Wage is the average annual wage for an individual in the
services sector. Services Total Wages is the sum total of all wages for the services sector. log(Yield) is
instrumented log corn yield. All dollar amounts are in real (2010) dollars. Standard errors are given in
parentheses, and are clustered at the year level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10 percent, 5
percent, and 1 percent level, respectively. All regressions include an intercept term (not reported).
Panel A runs from 1984 to 1987, the peak of the farm debt crisis, while Panel B runs from 1975-1980
and from 1988-2000, the period outside the farm debt crisis.

Panel A: Crisis
(1)
Sector:
Dependent Variable:
log (Yield)

Year FE
County FE
Observations
R2

Services Employ
-720.71***
(106.57)
Yes
Yes
396
0.997

(2)
Services Sector
log(Services
Avg Wage)
0.075**
(0.033)
Yes
Yes
396
0.970

(3)
log(Services
Total Wages)
-0.002
(0.045)
Yes
Yes
396
0.998

Panel B: Non-Crisis
(1)

Sector:
Dependent Variable:
log (Yield)

Year FE
County FE
Observations
R2

(2)
Services Sector
log(Services
Services Employ
Avg Wage)
-158.73
0.074
(715.69)
(0.098)
Yes
Yes
1,875
0.916

Yes
Yes
1,875
0.317

40

(3)
log(Services
Total Wages)
0.063
(0.159)
Yes
Yes
1,875
0.868

Table 8: Services Employment and Dependence on Farm Income
This table provides regression results for the effects of temperature shocks on services sector employment, and
how the magnitude of the effect varies based on the county’s dependence on farm income during the crisis.
Panel A runs an interaction regression with a measure of farm dependence, while Panel B separates the sample
into counties with either high or low farm dependence and runs instrumental variable specifications for each
(second-stage results are provided). All variables represent county-level values in the indicated year. Services
Employ is the total employment in the services sector. Services Avg Wage is the average annual wage for an
individual in the services sector. Days Above 83 is the number of days where the average temperature is above
83qF during the growing season. Farm Income Pct is percentage of total county income that is comprised of farm
crop income, taken as an average from 1969-1980. log(Yield) is instrumented log corn yield. All regressions are
run from 1984-1987. Standard errors are given in parentheses, and are corrected for spatial correlation in Panel
A (as in Conley, 2008). *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent level,
respectively. All regressions include an intercept term (not reported).

Panel A: Interaction with Dependence on Farm Income
(1)

Days Above 83
× Farm Income Pct

55.91***
(21.59)
-234.72***
(81.84)

(2)
log(Services
Avg Wage)
-0.003***
(0.0002)
0.008
(0.007)

Year FE
County FE
Standard Errors
Observations
R2

Yes
Yes
Spatial
396
0.997

Yes
Yes
Spatial
396
0.963

Dependent Variable:
Days Above 83

Services Employ

Panel B: Instrumental Variable Regressions

Dependent Variable:
log (Yield)

Year FE
County FE
Observations
R2

(1)
(2)
Below-Median
Farm Income Dependence
log(Services
Services Employ
Avg Wage)
-667.17**
0.105***
(272.54)
(0.037)
Yes
Yes
196
0.997

Yes
Yes
196
0.976

41

(3)
(4)
Above-Median
Farm Income Dependence
Services
log(Services
Employ
Avg Wage)
66.87*
0.0417
(37.11)
(0.067)
Yes
Yes
200
0.992

Yes
Yes
200
0.916

Table 9: Temperature Shocks and County Income
This table provides regression results for the effects of temperature shocks on county income per
capita. Columns 1 and 2 provide results from an instrumental variable specification, while Columns 3
and 4 provide reduced-form results. All variables represent county-level values in the indicated year.
log(Income) is log income-per-capita (in real 2010 dollars). log(Yield) is instrumented log corn yield.
Days Above 83 is the number of days where the average temperature is above 83qF during the growing
season. The crisis period runs from 1984 to 1987, the peak of the farm debt crisis. The non-crisis
period includes 1969-1980 and 1988-2010. Standard errors are given in parentheses and are clustered
at the year level in Columns 1 and 2 and are corrected for spatial correlation (as in Conley, 2008) in
Columns 3 and 4 as indicated. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1
percent level, respectively. All regressions include an intercept term (not reported).

Time Period:
log (Yield)
Days Above 83

Year FE
County FE
Standard Errors
Observations
R2

Dependent Variable: log(Income)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Crisis
Non-crisis
Crisis
0.138***
0.034
(0.051)
(0.031)
-0.003***
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
Robust
396
0.95

Yes
Yes
Robust
3,557
0.95

42

Yes
Yes
Spatial
396
0.94

(4)
Non-crisis

-0.001
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
Spatial
3,557
0.95

Figure 1: Distribution of Temperature Shocks
This figure shows the distribution of temperature shocks during the growing season, for the entire
sample from 1950 to 2010. The vertical axis represents the density, while the horizontal axis gives the
number of days in the growing season for a given county-year that were above 83qF.

43

Figure 2: Distribution of Temperature Shocks in Excess of Averages
This figure shows the distribution of temperature shocks during the growing season, in excess of
county and yearly averages, for the entire sample from 1950 to 2010. The vertical axis represents the
density, while the horizontal axis gives the de-meaned number of days in the growing season for a
given county-year that were above 83qF.

44

Figure 3: Distribution of Temperature Shocks in Different Years
This figure shows the distribution of temperature shocks during the growing season, for various years.
In each graph, the vertical axis represents the density, while the horizontal axis gives the number of
days in the growing season for a given county in the indicated year that were above 83qF.

Figure 4: Corn Yields, Farm Land Values, and Agricultural Debt over Time
This figure depicts average corn yields, land values, and agricultural debt over time. Each data point
is an average across all counties in Iowa. Corn yield is defined as bushels of corn produced per acre
of harvested land. Land Value is the dollar value of farmland per acre, in real (2010) dollars. Total
agricultural debt is the sum of agricultural loans to finance production and real estate debt secured by
farmland, in real (2010) dollars.

46

Figure 5: Cross-county Land Purchases in Hamilton County
This figure depicts cross-county land purchases in Hamilton County – purchases where the buyer is
located outside of the county. The red horizontal line indicates the mean over the sample period.

47

