                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           SHOW ME THE MONEY:
           FEDERAL R&D SUPPORT FOR ACADEMIC CHEMISTRY, 1990-2009

                                     Joshua L. Rosenbloom
                                       Donna K. Ginther

                                       Working Paper 23555
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23555


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2017




The research reported here was supported in part by the National Science Foundation's Science of
Science and Innovation Policy Program under award 1064218. We have benefited from the
insightful comments of Irwin Feller, David Popp, Otavio Bartalotti, participants in the Iowa State
University "no free lunch" colloquium and several anonymous referees. We wish to express our
appreciation for their assistance. Needless to say, any remaining errors are the responsibility of
the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Joshua L. Rosenbloom and Donna K. Ginther. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Show me the Money: Federal R&D Support for Academic Chemistry, 1990-2009
Joshua L. Rosenbloom and Donna K. Ginther
NBER Working Paper No. 23555
June 2017
JEL No. I23,O3,O32

                                         ABSTRACT

We examine the distribution of Federal support for chemistry Research and Development (R&D)
performed at U.S. universities from 1990-2009. Federal R&D funding is an essential source of
funds for investigator-driven research at the nation’s universities. Previous studies have
documented that aggregated federal R&D funding has become more dispersed over time and
attributed this to political pressure to spread resources more evenly. There have, however, been
few studies of the allocation of funds within narrowly defined scientific disciplines. By
narrowing the focus and exploiting the panel nature of our data we are better able to analyze the
correlates of funding variation, yielding a number of new insights not apparent in studies using
more aggregated data. First, we find that R&D expenditures at the discipline level are
considerably more volatile than aggregate funding. Second, we show a strong positive
association between several measures of institutional research capacity and future funding. In
particular, we find a positive association between the employment of postdoctoral researchers and
higher future research funding.


Joshua L. Rosenbloom
Economics Department
266B Heady Hall
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50011-1070
and NBER
Jlrosenb@iastate.edu

Donna K. Ginther
Department of Economics
University of Kansas
333 Snow Hall
1460 Jayhawk Boulevard
Lawrence, KS 66045
and NBER
dginther@ku.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23555
                                                                                                    1



1. Introduction

       Despite the central role of federal Research& Development (R&D) funding in supporting

basic scientific research conducted at the nation’s universities, relatively little attention has

been given to how these federal funds are allocated. Attracting research funding is important

for university leaders not only because it signals the reputation and prestige of their faculty, but

because this support typically includes payments for research overhead costs that cannot be

allocated to specific research projects. These payments for “Facilities and Administration”

(F&A) costs are commonly in the range of 50% or more of the direct costs of the research being

performed. For public institutions grappling with shrinking state appropriations and private

institutions seeking to control the growth of tuition, this stream of funding has become

increasingly important for stabilizing budgets. Collectively the nation’s universities advocate for

expansion of the federal research budget, while individually they are all seeking to capture a

larger slice of the pie and move up in the rankings. This paper studies the allocation of federal

research funding in chemistry to research universities, and finds that research capacity is a key

determinant of funding.

       While it is true that the ultimate goal of federal support for basic research is to advance

the frontiers of knowledge, the allocation of federal R&D funds also has a number of other

important implications for higher education institutions. Grant funds provide much of the

support for the training of doctoral and post-doctoral scholars, so the way in which funds are

allocated plays an important role in determining where the next generation of scholars will be

educated. At the same time, the linkage between F&A payments and the direct costs of science

means that the allocation of funds has implications for the support of scientific infrastructure.
                                                                                                    2


Together these factors influence institutional reputations and resources that affect faculty

recruiting, and shape the structure of the higher education enterprise.1

       Most discussions of the allocation of Federal R&D funding have been purely descriptive

and concerned with aggregate funding across all disciplines. There has been little attention to

the factors that influence the distribution of funding to individual universities. The premise of

the merit-review process used by the National Science Foundation (NSF), the National Institutes

of Health (NIH) and other federal agencies is that funding should be allocated to support the

best science as judged by other scientists. Yet the primacy of merit review has not fully

insulated science funding from the pressure of members of Congress seeking to steer more

federal science funds to their own districts. These pressures are manifested both in earmarks

for certain projects and in programs like NSF’s Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive

Research (EPSCoR) and NIH’s Institutional Development Award (IDeA) Program, both of which

target funding to scientists in states receiving disproportionately low levels of funding.

       Universities are, of course, concerned about their rankings in the National Science

Foundation’s annual survey of Higher Education R&D Expenditures, citing high levels of funding

as a marker of prestige. There is a small literature that has used these aggregate data to

explore what might be called the political economy of federal science funding. Geiger and

Feller (1995), Graham and Diamond (1997) and Feller (2001) have used aggregate Federal R&D

funding to states or universities to document the growth of national research capacity and the

expansion of the group of research universities beyond the small group of elite universities that

1Research universities are themselves sources of local economic development spillovers. As
attention to the innovation systems that have emerged in Silicon Valley, Route 128 around
Boston, the Research Triangle and in Austin, Texas suggests, fostering robust university
research enterprises is seen as one key to innovation-led economic growth strategies.
                                                                                                    3


dominated research and graduate training in the 1950s. In the 1950s and 1960s, as a result of

federal investments in science after Sputnik, the group of research universities expanded

significantly (Graham and Diamond 1997, ch. 2). Since the mid-1970s, however, as the growth

of federal R&D funding slowed, the group of research universities has more or less stabilized,

and competition between them to move up the rankings has intensified. This literature is,

however, more descriptive than analytical, and offers few empirical insights about the factors

that influence the distribution of funding across universities or variations in a university’s

funding over time.

       In addition to this work there have also been some studies that explored the

interactions between federal and non-federal sources of funding. Mostly this research has

been motivated by the question of whether federal funding is a substitute or complement for

non-federal funding. Using somewhat different approaches Blume-Kohout, Kumar, and Sood

(2014), Payne (2001), and Lanahan, et al. (2016) have all concluded that increased federal

funding tends to increase research expenditures from other sources rather than crowding them

out.2 Ehrenberg, Rizzo, and Jakubson (2003) have pointed out that in aggregate, since the

1980s the share of university research expenses supported by federal funds has declined,

dropping from over 60% to under 55%. Analyzing panel data for 228 universities, they conclude

that universities have responded to the falling levels of federal support by reducing faculty-

student ratios, and increasing tuition, in effect subsidizing research expenditures by increasing

the costs and reducing the quality of instruction.



2 David, Hall, and Toole (2000) survey the literature on the relationship between federal and
industrial R&D spending.
                                                                                                      4


       Aggregate descriptions of the sort noted above are helpful in sketching the broad

outlines of federal research support, but because they combine data on funding across a broad

range of scientific disciplines they cannot yield much insight about the factors influencing the

patterns that they describe. Wachtel (2000) has analyzed the distribution of the National

Science Foundation’s funding of economics research. Given that economics funding has been

concentrated among a few institutions, he argued that funding decisions are not being made

objectively. In contrast, Feinberg and Price (2004) controlled for proposal quality and found

that researchers affiliated with the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) were more

likely to receive funding than otherwise comparable applicants.

       Focusing at the level of individual investigators, Ginther et al. (2011, 2012, 2016)

examined race/ethnicity and gender differences in the probability of receiving NIH funding.

After controlling for several individual and institutional covariates, these studies found that the

NIH funding rank of the institution was associated with a higher probability of funding. In other

words, the wealthier the institution in terms of NIH funding, the more likely a proposal from an

investigator affiliated with that institution was to receive funding. However, these studies do

not control for the fact that the best researchers are more likely to be employed by the best-

funded institutions.

       With the exception of these few studies, we are not aware of other work that has

sought to analyze the distribution of federal R&D funding within a single scientific discipline. If

we are going to gain greater insight about the factors that influence the allocation of funding,

however, it is necessary to study funding at this more disaggregated disciplinary level. In this

article we provide what we believe is one of the first empirical examinations of the
                                                                                                     5


determinants of the distribution of research funding, examining the factors that influence

federally funded R&D expenditures in chemistry at a panel of 147 U.S. universities between

1990 and 2009.

       Because of disciplinary differences in publication and citation practices, as well as

variation in laboratory structure and organization we believe it is essential that any effort to

identify the determinants of funding must be conducted at a disaggregated level, rather than

attempting to encompass aggregate R&D Funding. Chemistry provides an excellent area for our

exploration. It is a foundational discipline that receives a relatively large level of federal R&D

funding, amounting to over $1 billion annually, or close to 4% of federally funded university-

performed R&D in the period we are considering. In addition, chemistry research includes a

broad range of topics, from fundamental scientific exploration to highly applied areas in

biochemistry and chemical engineering. Also, the organization of the Chemistry discipline

allowed us to compile the necessary data to analyze inputs in the knowledge production

process. The American Chemical Society keeps a roster of members that allows us to identify

Chemistry and Chemical engineering faculty at research universities over several decades.

These data are not readily available in other disciplines.

       Our empirical results offer a number of intriguing and policy-relevant insights about the

allocation of funding in this field. First, we document that scientific capacity plays a large role in

the distribution of funding. Faculty numbers, graduate program size, and numbers of

postdoctoral scholars are all positively associated with Federal R&D funding. Of these

relationships, however, only the number of postdoctoral scholars is consistently statistically

significant. The effect of an additional postdoc is also economically large, implying an increase
                                                                                                     6


in funding of nearly $14,000 in Federal R&D funding. Second, consistent with the focus of most

federal agencies on scientific merit, we find holding personnel numbers constant, higher rates

of publication are associated with more funding. Third, we find that higher levels of non-federal

R&D funding are associated with more federal funding, a result with the complementarity

between these funding sources found by Blume-Kohout, Kumar, and Sood (2014) and Payne

(2001).

          We begin in the next section by describing in more detail the data that we use, and

present a number of summary and descriptive statistics. We show that federal support for

chemistry research is quite unevenly distributed across universities and that the overall size

distribution of funding has remained stable over time. Looking at the performance of individual

institutions, however, belies the initial impression of stability. The fortunes of particular

universities have changed quite a bit since the early 1990s. In section 3, we introduce a

dynamic panel regression framework to systematically analyze the determinants of funding at

the university level. This analysis points to several important conclusions. Section 4 places

these results in context and considers their significance for our understanding of federal

support for university-based R&D.



2. An Overview of the Research Funding Landscape for Academic Chemistry



          Our analysis sample consists of the 147 institutions with the highest aggregate value of

real federally financed academic chemistry R&D expenditures over the 20-year period from

1990 to 2009. We initially focused on the top 150 institutions, but were subsequently obliged
                                                                                                  7


to drop three of them because the available data were incomplete or appeared inconsistent.3 In

aggregate, our sample accounted for over 90% of federally supported and total chemistry R&D

expenditures in each year, produced more than 90% of research doctorates earned in

chemistry annually, and employed almost 95% of the postdoctoral researchers. The institutions

in our sample also represent a highly diverse population ranging from chemistry powerhouses

such as MIT, which averaged close to $37 million (in constant 2005 prices) in total chemistry

R&D expenditures annually, to Cleveland State University, which averaged under $1.2 million in

chemistry R&D expenditures in the same period.



                                    Insert Figure 1 about here



       Table 1 lists the 147 institutions in out sample, ranked from highest to lowest in total

real federally financed chemistry R&D expenditures over the entire twenty-year period 1990-

2009. The table also reports average federally financed R&D expenditures for 5 year periods. It

is apparent that funds are distributed relatively unequally, with the top 10 institutions receiving

approximately 20% of funds in each period, and the top 20 accounting for more than one-third

of total funding. In Figure 1 we have plotted Lorenz curves illustrating the distribution of

Federal R&D Expenditures in 5 year periods from 1990 through 2009. Were funds equally

distributed the plot would lie along the 45-degree line, which is also graphed for reference.


3 The three institutions dropped from our sample included two academic medical centers: the
University of California San Francisco and the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center—which reported no chemistry faculty, graduate students or postdocs for much of the
study period—and the Oregon Institute of Science and Technology, which disappears from the
HERD data after 2001.
                                                                                                   8


Reflecting the concentration of funding at a relatively small number of institutions each of the

plots lies well below the 45 degree line. Although the magnitude of the changes does not

appear to be too great, there has been a small tendency toward an increase in the levels of

R&D expenditures at institutions in the middle of the distribution over the period we are

considering.



                                    Insert Table 1 about here



        The stability of the overall distribution of funding conceals, however, a much more

dynamic pattern of funding at individual institutions. The last two columns of Table 1 report

the highest and lowest ordinal rankings of each institution in annual R&D expenditures over the

period 1990-2009. Over the 20 years covered by our data, many institutions moved up or down

by as much as 10 or 20 places in the rankings. The extent of this temporal variation is illustrated

in Figure 2, which plots 5-year average expenditures (measured in constant 2005 dollars) at

each institution against its rank in the 1990-1994 period. The solid circles, plotting the 1990-

1994 average values follow a steadily declining gradient, but there is considerable dispersion in

values around this line as time progresses. Rising levels of federal funding for chemistry R&D

mean that the overall tendency is for expenditures to move up, but there are a substantial

number of institutions that experienced declines in federal R&D funding, and even among those

that experienced increases in funding the magnitude of increases varied considerably over

time.
                                                                                                   9


                                    Insert Figure 2 About here



       These data raise several important questions. First, what factors account for the

pronounced inequality of federal funding across universities at each point in time? Second,

why does funding at individual universities vary so substantially over time? In the next section

we implement an estimation strategy that allows us to offer at least a partial answer to these

questions.



3. Modeling the Distribution of Federal Funding



3.1 Estimation

       There are at least 14 different federal agencies that support some extramural R&D.

However, the primary federal sources of funding for university research are the National

Institutes of Health (NIH) and the National Science Foundation (NSF).4 At both of these

agencies funding is distributed through a number of different mechanisms, but the dominant

paradigm is to fund investigator-driven projects that are evaluated largely on their scientific

merit. Both agencies rely heavily on the judgment of university scientists to assess the

strengths of the proposals they receive. At the National Science Foundation, proposed research

projects are evaluated based on the criteria of intellectual merit and broader impacts of the

proposed activity. Although the terminology NIH uses to articulate its criteria—significance,

approach, innovation, investigator qualifications, and environment—is somewhat different

4See Gans and Murray (2012) for a detailed discussion of the range and objectives of federal
extramural R&D funding.
                                                                                                     10


from that used by NSF, the two agencies are, as Gans and Murray observe (2012, p. 61)

“…strikingly similar…” in the qualities that they seek to emphasize.

       While both NSF and NIH selection processes are fundamentally forward-looking, in the

sense that they emphasize the potential significance of the activities that are proposed, they

also give weight to the qualifications of the investigators to successfully carry out the proposed

research and to institutional characteristics, such as the presence of specialized facilities that

may be necessary to conduct the research. To investigate how these factors affect the

allocation of funding we postulate a model of the determinants of federally financed R&D

expenditures, which we denote as r, at institution i in year t as:

(1)    rit = f(Xit-1,i, t; it)

where X is a vector of time and institution varying characteristics,  captures any fixed

institution-specific effects on funding,  is a year effect that captures common temporal shocks

to funding, and  is a stochastic error term. The variables in X are lagged one year, to reflect

the fact that expenditures in t are determined by the success of past funding applications, so it

is characteristics in the previous period that will affect available funding.

       Because most federal grants are awarded for periods of anywhere from 3 to 5 years

these is likely to be considerable serial correlation in institutional expenditures between

successive years. Taking account of the these lags, and assuming a linear approximation to

equation (1) our estimating equation becomes:

(2)    𝑟𝑖𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑡 + 𝛾1 𝑟𝑖𝑡−1 + 𝛾2 𝑟𝑖𝑡−2 + ∑ 𝛿 𝑋𝑖𝑡−1 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

To the extent that institutional reputations affect the allocation of funding this effect will be

captured by the panel variable, 𝛼𝑖 , which will absorb all fixed university-specific influences on
                                                                                                   11


funding. Similarly, the inclusion of a full set of time dummies will absorb any common, time-

dependent influences on research funding, such as increases in overall federal R&D funding.

       Because of the autoregressive nature of research funding as expressed in equation (2),

conventional approaches to fixed effects panel estimation are inappropriate (Cameron and

Trivedi 2010, p. 293-94). Instead it is necessary to deal with fixed effects by taking the first

difference of equation (2). The time invariant effects, represented by 𝛼𝑖 , are cancelled out,

resulting in the transformed equation:

(3)    ∆𝑟𝑖𝑡 = Δ𝛽𝑡 + 𝛾1 ∆𝑟𝑖𝑡−1 + 𝛾2 ∆𝑟𝑖𝑡−2 + ∑ 𝛾 ∆𝑋𝑖𝑡−1 + ∆𝜀𝑖𝑡

First differencing removes university fixed effects from the estimating equation, but introduces

a new estimation problem because by construction the lagged dependent variables are no

longer exogenous with respect to the error term ∆𝜀𝑖𝑡 . A number of approaches have been

suggested for estimating the autoregressive relationship using instrumental variables. The

most widely used approach, proposed by Arellano and Bond (1991), uses longer lags of the

dependent variable as instruments. We use the Arellano-Bond method to estimate the factors

associated with university chemistry funding.



3.2 Data

       To conduct our analysis, we have gathered annual data on federally funded and total

academic chemistry and chemical engineering (for brevity we will refer to these combined

fields as chemistry) R&D expenditures at U.S. universities and colleges between 1990 and 2009

from NSF’s Higher Education Research and Development (HERD) survey (see Rosenbloom et al.
                                                                                                   12


2015). 5 We link these to data on publications and citations to those publications derived from

Thomson Reuters Web of Science database, counts of doctorates awarded and postdoctoral

scholars from the NSF-NIH survey of Graduate Students and Postdoctoral scholars, and faculty

counts that we hand collected from directories published by the American Chemical Society.

Additional details concerning data sources and how we linked them are contained in the Data

Appendix. We chose to focus on academic chemistry because it is well established, widely

represented across the universe of higher education institutions, and accounts for a significant

share (about 4%) of federally funded academic R&D.

        In Table 2 we report sample means for federally funded R&D and for each of the

institutional characteristics in our data for the full sample, and for various subsets of

institutions. As we might expect institutions in the Carnegie Research I category have higher

levels of chemistry R&D expenditures, employ more faculty and postdoctoral researchers, and

produce more publications and doctoral degrees than do the non-Research I institutions. It is

also notable that the average number of citations to articles published by the Research I

institutions is higher than for the non-Research I universities. To the extent that the number of

citations an article receives is a reflection of its quality or impact, the data in Table 2 also

indicate that private universities produce higher quality publications than do public universities.

5 Although ideally one might want to analyze chemistry and chemical engineering separately,
differences in the way disciplines are defined across our different data sources make it
necessary to aggregate the two distinct fields. To illustrate this point, of the 150 institutions we
initially examined, there were 102 that had chemical engineering departments that reported
faculty numbers in the American Chemical Society directory and 48 that did not. However, only
22 institutions reported zero amounts of federally funded R&D expenditures for chemical
engineering research in every year, and there are no institutions for which Web of Science
recorded zero chemical engineering publications in all years. The mismatch in classification
across the different sources used in our analysis suggests that attempting to analyze these
fields separately would likely cause more problems than it solves.
                                                                                                     13




                                     Insert Table 2 about here



3.3 Results

       We use the XTABOND procedure in STATA 14 to estimate equation (3).6 The estimation

procedure uses heteroscedasticity robust standard errors. STATA transforms the results to

show the coefficients for the original specification in levels. The results are reported in Table 3

for a variety of different combinations of the explanatory variables. In columns (1) through (3)

we add measures of faculty size, numbers of postdocs, and graduate program size. Column (4)

adds non-federal R&D funding levels, and Columns (5) and (6) add our measures of research

quality: publications and average citations per publication. Finally in Column (7) we drop the

scientific capacity measures to test the stability of the other coefficients. Given the stability of

the coefficient estimates across different specifications, we prefer specification (6), which

includes the richest set of explanatory variables.



                                     Insert Table 3 about here



       Consistent with the expected serial correlation of R&D expenditures we find that in all

cases the first lag of the dependent variable exerts a large and statistically significant effect.


6For long panels the number of potential instruments available for the lagged dependent
variable can become quite large. With the inclusion of two lags of the dependent variable
among the regressors there would be two available instruments at t=4, three at t=5, and 18 at
t=20. After some experimentation we opted to limit the number of instruments to a maximum
of 5. Results are not sensitive, however, to changes in this maximum.
                                                                                                   14


Consistent with the fact that most awards are for two or more years, roughly 50 percent of an

increase in expenditures in one year persists for a second year. However, the coefficient on the

second lag is smaller and negative, implying some regression toward the mean as the effects of

any positive funding shock begin to wear off with the passage of time.

        Turning to measures of research capacity we note that all three of the scale variables

included in our model—the numbers of faculty, postdocs, and doctorates awarded—enter

positively. Because the dependent variable is measured in $1,000s, the coefficients suggest

that each additional faculty member is associated with about $10,000 in additional funding,

each postdoc is also associated with between $10,000 and $15,000, and each additional

doctorate awarded is associated with about $5,000 in additional funding. For faculty and

graduate student numbers we cannot reject the hypothesis that the true effect is zero. But in

all specifications the effect of additional postdoctoral scholars is both economically large and

statistically significant.

        The ability of universities to mobilize additional funding from their own institutional

resources or through corporate or philanthropic funds could be either a complement to or

substitute for federal funding. If higher levels of non-federal funding increase scientific capacity

and signal higher faculty quality, then they should act as a complement, inducing additional

federal support. On the other hand, the availability of non-federal funds may substitute for

federal support, reducing the volume of research proposals submitted by an institution or

discouraging agencies from awarding funds, in which case we would expect a negative effect on

federal R&D funding. As we noted earlier, several previous studies have argued that non-

federal R&D funding generally serves to leverage additional federal R&D funding. Our
                                                                                                    15


estimates also imply a positive and sometimes statistically significant effect of non-federal

expenditures on federal funding. The estimated coefficients imply that every $100 dollars of

non-federal funding leads to between $5 and $8 dollars of federal funding.

       To measure research quality we have included both the number of publications in the

prior year and the average number of citations to these publications. Holding faculty, postdoc,

and graduate student numbers constant, higher numbers of publications should indicate more

research activity, and more highly cited publications should be an indicator of higher impact

publications. 7 Both these quality measures enter positively, but only publication numbers are

statistically significant. The point estimates indicate that each additional publication in year t-1,

is associated with approximately $4,000 of additional research funding in year t.

        For consistent estimation, the Arellano-Bond estimation procedure requires that the

errors, it, be serially uncorrelated beyond order 1. This assumption can be tested using the

fitted residuals (Cameron and Trivedi 2010, p. 300). At the bottom of the table we report the Z-

statistic for the test of this hypothesis along the probability of obtaining a value at least this big.

We do not reject the hypothesis of zero autocorrelation for any of our models.



3.4 Identification

       We have shown the correlation between faculty, students, postdocs, publications, and

lagged funding on current research funding. It is difficult to imagine a quasi-experimental

setting that leads to an exogenous change in the number of faculty or research productivity at a

7 The number of citations received is measured over a three year window following publication,
so this number would not be known to reviewers involved in the merit review process. Rather
it is an indicator of the importance of the articles that these reviewers might infer from other
sources.
                                                                                                     16


given university while holding other characteristics constant to observe an unambiguously

causal effect. But it is important to recall that the coefficient estimates we have reported are

estimated from a panel model in first differences. Hence all of the effects reflect the impact on

funding level at a single university of variations over time in the explanatory variables. All time-

invariant effects such as institutional reputation or persistent differences in quality and size are

absorbed in the panel fixed-effects, which are removed by first differencing. Moreover,

because the explanatory variables are lagged one period, there is little chance for reverse

causation. Prior years R&D funding might account for higher rates of publication activity in year

t, but it is hard to see how articles published in year t could be caused by funding that was not

received until year t+1.

       The most plausible channel through which such reverse causation might enter is

through feedbacks between funding and the number of postdoctoral scholars. Because

postdocs are typically hired for several years, it is possible that a shock to funding in year t-1

might increase both the number of postdocs employed in year t-1 and volume of research

expenditures in year t. In Table 4 we address this problem by using instrumental variables for

the number of postdocs. Consistent with the dynamic panel model framework, our instruments

are longer lags of the postdoc variable. After reproducing the baseline results in column (1) the

next three columns report IV specifications using 3, 5, and 10 lagged values of postdocs as

instruments. Point estimates of the coefficients are quite stable regardless of the number of

instruments, but the magnitude of the effect of postdoctoral scholars increases with more

instruments. With fewer IVs this effect is not statistically significant, but when we use 10 lags

of the variable it becomes statistically significant at the 10 percent level.
                                                                                                17




                                       Insert Table 4 about here



3.5 Stability Across University Types

       So far we have concentrated on estimating an average within-institution effect on

funding across our full sample of universities. But the sample comprises different types of

institutions and it is reasonable to suppose that the effects of the research capacity, non-

federal funds, and research quality might vary from one type of institution to another. By

splitting our sample based on research intensity (whether the university is classified as a

Carnegie Research I institution or not) and control (public or private), we can gain some insight

into this question.

        Table 5 compares estimates of equation (3) for each of these subsamples of universities

to the baseline estimates obtained for the full sample. Columns 2 and 3 report results

separately for public and private universities, while Columns 4 and 5 show separate regression

for institutions classified as Carnegie Research I and not Research I. The estimates for non-

Research I universities reported in Column 4a violate the assumption of zero autocorrelation of

the residuals at order 2. The solution to this problem is to add additional lags of the dependent

variable until the assumption is satisfied. In Column 4b we show that after including a third lag

of funding this assumption is satisfied. This modification does not, however, greatly affect any

of the other estimated coefficients.



                                       Insert Table 5 about here
                                                                                                    18




        As the summary data in Table 2 make clear, a number of the explanatory variables are

correlated with research intensity or control, but comparison of the constant term across the

different samples suggests that in the hypothetical case where these explanatory variables

were held constant private universities would on average receive higher levels of federal

funding ($2.82 million vs. $2.05 million). Interestingly the differences between Research I and

non-Research I universities are quite small ($2.71 million vs. $2.51 million) once other factors

are controlled. Turning to the explanatory variables, with the smaller sample sizes the precision

of many of the point estimates falls so effects are not always statistically significant at standard

levels. Interestingly, however the magnitude of the effect of the number of postdoctoral

scholars is similar to the baseline estimates except in the case of private universities. For the

latter subsample, our estimates suggest that variations in numbers of postdocs are not an

important determinant of funding variation. On the other hand, variations in publications enter

as a strong and positively significant factor for private universities, and have a much smaller and

consistently statistically insignificant effect for public universities.8




8 Numbers of publications and numbers of postdocs are highly positively correlated, and
dropping publications from the estimation for private universities results in a much stronger
and statistically significant effect on the postdoc variable. This suggests that for private
institutions, past research productivity is a more accurate predictor of future funding levels
than scientific capacity, but that scientific capacity plays an important role in determining
productivity.
                                                                                                   19


4. Discussion



       Federal R&D funding is an essential ingredient supporting individual researchers and the

university research enterprise. Ask any university scientist about the importance of external

research funding and she will tell you that it is essential to supporting her laboratory. Without

funding it would not be possible to get the research done; there would be no money to pay for

supplies or hire the graduate students and postdocs essential to conducting the experiments.

One illustration of the importance of funding for the research enterprise is provided by a survey

we recently conducted of academic chemists in the United States. In that survey we asked how

a 25 percent reduction in funding would affect their research activities; over 75% of

respondents said lower funding would result in fewer publications, 81% said they would be able

to support fewer graduate students, 68% said they would employ fewer postdocs and 40% said

that they would generate fewer patents.9 Consistent with these views most econometric

estimates find a positive effect of federal funding on research outputs (e.g., Payne and Siow

2003, Jacob and Lefgren 2011, Popp 2015, Rosenbloom et al. 2015).The results reported above

represent a first attempt to understand how key inputs to the production of scientific

knowledge—the quantity and quality of scientific personnel and other, non-federal resources—

influence the distribution of federal funds. Consistent with the basic premises of the merit

review process, we find evidence that increased capacity, especially greater numbers of

postdocs, and higher numbers of publications are linked to increased funding levels.

9The survey was conducted during the Spring of 2014. Email invitations to participate in an
online survey were sent to all faculty in the United States with valid email addresses listed in
the American Chemical Society’s Directory of Graduate Research for 2013. Invitations were
sent to 7,438 individuals and we received 1,544 completed survey responses.
                                                                                                  20


          The effect of postdocs on research funding is rather striking. The National Institutes of

Health (NIH) and the National Science Foundation (NSF) define the postdoctoral scholar to be

“individuals engaged in temporary periods of mentored advanced training to enhance the

professional skills and research independence needed to pursue their chosen career paths.”10

However, the postdoc is controversial, and some have labeled the postdoc as “exploitation”

given the low salaries, lack of benefits, and high rates of foregone earnings (Stephan 2013, Kahn

and Ginther 2017). Stephan (2013) argued that the postdocs persists because faculty can hire

inexpensive and temporary employees to conduct research. Our analysis provides the

university’s rationale for postdoctoral scholars: postdocs increase the future stream of research

funding flowing to the university.

          For public university leaders seeking to increase their share of the federal R&D pie, our

results suggest that increasing the number of postdoctoral fellows and greater investments of

non-federal funding for R&D will increase competitiveness. Correlation is not, of course, the

same as causation. Our dynamic panel estimates account for a number of potential sources of

reverse causation. In the absence of truly experimental variation or sources of large exogenous

shocks to chemistry funding, however, it is difficult to argue that we have isolated truly causal

relationships. Nonetheless, our results suggest that such relationships exist and ought to

encourage further efforts to investigate them.



5. Conclusion




10   http://grants.nih.gov/training/Reed_Letter.pdf
                                                                                                  21


       This article offers an initial exploration of a topic that has so far been largely neglected

in the Science of Science Policy literature: the factors influencing the allocation of federal R&D

funding at the level of an individual scientific discipline. Past discussion has tended to focus on

total R&D funding, an approach that makes it difficult to incorporate measures of scientific

merit or scale. We have focused here on one discipline, chemistry, but believe that it would be

fruitful to expand this research program to make comparisons across other disciplines.

       The results of our investigation suggest that there are a number of systematic

relationships that influence variations in funding across institutions, and these correspond to

factors that were a priori expected to be important. Numbers of postdoctoral scholars, for

example are both an indicator of the human capital capacity of an institution and an important

input into the preparation of competitive research funding proposals. Since postdoctoral

scholars are highly dependent on external funding to cover their salaries, it makes considerable

sense that institutions that have large numbers of postdoctoral scholars would attract more

funding. Similarly, given the importance of physical capital and specialized equipment the

evidence that we find of positive effects of non-federally funded R&D on subsequent federal

support makes a great deal of sense. Finally, given the emphasis on investigator qualifications

it makes considerable sense that past publication positively affects subsequent funding. On the

other hand, one might note that all of these relationships suggest mechanisms through which

past success supports future success, a version of the so-called “Matthew effect, “where the

rich get richer. However, the considerably mobility of institutions in funding ranks over time

argues against a pure “Matthew effect” explanation. With the available data it is not possible

to tease apart these two alternative interpretations of our results. On the other hand, the
                                                                                               22


relationships we find suggest a need for further investigation using higher resolution data that

will enable a sharper distinction between these interpretations.
                                                                                                 23




                                         Data Appendix

All data used in our analysis are available online. The dataset and documentation have have

been deposited in the University of Kansas Digital Repository and can be accessed here:

https://doi.org/10.17161/1808.18234. This appendix provides a brief explanation of the

sources of each of the major data elements in our analysis and how they were linked.



Research & Development Expenditures

       These data are derived from the National Science Foundation’s Survey of Research and

Development Expenditures at Universities and Colleges/Higher Education Research and

Development Survey (http://webcaspar.nsf.gov). Data are available annually since 1973 for

total and federally funded R&D expenditures by discipline. They are obtained from survey

responses completed by institutions of higher education, which are responsible for classifying

all research expenditures by discipline. We computed non-federally funded R&D expenditures

as the difference between total and federally funded R&D expenditures.

       Sample institutions were selected from the universe of institutions represented in this

data by summing real federally funded R&D expenditures (in prices of 2005) for chemistry and

chemical engineering between 1990 and 2009 and then ranking institutions in descending

order. We initially selected the top 150 institutions but as described in the text were obliged to

drop three of these from the analysis because of inconsistencies in coverage. Before adopting

this sampling strategy, we examined several other rankings, using total R&D expenditures and

using nominal rather than real expenditures. The lists produced in each case were quite similar.
                                                                                                  24


The full list of institutions included in the study in declining order of federally-funded chemistry

R&D expenditures is provided in Table 1.

       Institutions report these data for the fiscal year corresponding most closely to the

federal fiscal year. In most cases this is likely to run from July of one year to June of the

following calendar year. Data are labeled with the calendar year in which the fiscal year ends.

Hence data for 2009 most likely cover expenditures from July 2008 through June 2009.

       In addition to the expenditures data, this source also contains information on type of

control (private or public) and standardized Carnegie Classifications that we use to categorize

university types.


Doctorates Awarded and Postdoctoral Researchers

       These data are derived from the National Science Foundation and National Institutes of

Health Survey of Graduate Students and Postdoctorates in Science and Engineering (graduate

student survey) which is conducted annually by the National Center for Science and Engineering

Statistics. The survey is conducted in the fall semester of each academic year and data are

collected at the department level. These data are available from http://webcaspar.nsf.gov.

       The level of institutional detail provided in this survey is greater than in the R&D

expenditure data. In the latter survey a number of multi-campus state systems report a single

aggregated number. To link the data sets, we were obliged to aggregate the data in the student

survey to match the level of aggregation of the R&D data.
                                                                                                  25


Publications and Citations

       Publication and citation data were computed by Thomson Reuters, Research Analytics

from the data underlying the Web of Science publication and citation database. Thomson

Reuters subject area experts categorize journals into subject classes based on detailed analysis

of the content and focus of the journals. See

http://wokinfo.com/media/essay/journal_selection_essay-en.pdf for additional details

regarding the selection process used by Thomson Reuters in compiling the Web of Science data.

The Web of Science is relatively selective about which journals are included, reflecting subject

expert judgment and objective metrics of journal impact. Our research began with the full set

of journals that Thomson Reuters categorizes as Chemistry and Chemical Engineering. We also

conducted an analysis of all journal titles indexed by Thomson Reuters and added a small

number of additional journals that contain significant chemistry content.

       We then worked closely with Thomson Reuters staff to match publications by author

affiliation to universities in our sample. In addition to institution name, we considered city,

state and zip code information associated with authors to verify the accuracy of article linkages.

       After verifying the full list of publications, Thomson Reuters analyzed them to produce

summary statistics describing the number of publications each year produced by each

institution, the number of citations that those publications received in 3 and 5 year windows

beginning with the publication year, and a variety of other citation related metrics.
                                                                                               26



References

Adams, J. D. and Griliches, Z., 1998. Research Productivity in a System of Universities. Annales

       d’Economie et de Statistique No. 49/50: The Economics and Econometrics of Innovation,

       127-162.

Arellano, M. and Bond, S., 1991. Some Tests of Specification for panel Data: Monte Carlo

       Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations. Review of Economic Studies 58,

       277-97.

Arora, A. and Gambardella, A., 2005. The Impact of NSF Support for Basic Research in

       Economics. Annals of Economics and Statistics 79-80, 91-117.

Blume-Kohout, M. E., Kumar, K.B., and Sood, N., 2014. University R&D Funding Strategies in a

       Changing Federal Funding Environment. Science and Public Policy 42, 1-14.

Cameron, A. C. and Trivedi, P. K., 2010. Microeconometrics Using Stata, revised ed. STATA

       Press, College Station, TX.

David, P. A., Hall, B., and Toole, A. A., 2000. Is Public R&D a Complement or Substitute for

       Private R&D? A Review of the Econometric Evidence. Research Policy 29, 497-529.

Ehrenberg, R. G., Rizzo, M.J., and Jakubson, G.H., 2003. Who bears the growing cost of science

       at universities? CHERI Working Paper #35. Retrieved [10/31/2016], from Cornell

       University, ILR School site: http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/workingpapers/40/.

Feinberg, R. M. and Price, G. N., 2004. The Funding of Economics Research: Does Social Capital

       Matter for Success at the National Science Foundation. Review of Economics and

       Statistics 86, 245-52.
                                                                                                    27


Feller, I., 2001. Elite and/or Distributed Science, in: Feldman, M. P. and Link, A. N. (Eds.),

       Innovation Policy in the Knowledge-Based Economy. Kluwer Academic, Norwell, MA

       and Dordrecht, Netherlands, pp. 189-209.

Ginther, D. K., Schaffer, W. T., Schnell, J., Masimore, B., Liu, F., Haak, L., and Kington, R., 2011.

       Race, Ethnicity, and NIH Research Awards. Science, August 19, 333(6045), 1015-1019.

Ginther, D. K., Haak, L., Schaffer, W. T., and Kington, R., 2012. Are Race, Ethnicity, and Medical

       School Affiliation Associated with NIH R01 Type Award Probability for Physician

       Investigators? Academic Medicine 87, 1516-1524.

Ginther, D. K., Kahn, S., and Schaffer, W. T., 2016. Gender, Race, Ethnicity and NIH R01 Research

       Awards: Is There Evidence of a Double Bind? Academic Medicine 91, 1098-1107.

Gans, J. S. and Murray, F., 2012. Funding Scientific Knowledge: Selection, Disclosure and the

       Public-Private Portfolio, in J. Lerner and S. Stern (Eds.), The Rate and Direction of

       Inventive Activity Revisited. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, pp. 51-106.

Geiger, R. and Feller, I., 1995. The Dispersion of Academic Research in the 1980s. Journal of

       Higher Education 66, 336-60.

Graham, H. Davis and Diamond, N., 1997. The Rise of American Research Universities: Elites and

       Challengers in the Postwar Era. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore MD.

Jacob, B. and Lefgren, L., 2011. The Impact of Research Grant Funding on Scientific Productivity.

       Journal of Public Economics 95, 1168-1177.

Kahn, S. and Ginther, D. K., 2017. The Impact of Postdocs on Early Careers in Biomedicine.

       Nature Biotechnology 35, 90-94.
                                                                                                28


Lanahan, L., Graddy-Reed, A., and Feldman, M. P., 2016. The Domino Effects of Federal

       Research Funding. PLoS ONE 11, no. 1: e0157325.

       http://Doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0157325 .

Moffitt, R. A., 2016. In Defense of the NSF Economics Program. Journal of Economic

       Perspectives 30, no. 3, 213-34.

Payne, A. A., 2001. Measuring the Effect of Federal Research Funding on Private Donations at

       Research Universities: Is Federal Research Funding More than a Substitute for Private

       Donations? International Tax and Public Finance 8, 731-51.

Payne, A. A. and Siow, A., 2003. Does Federal Research Funding Increase University Research

       Output? Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy 3, no. 1, Article 1.

Popp, D., 2015. Using Scientific Publications to Evaluate Government R&D Spending: The Case

       of Energy. National Bureau of Economic Research, NBER Working Paper 21415.

       https://doi.org/10.3386/w21415.

Rosenbloom, J. L., Ginther, D. K, Juhl, T. P., and Heppert, J. A., 2015. Academic Chemistry Inputs

       and Outcomes Data. Database: https://doi.org/10.17161/1808.18234.

Stephan, P., 2013. How to Exploit Postdocs. Bioscience 63, no. 4, 245-246.

Wachtel, H., 2000. How the National Science Foundation Funds Research in Economics.

       Challenge 43, no. 5, 20-30.

Whalley, A. and Hicks, J., 2014. Spending Wisely? How Resources Affect Knowledge Production

       in Universities. Economic Inquiry 52, 35-55.
                                                                                                                                                29



             100
                                       Distribution of Federally Funded Chemistry R&D,
                         90                      by 5 year periods, 1990-2009

                         80



                         70
Percent of Federal R&D




                         60



                         50



                         40



                         30



                         20



                         10



                         0
                              0   10      20       30             40             50              60        70           80           90   100
                                                                       percent of Universities
                                         1990-94        1995-99              2000-04             2005-09        Equal distribution



Figure 1: Lorenz Curve for Federally Funded Chemistry R&D, 5-year Periods, 1990-2009]
                                                                                                                                              30




                                                                      Average Federally Funded R&D in 5 Year Periods
                                                                                 by Institution's initial ranking
                                                     35000



                                                     30000
  5 Year Average Federal R&D Expenditures ($1000s)




                                                     25000



                                                     20000



                                                     15000



                                                     10000



                                                     5000



                                                        0
                                                             0   20       40             60             80           100    120   140   160
                                                                                    Federal Funding Ranking in 1990-1994

                                                                               1990-94        1995-99   2000-04   2005-09

Figure 2: University Five Year Average Federally Funded Chemistry R&D vs. Initial Federal Funding Rank, 5-Year Periods, 1990-2009
                                                                                                                    31



Table 1: Federally Funded Chemistry R&D Rankings, 1990-2009

                                                      Average annual Federally Funded R&D           Funding
                                                              Expenditures (1000s)                  Rankings
                                                 1990-     1990-     1995-     2000-
University                                       2009      94        99        04      2005-09   Highest   Lowest
Massachusetts Institute of Technology             $28,250 $29,677 $23,303 $29,754 $30,268              1        7
California Institute of Technology                $21,087 $16,553 $19,750 $19,876 $28,170              1        9
Johns Hopkins University                          $18,728 $12,545 $18,533 $19,467 $24,368              1       16
University of California-Berkeley                 $18,697 $17,047 $17,746 $20,385 $19,609              2       20
Stanford University                               $18,448 $14,767 $18,912 $22,418 $17,697              2       22
Harvard University                                $17,327 $15,834 $13,124 $17,136 $23,216              2       19
Pennsylvania State U, All Campuses                $16,177 $10,734 $12,181 $20,825 $20,971              2       20
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign        $15,783 $10,267 $13,044 $16,929 $22,891              3       19
University of Texas at Austin                     $15,521 $14,979 $11,718 $16,456 $18,932              3       35
University of California-Los Angeles              $15,164 $14,367 $13,374 $16,433 $16,483              6       22
University of Colorado, All Campuses              $14,890   $9,387 $13,212 $16,260 $20,700             5       29
University of Minnesota, All Campuses             $14,391 $15,754 $17,259 $12,419 $12,132              2       36
Cornell University, All Campuses                  $13,823 $13,308 $12,460 $14,822 $14,702              7       27
University of Wisconsin-Madison                   $13,773 $12,580 $13,829 $13,754 $14,931              7       26
University of Pennsylvania                        $13,767 $12,071 $13,461 $12,920 $16,618              6       28
University of California-San Diego                $12,696   $9,435 $11,892 $12,542 $16,916             7       36
Northwestern Univ                                 $12,511   $8,529    $9,044 $14,701 $17,769          10       40
Rutgers the State Univ of NJ, All Campuses        $12,370   $8,446    $8,478 $11,476 $21,082           2       37
University of Washington - Seattle                $12,323   $6,741    $8,295 $15,212 $19,045           6       49
Purdue University, All Campuses                   $12,129 $10,954 $12,280 $10,940 $14,342             10       39
University of Michigan, All Campuses              $11,829   $6,670    $7,860 $14,386 $18,399           7       48
Georgia Institute of Technology, All Campuses     $11,247   $7,738    $8,421 $10,337 $18,492           7       48
University of Utah                                $11,056   $7,369 $10,246 $13,226 $13,381             9       40
University of Pittsburgh, All Campuses            $10,515   $8,024    $8,148 $11,763 $14,126          17       43
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill       $10,316   $7,085    $6,982 $11,206 $15,991          12       47
Texas A&M University, All Campuses                $10,289   $7,848    $9,862 $11,053 $12,392          13       40
Ohio State University, All Campuses               $10,041   $9,002    $8,719    $9,868 $12,574        14       52
Princeton University                               $9,972   $9,005    $8,523 $10,949 $11,409          18       43
                                                                                                            32

University of Notre Dame                         $9,969   $10,136   $9,976   $11,373    $8,392   16    64
University of Massachusetts at Amherst           $9,540    $7,820   $7,521    $9,394   $12,736   21    47
Arizona State University Main                    $9,277    $6,762   $6,599    $8,557   $15,189   14    54
University of California-Irvine                  $9,188    $6,907   $8,933    $9,445   $11,466   20    46
Columbia University in the City of New York      $8,965    $9,776   $8,480    $7,851    $9,753   16    52
University of California-Santa Barbara           $8,868    $8,013   $9,057    $9,581    $8,819   21    58
University of Arizona                            $8,854    $5,493   $7,499   $11,150   $11,275   19    55
University of Florida                            $8,701    $5,336   $8,131   $10,488   $10,847   18    55
University of Delaware                           $8,662    $5,402   $7,262   $10,517   $11,467   17    71
University of South Carolina, All Campuses       $8,566    $4,757   $8,485    $9,500   $11,523   21    65
Yale University                                  $8,556    $9,924   $8,136    $8,171    $7,994   17    52
North Carolina State University at Raleigh       $8,493    $3,941   $7,340   $12,252   $10,440   10    73
University of Chicago                            $8,456   $10,090   $8,399    $6,951    $8,386   13    54
University of California-Davis                   $8,069    $4,514   $6,384    $9,271   $12,108   26    69
Michigan State University                        $7,527    $4,387   $7,149    $8,781    $9,792   26    81
University of Virginia, All Campuses             $7,416    $6,776   $7,078    $8,702    $7,109   32    64
Case Western Reserve University                  $7,385    $9,261   $8,750    $5,850    $5,679   19    90
Indiana University, All Campuses                 $7,271    $7,999   $7,913    $6,723    $6,449   21    73
University of Tennessee Univ-Wide Adm Cent Off   $7,184   $13,740   $5,910    $4,167    $4,918    5    93
University of Maryland at College Park           $7,176    $7,129   $6,872    $7,913    $6,791   25    63
New Mexico State University, All Campuses        $7,058    $4,732   $9,370    $7,308    $6,824   13    96
Colorado State University                        $6,972    $6,456   $7,527    $6,753    $7,150   32    60
University of Southern California                $6,952    $7,496   $7,310    $6,546    $6,457   28    70
SUNY at Buffalo, All Campuses                    $6,950    $5,119   $5,197    $5,871   $11,613   15    95
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univ    $5,992    $4,671   $5,295    $6,148    $7,854   45    82
Carnegie Mellon University                       $5,892    $4,573   $4,347    $7,034    $7,613   37    72
University of Rochester                          $5,868    $8,205   $7,788    $4,131    $3,347   27   112
Rice University                                  $5,794    $3,652   $4,427    $7,861    $7,236   38    82
Emory University                                 $5,688    $4,893   $5,091    $5,928    $6,841   45    67
SUNY at Stony Brook, All Campuses                $5,447    $4,782   $5,110    $6,078    $5,820   48    72
University of Southern Mississippi               $5,424    $4,886   $3,914    $4,797    $8,098   33    88
University of Oklahoma, All Campuses             $5,289    $4,417   $6,849    $6,751    $3,139   23   122
Louisiana State Univ, All Campuses               $5,067    $4,193   $4,592    $5,658    $5,827   46    89
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute                 $5,022    $4,569   $4,144    $4,416    $6,961   44    98
Washington University                            $4,977    $3,769   $4,537    $5,155    $6,447   55    75
University of Kansas, All Campuses               $4,897    $3,032   $4,822    $4,264    $7,469   47   104
                                                                                                       33

University of Nebraska Central Admin Sys Off   $4,778   $3,292   $3,630   $4,573   $7,618   42    96
University of Houston                          $4,705   $7,006   $3,813   $4,012   $3,988    4   106
Vanderbilt University                          $4,677   $2,129   $2,870   $4,809   $8,899   27   107
Wayne State University                         $4,664   $2,903   $3,887   $5,701   $6,165   54    96
Clemson University                             $4,541   $1,372   $1,510   $6,730   $8,552   36   136
University of Alabama in Huntsville            $4,190   $7,133   $3,609   $4,321   $1,698   27   146
Iowa State University                          $4,149   $2,553   $4,267   $4,490   $5,286   57    99
University of California-Santa Cruz            $4,116   $2,557   $3,945   $4,942   $5,021   55    98
University of Oregon                           $4,068   $6,291   $2,720   $3,434   $3,825   35   120
University of Illinois at Chicago              $3,981   $3,571   $2,996   $4,599   $4,759   57    94
University of Iowa                             $3,949   $3,522   $3,844   $4,350   $4,081   59   108
Montana State University - Bozeman             $3,931   $1,657   $2,628   $4,402   $7,034   44   123
University of New Mexico, All Campuses         $3,909   $2,516   $5,208   $4,217   $3,695   54   119
University of California-Riverside             $3,895   $2,829   $3,525   $4,099   $5,128   68    96
Boston College                                 $3,886   $2,715   $3,788   $5,111   $3,929   63   102
Florida State University                       $3,885   $2,273   $4,283   $5,085   $3,899   56   121
University of PR Rio Piedras Campus            $3,799   $1,309   $1,914   $2,092   $9,882   21   139
Kansas State University                        $3,752   $1,990   $4,215   $4,801   $4,000   56   119
CUNY City College                              $3,718   $4,399   $4,649   $3,087   $2,736   56   126
Brigham Young University, All Campuses         $3,577   $4,326   $3,202   $3,540   $3,241   57   123
Mississippi State University                   $3,511   $3,015   $2,707   $3,262   $5,060   57   118
New York University                            $3,474   $2,402   $2,897   $3,544   $5,053   66   107
University of Alabama                          $3,450   $2,526   $3,733   $4,047   $3,494   62   117
Duke University                                $3,446   $2,915   $3,309   $3,491   $4,068   73   100
University of Akron, All Campuses              $3,445   $1,137   $2,877   $4,880   $4,889   62   136
University of Dayton                           $3,408   $4,957   $3,260   $1,781   $3,635   50   143
Washington State University                    $3,343   $2,203   $2,818   $3,763   $4,589   76   112
University of Maryland Baltimore County        $3,325   $2,023   $2,568   $4,250   $4,459   57   128
Georgetown University                          $3,273   $4,950   $4,278   $2,302   $1,562   46   144
Oregon State University                        $3,267   $2,665   $4,499   $3,675   $2,232   59   135
Brown University                               $3,217   $3,342   $2,864   $3,455   $3,209   68   120
University of Arkansas, Main Campus            $3,156   $2,242   $1,634   $4,202   $4,545   54   132
Northeastern University                        $3,131   $1,546   $3,075   $4,515   $3,385   56   131
University of Kentucky, All Campuses           $3,103   $1,326   $2,352   $4,314   $4,419   63   126
Rockefeller University                         $2,960   $4,169   $2,275   $2,358   $3,038   44   133
Auburn University, All Campuses                $2,958   $1,411   $2,128   $3,298   $4,996   63   134
                                                                                                         34

University of Tulsa                             $2,907     $791   $3,173   $5,185   $2,478    53   143
University of Cincinnati, All Campuses          $2,902   $3,365   $2,048   $1,859   $4,338    68   136
Boston University                               $2,877   $1,570   $1,909   $3,523   $4,508    65   128
New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology   $2,873   $1,277   $1,670   $3,105   $5,439    52   136
CUNY Hunter College                             $2,838   $2,282   $2,049   $3,596   $3,425    73   123
Tufts University                                $2,838   $1,081   $3,416   $2,611   $4,243    62   139
North Dakota State University, All Campuses     $2,815   $1,545   $2,353   $3,511   $3,850    75   135
Colorado School of Mines                        $2,804   $2,125   $3,005   $3,121   $2,962    83   130
Virginia Commonwealth University                $2,727   $1,563   $1,664   $3,923   $3,756    71   130
Clark Atlanta University                        $2,713   $2,844   $3,239   $1,900   $2,869    73   143
Lehigh University                               $2,678   $2,983   $2,569   $2,283   $2,876    71   137
University of Georgia                           $2,653   $2,588   $2,545   $2,484   $2,996    76   123
University of Connecticut, All Campuses         $2,532     $826     $928   $3,631   $4,742    67   144
West Virginia University                        $2,440   $1,127   $1,052   $3,341   $4,241    64   141
Tulane University                               $2,383   $1,431   $2,549   $2,808   $2,745    82   140
Oklahoma State University, All Campuses         $2,349   $3,830   $1,470   $2,696   $1,398    47   142
Syracuse University, All Campuses               $2,309   $2,899   $2,935   $2,099   $1,304    74   145
Brandeis University                             $2,233   $2,028   $2,023   $2,123   $2,756    90   131
Jackson State University                        $2,206   $1,325   $1,324   $2,940   $3,235    86   143
Illinois Institute of Technology                $2,168   $1,073   $3,788   $1,751   $2,062    53   142
Clarkson University                             $2,144   $2,669   $1,608   $1,561   $2,738    71   140
New Jersey Institute Technology                 $2,137   $1,008   $1,271   $1,051   $5,217    48   145
Texas Tech University                           $2,103   $1,326   $1,511   $2,441   $3,136   100   134
University of Missouri, Columbia                $2,031   $1,112   $1,830   $2,124   $3,056    93   135
University of Wyoming                           $1,803   $1,207   $2,117   $2,379   $1,510    97   143
University of Hawaii at Manoa                   $1,744   $1,958   $1,752   $1,532   $1,732    89   143
Dartmouth College                               $1,690   $1,525   $1,607   $1,297   $2,330    89   141
Drexel University                               $1,653   $1,023     $736   $2,147   $2,708   101   147
Utah State University                           $1,629     $923   $1,876   $2,251   $1,466   101   145
Norfolk State University                        $1,629      $35   $1,685   $2,645   $2,149    97   147
University of New Hampshire                     $1,583     $815   $1,010   $2,272   $2,237    96   141
San Francisco State University                  $1,567   $2,008   $1,757     $888   $1,616    98   147
Howard University                               $1,530   $1,491   $1,275   $1,920   $1,433    65   146
University of Denver                            $1,510   $1,560   $1,661   $1,417   $1,403   103   144
Polytechnic University                          $1,491   $1,645   $1,437   $1,658   $1,224    84   147
California State University-Los Angeles         $1,481   $1,517     $515     $871   $3,023    95   147
                                                                                                         35

University of Idaho                             $1,467   $1,367   $1,194   $1,223   $2,085    98   143
Georgia State University                        $1,447   $1,633     $947   $1,199   $2,009   104   146
University of Missouri, Rolla                   $1,446     $727   $1,127   $2,048   $1,885   111   144
University of Massachusetts Lowell              $1,379   $1,127   $2,287   $1,556     $545    96   147
University of Louisville                        $1,378   $1,282   $1,189   $1,615   $1,427   108   144
University of Montana                           $1,340     $253     $524   $1,578   $3,005   103   147
University of South Florida                     $1,327     $788     $477   $1,179   $2,865   110   147
University of PR Mayaguez Campus                $1,300     $433     $640   $1,538   $2,590   111   147
North Carolina Agricultural & Tech State Univ   $1,281     $660   $1,094   $1,060   $2,311    94   144
Stevens Institute of Technology                 $1,252     $854   $1,132   $1,860   $1,162   113   147
Cleveland State University                      $1,178   $1,605   $1,435   $1,110     $561   104   147
                                                                                                            36

Table 2: Summary Statistics

                                                                     Non-
                                                                  Federally                    Average
                   Federally                                       Funded                      citations
                  Funded R&D                            PhDs         R&D                          per
                    (1000s)      Faculty   Postdocs    Awarded     (1000s)      Publications    article
Full Sample           $6,078.9      33.5        28.9       18.2      $3,362.0         164.6           9.0
Private               $6,529.0      28.9        31.4       16.1      $2,197.3         156.6          10.7
Public                $5,867.1      35.7        27.7       19.2      $3,909.9         168.4           8.3
Not Research I        $3,065.2      24.9        12.4        8.4      $1,984.1           69.9          7.1
Research I            $8,341.8      40.0        41.3       25.6      $4,396.6         235.5          10.5
                                                                                                               37


Table 3: Dynamic Panel Estimates of the Determinants of Federally Funded R&D Expenditures
                           (1)          (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)
 Fed R&D (t-1)             0.555*** 0.532*** 0.530*** 0.514*** 0.485*** 0.484***                   0.504***
                           (6.09)       (5.85)     (5.85)        (5.69)     (5.50)      (5.52)     (5.79)
 Fed R&D (t-2)             -0.0800*     -0.0850*   -0.0874*      -0.0948** -0.109**     -0.109**   -0.105**
                           (-1.74)      (-1.84)    (-1.83)       (-1.97)    (-2.18)     (-2.19)    (-2.16)
 Faculty (t-1)             10.58        10.67      10.95         11.03      11.54       11.50
                           (1.15)       (1.16)     (1.17)        (1.19)     (1.22)      (1.22)
 Postdocs (t-1)                         14.45*** 14.24*** 13.59*** 10.02**              10.05**
                                        (2.79)     (2.81)        (2.67)     (2.25)      (2.26)
 Doctorates
 awarded (t-1)                                     5.571         5.364      5.145       5.119
                                                   (0.67)        (0.65)     (0.63)      (0.63)
 Non-Fed R&D(t-1)                                                0.0821** 0.0541        0.0538     0.0559*
                                                                 (2.11)     (1.63)      (1.62)     (1.66)
 Publications (t-1)                                                         3.808*      3.793*     4.179**
                                                                            (1.90)      (1.90)     (2.06)
 Avg. Citations (t-1)                                                                   6.895      5.493
                                                                                        (0.41)     (0.32)
 _cons                     2341.7*** 2083.8*** 2000.9*** 1904.6*** 1935.2*** 1886.7***             2491.1***
                           (5.08)       (4.61)     (4.05)        (3.75)     (3.75)      (3.39)     (4.74)
 N                         2497         2497       2497          2497       2493        2493       2493

 Test for autocorrelation of first differenced errors at order 2
 Z                           0.41          0.32          0.33      0.42   1.30        1.30         1.39
 Prob >Z                     0.68          0.75          0.74      0.68   0.19        0.19         0.16
T-Statistics in parentheses
* p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01
                                                                                                                              38


Notes to Table 3
All specifications estimated using the XTABOND procedure in STATA 14, using robust standard errors and specifying a maximum of 5
lags of the dependent variable as instruments. All regressions include year fixed effects.
                                                                                           39


Table 4: Alternative Specifications of Federally Funded R&D Expenditures

                                                     IV Regressions with postdocs
                            Baseline                         Endogenous
                            (1)                  (2)           (3)         (4)

 Fed R&D (t-1)              0.630***             0.553***       0.580***     0.620***
                            (6.91)               (7.56)         -8.54        -10.08
 Fed R&D (t-2)              -0.0900*             -0.101*        -0.0982*     -0.0940*
                            (-1.76)              (-1.94)        (-1.89)      (-1.80)
 Faculty (t-1)              15.68                6.33           7.494        7.32
                            (1.55)               (0.69)         (0.85)       (0.82)
 Postdocs (t-1)             10.20**              12.48          15.35        16.68*
                            (2.19)               (1.03)         (1.51)       (1.76)
 Doctorates
 awarded (t-1)                -0.840              2.622         1.209        1.241
                              (-0.09)             (0.31)        (0.14)       (0.14)
 Non-Fed R&D(t-1)             0.0719**            0.0549        0.0481       0.0524
                              (2.03)              (1.63)        (1.41)       (1.54)
 Publications (t-1)           5.599***            4.026**       3.966**      4.100**
                              (3.44)              (2.17)        (2.12)       (2.22)
 Avg. Citations (t-1)         38.84**             -1.699        -1.989       -5.301
                              (2.26)              (-0.10)       (-0.11)      (-0.29)
 _cons                        616.6               1713.8***     1509.6***    1270.5***
                              (1.38)              (3.1)         (3.02)       (2.76)
                              2493                2493          2493         2493
 Autocorrelation of first differenced errors at order 2
 Z                            1.00                1.04          0.93         0.82
 Prob >Z                      0.32                0.30          0.35         0.41

 t statistics in parentheses
 * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01"

 Notes: All specifications estimated using the XTABOND procedure in STATA 14, using
 robust standard errors and specifying a maximum of 5 lags of the dependent variable
 as instruments. All regressions include year fixed effects. In specifications (2)-(4)
 Postdocs(t-1) is treated as endogenous, and instrumented with lagged values.
 Specifications differ only in the number of lags used. Specification (2) uses 3 lags as
 instruments, specification (3) uses 5 lags, and specification (4) uses 10 lags.
                                                                                                                      40


Table 5: Dynamic Panel estimates of Determinants of Federally Funded R&D, by type of insititution
                                   (1)Baseline      (2)Private      (3)Public          (4) Not R 1           (5)R1
                                                                                   (a)             (b)
 Fed R&D (t-1)                   0.484***         0.589***       0.342***     0.412***        0.391***    0.515***
                                 (5.52)           (9.30)         (3.22)       (3.66)          (3.55)      (6.55)
 Fed R&D (t-2)                   -0.109**         -0.282***      -0.0210      0.0637          0.0813      -0.168***
                                 (-2.19)          (-3.98)        (-0.60)      (1.42)          (1.46)      (-2.88)
 Fed R&D (t-3)                                                                                -0.0756
                                                                                              (-1.62)
 Faculty (t-1)                   11.50            12.69          9.399        -9.101          -15.42      12.32
                                 (1.22)           (0.91)         (0.82)       (-0.68)         (-1.05)     (1.11)
 Postdocs (t-1)                  10.05**          0.286          12.11***     7.281           8.278       10.66**
                                 (2.26)           (0.04)         (2.62)       (0.72)          (0.75)      (2.09)
 Doctorates awarded (t-1)        5.119            5.875          2.251        -8.512          -16.02      10.42
                                 (0.63)           (0.30)         (0.32)       (-0.77)         (-1.28)     (1.17)
 Non-Fed R&D(t-1)                0.0538           -0.0242        0.0765*      -0.0450         -0.0469     0.0652*
                                 (1.62)           (-0.29)        (1.96)       (-0.98)         (-0.98)     (1.65)
 Publications (t-1)              3.793*           8.058***       2.081        -4.483*         -4.146      2.466
                                 (1.90)           (2.71)         (0.75)       (-1.66)         (-1.62)     (1.12)
 Avg. Citations (t-1)            6.895            18.50          0.563        0.826           8.105       16.56
                                 (0.41)           (0.74)         (0.03)       (0.05)          (0.51)      (0.51)
 _cons                           1886.7***        2812.6***      2053.5***    1765.2***       2511.7***   2711.0***
                                 (3.39)           (3.09)         (3.18)       (3.19)          (3.36)      (3.13)
 N                               2493             799            1694         1067            1006        1426
 Test for autocorrelation of first differenced errors at order 2
 Z                               0.41             0.61           0.77         2.03            0.39        0.28
 Prob >Z                         0.68             0.54           0.44         0.04            0.70        0.78
T-statistics in parentheses
*p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01
