                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   DEFAULT EFFECTS AND FOLLOW-ON BEHAVIOR:
                 EVIDENCE FROM AN ELECTRICITY PRICING PROGRAM

                                          Meredith Fowlie
                                         Catherine Wolfram
                                         C. Anna Spurlock
                                           Annika Todd
                                           Patrick Baylis
                                           Peter Cappers

                                        Working Paper 23553
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w23553


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2017



We received many helpful comments from seminar participants at Arizona State University, Cornell,
Toulouse School of Economics, UC Berkeley and University of Oxford. The authors gratefully acknowledge
contributions from and discussions with Hunt Allcott, Stefano Dellavigna, Steven George, Nick Kuminoff,
Brigitte Madrian, Jennifer Potter, Lupe Strickland, Michael Sullivan and Nate Toyama. We also thank
Severin Borenstein, Lucas Davis, and Michael Greenstone for helping to make this project possible
through their initial involvement with the Smart Grid Investment Grant program. This material is based
upon work supported by the Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability, of the U.S. Department
of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. The views and opinions of authors expressed
herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof,
nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23553.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by Meredith Fowlie, Catherine Wolfram, C. Anna Spurlock, Annika Todd, Patrick Baylis,
and Peter Cappers. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Default Effects and Follow-On Behavior: Evidence from an Electricity Pricing Program
Meredith Fowlie, Catherine Wolfram, C. Anna Spurlock, Annika Todd, Patrick Baylis, and
Peter Cappers
NBER Working Paper No. 23553
June 2017
JEL No. D03,L51,L94,Q41
                                          ABSTRACT
We study default effects in the context of a residential electricity pricing program. We implement
a large-scale randomized controlled trial in which one treatment group is given the option to opt-
in to time-based pricing while another is defaulted into the program but allowed to opt-out. We
provide dramatic evidence of a default effect – a significantly higher fraction of households
defaulted onto the time-based pricing plan enroll in the program, even though opting out simply
involved making a phone call or clicking through to a website. A distinguishing feature of our
empirical setting is that we observe follow-on behavior subsequent to the default manipulation.
Specifically, we observe customers’ electricity consumption in light of the pricing plan they face.
This, in conjunction with randomization of the default provision, allows us to separately identify
the electricity consumption response of “complacent” households (i.e., those who only enroll in
time-based pricing if assigned to the opt-out treatment). We find that the complacent households
do reduce electricity use during higher priced peak periods, though significantly less on average
compared to customers who actively opt in. However, with complacents comprising
approximately 75 percent of the population, we observe significantly larger average demand
reductions among consumers assigned to the opt-out group. We examine the extent to which the
behavioral responses we observe are consistent with a standard model of switching costs, or with
alternative mechanisms including inattention, and preferences constructed based on contextual
features of the choice setting.

Meredith Fowlie                               Annika Todd
Department of Agricultural &                  Lawrence Berkeley National Lab
Resource Economics                            1 Cyclotron Road
University of California, Berkeley            MS 90R4000
301 Giannini Hall                             Berkeley CA 94720
Berkeley, CA 94720-3310                       ATodd@lbl.gov
and NBER
fowlie@berkeley.edu                           Patrick Baylis
                                              Stanford University
Catherine Wolfram                             Center on Food Security and the Environment
Haas School of Business                       Y2E2 349
University of California, Berkeley            473 Via Ortega
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900                       Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER                                      pbaylis@gmail.com
wolfram@haas.berkeley.edu
                                              Peter Cappers
C. Anna Spurlock                              Lawrence Berkeley National Lab
Lawrence Berkeley National Lab                1 Cyclotron Road
1 Cyclotron Road                              MS 90R4000
MS 90R4000                                    Berkeley CA 94720
Berkeley CA 94720                             pacappers@lbl.gov
caspurlock@lbl.gov

An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23553
1    Introduction

When confronted by a choice with a default option, decision-makers are often predisposed to accept the

default. Prior work in psychology and economics has documented this “default effect” for a range of

decisions that would seem to merit deliberate choices, including retirement plans (Madrian and Shea, 2001),

health insurance (Handel, 2013), and organ donations (Johnson and Goldstein, 2003). This phenomenon

is of general interest because it provides businesses and public policymakers with a relatively easy and

non-intrusive way to influence choices.

    Although the effect of default options on decision-making has been clearly demonstrated in the liter-

ature, the broader economic implications of these default effects have been much harder to discern. One

reason is that the economic impacts of a default effect can work through several channels. To comprehen-

sively assess these impacts, one must consider not only the initial choice subject to the default manipu-

lation, but also any “follow-on” behaviors that can depend on the initial choice. For example, consumers

who are defaulted onto a health insurance plan with high co-pays may invest less in preventative health

compared to those who actively chose such a plan. Employees defaulted into a high 401(k) savings rate

may alter their retirement savings in other vehicles less than employees who make an active choice. Given

that many default manipulations aim to induce changes in follow-on behavior, it is important to account

for both direct and indirect impacts of default manipulations on economic outcomes.

    This study analyzes the use of default provisions in a new choice setting: time-varying electricity pric-

ing. This choice context is important because policy makers are looking to significantly increase electricity

demand response to meet challenges associated with aging power sector infrastructure, increasing grid in-

tegration of renewables, and system reliability concerns. An important first step towards increased demand

response is increased consumer acceptance of time-varying pricing programs. We leverage experimental

variation in the pricing program default, together with detailed data on electricity consumption, to analyze

how defaulting customers into time-varying electricity pricing affects both the initial program participa-

tion choice and follow-on behavior for different types of customers. In particular, we are able to isolate the

follow-on behavior of those who actively opted in (referred to here as “always takers”), from those who

only ended up on the new pricing structure because of the default (referred to here as “complacents”).

    A significant increase in customer participation in electricity demand response programs could gener-

ate substantive efficiency gains. Benefits include lower electricity system operating costs, lower renewable


                                                      2
integration costs, and a more resilient electricity grid. Importantly, the scale of these benefits increase with

the number of customers confronted by and responding to time-varying prices. However, customer partic-

ipation in time-varying pricing programs has historically been very low. The vast majority (over 95 percent

in 2012) of U.S. residential customers currently face time-invariant prices for electricity (FERC, 2014). Re-

cent investments in smart grid infrastructure, including smart meters, make it technologically feasible to

enroll many customers in time-varying pricing programs. As of 2014, more than 50 million smart meters

had been deployed to over 40 percent of US households (IEI, 2014).1 These investments notwithstanding,

proactive approaches to increasing active participation in these programs will be required to fully leverage

demand response potential.

       This paper explores an innovative approach to increasing participation - and demand response - in a

residential time-varying electricity pricing program. The analysis is based on a field experiment run by

the Sacramento Municipal Utility District (SMUD) in 2011-2013. In one set of treatment groups, customers

were invited to opt-in to a new time-based pricing structure. In another set of randomly selected groups,

customers were informed that they would be defaulted onto the new pricing programs unless they opted

out. We show that making time-based pricing the default choice can significantly increase participation

– over 90 percent of the customers stayed with time-based pricing when defaulted onto it. In contrast,

approximately 20 percent actively opted in.

       The economic importance of this default effect will depend critically on whether the households sus-

ceptible to the default effect actively reduce their peak consumption in response to the time-varying elec-

tricity prices. If complacent customers do not adjust consumption in response to time-varying pricing,

then there is little point in defaulting them into this pricing regime. We obtain very detailed measure-

ments of electricity consumption in the periods prior to and following the experimental intervention. We

show that complacent customers, who comprise more than 75 percent of the sample, do reduce consump-

tion when prices increase during peak times. Although the average demand response among complacent

customers is approximately half as large as the average response among customers who actively opted in,

higher participation rates in the opt-out group mean that the average effect of the opt-out offer on peak

demand is significantly larger than the average effect of the opt-in offer.

       These findings notwithstanding, policy makers may be reluctant to authorize the use of default provi-
   1
     The deployment of smart grid technology was dramatically accelerated under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009.



                                                            3
sions until they understand the consumer welfare implications. For example, if the default effect is driven

by high switching costs, customers could be considerably worse off under a new pricing plan. Alter-

natively, suppose that switching inattentive or uninformed customers into an unfamiliar pricing regime

encourages customers to learn about a new experience and “construct” their preferences (e.g., Hoeffler and

Ariely, 1999; Barkan and Busemeyer, 2003; Simon et al., 2008). If preferences over alternative electricity

pricing regimes are constructed or poorly understood, customers may in fact be better off in the pricing

regime they would not proactively choose.

    Given that there are several candidate models to explain the default effect, we opt not to perform a

full welfare analysis under all possible rationalizations. Instead, we assess the extent to which alternative

explanations for the default effect are consistent (or not) with observed patterns of behavior. While not

dispositive, the evidence appears to reject a neoclassical switching cost model and instead points to cus-

tomers with limited attention (either through rational inattention or lack of awareness) and non-standard

choice heuristics.

    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 situates our paper relative to the existing work on the default

effect. Section 3 describes the experiment. Section 4 describes the data and our empirical approach. Section

5 presents our main results on the default effect and follow-on behavior. Section 6 describes the net benefits

of the time-varying pricing programs from the utility’s perspective. In Section 7, we present several pieces

of evidence on the underlying factors behind the default effect to shed some light on its likely impacts on

customers. Section 8 concludes.



2    Default Effects, Choice Modification, and Follow-on Behavior

A rich literature documents and explores various aspects of default effects in a range of settings, includ-

ing 401(k) participation (Madrian and Shea, 2001; Choi et al., 2002, 2004), organ donation (Johnson and

Goldstein, 2003; Abadie and Gay, 2006), car insurance (Johnson et al., 1993), car purchase options (Park

et al., 2000), and email marketing (Johnson et al., 2002). This literature offers a range of possible explana-

tions for default effects. In instances where the choice is relatively simple and not particularly important,

such as agreeing to receive marketing emails, default effects may stem from rational inattention (Bellman

et al., 2001; Sims, 2005). When confronting a decision that is more complicated or stressful, such as choices

about health care or personal finance, choosing not to choose (and thus accepting the default) can allow


                                                      4
the decision-maker to avoid incurring the costs of gathering information or evaluating difficult tradeoffs

(Kressel and Chapman, 2007; Pichert and Katsikopoulos, 2007). If the consumer has limited personal ex-

perience with the choice context, the default option can be appealing, particularly if it is perceived to be

the prescribed or recommended option (Beshears et al., 2009).

       With this study, we aim to extend the literature on default effects in several important ways. First, we

highlight the importance of follow-on behavior. In many of the choice contexts where default provisions

are used to influence choice outcomes, subsequent follow-on behavior plays a critical role in determining

economic impacts. We make a distinction between two types of follow-on behavior. First, individuals may

choose to subsequently modify the option they chose by default. For example, a consumer who accepts

a particular 401(k) plan as a default option might subsequently adjust the parameters of this choice by

changing the savings rate, changing the asset allocation, or dropping off the plan altogether. Second,

there may be important choices or actions that are contingent on - but distinct from - the initial choice.

Building on the retirement savings plan example, participating in a 401(k) plan could impact savings via

other vehicles.2

       To date, the literature on default effects has emphasized the initial choice and placed less emphasis

on the implications for subsequent choices and behaviors. In particular, we are not aware of studies that

consider the contingent behaviors that can be indirectly influenced by default effects. Analyses of 401(k)

investment decisions have considered the first type of follow-on behavior – modifications to the original

choice. For example, Carroll et al. (2009) analyze savings outcomes over time as a function of different

default options at the initial plan participation decision. Other work includes information about follow-on

choices, but does not model the impact of the default setting on those choices. For example, Ketcham

et al. (2016) include information about Medicaid recipients’ prescription drug spending in their welfare

calculation, but do not model how plan choice impacts drug expenditures. Our study provides an unusual

opportunity to analyze not only the direct effect of a default manipulation on an initial choice, but also the

ways in which the default effect operates through the initial choice to affect subsequent consumer choices

and behaviors.

       Our empirical results also shed light on the underlying mechanisms that can give rise to default effects

in this setting, and the associated welfare implications. Ultimately, the consumer-level impacts will depend
   2
     Similarly, in a health insurance context, the relevant follow-on behavior could include subsequent choices about whether or
not to go to the doctor, lifestyle choices that can affect health outcomes, choice of medical procedures, et cetera. In a social media
context, default privacy settings could shape subsequent choices about posting personal photos or personal information.


                                                                  5
on whether the default choice is well-suited to those who are susceptible to default effects. Recent papers

have investigated the welfare effects of nudges in a variety of settings, including retirement savings plan

default provisions (Carroll et al., 2009; Bernheim et al., 2015), health insurance plan choices (Handel, 2013;

Handel and Kolstad, 2015; Ketcham et al., 2016), and home energy conservation reports (Allcott and Kessler,

2015). These papers augment the more standard utility maximization framework to accommodate features

of consumer behavior (such as inattention) that could rationalize a default effect (or, in the case of Bernheim

et al., 2015, they mediate between several different explanations for the default effect).

    We consider several alternative explanations for the default effect and assess which seems most consis-

tent with our data. The most straightforward explanations are predicated on the assumption that consumer

preferences are pre-determinedand utility-maximizing choices, which are well informed. Under these stan-

dard assumptions, a default effect can manifest if agents incur a cost to switch from the default choice, or if

consumers are inattentive to unfamiliar choice alternatives. Alternative models, such as those introduced

by Bernheim et al. (2015), assume that the default provision affects not only the level of effort required

to select a given choice, but also the frame through which the choice is viewed and the process by which

the agent constructs her preferences. If the utility maximizing choice is frame dependent, welfare analysis

becomes more complicated.

    We evaluate alternative explanations of the default effect using not only observed participation deci-

sions, but also rich data on subsequent electricity consumption patterns as well as survey responses de-

scribing consumer experiences. We find that observed consumer behavior is consistent with explanations

under which consumers are not paying attention to the initial choice, but come to understand it and like

it. One implication is that standard welfare analysis predicated on the assumption of known preferences

and informed choices can generate misleading estimates of welfare impacts.



3    Empirical Setting and Experimental Design

Economists have noted for some time that efficient pricing of electricity should reflect changing electricity

market conditions (e.g., Boiteux, 1964a,b). Electricity demand, marginal system operating costs, and firms’

abilities to exercise market power vary significantly and systematically over hours of the day and seasons

of the year. Figure 1 demonstrates the extent of this variation for a week during our study. The red line

depicts hourly electricity demand, which cycles predictably over the course of a day, varying by a factor


                                                      6
of 1.5 to almost 3 from the middle of the night to the peak hours in the late afternoon. The blue line

depicts hourly wholesale prices, which fall below $60/MWh in most hours, but spike to over $1,000/MWh

at critical peak times.


                                                       [FIGURE 1 HERE]


       Although wholesale electricity prices can vary significantly across hours, at least partially reflecting

variations in marginal costs, retail prices do not generally reflect these dynamic market conditions. The

vast majority (over 95 percent in 2012) of U.S. residential customers pay time-invariant prices for elec-

tricity (FERC, 2014). If customers are not exposed to prices that reflect variable marginal operating costs,

economic theory suggests that consumers will under-consume in periods of low marginal costs and over-

consume in periods of high marginal costs. This further implies over-investment in capacity to meet

excessive peak demand. For example, Borenstein and Holland (2005) simulate that by shifting a fraction

of customers to time-based rates, utilities could construct 44 percent fewer peaking plants.

       In principle, these inefficiencies can be mitigated - or eliminated - with the introduction of time-varying

retail electricity pricing. Residential customers have an important role to play in electricity demand re-

sponse, particularly in areas of the country where peak residential demand (driven by air conditioning in

many parts of the U.S.) coincides with the system peak. When residential customers have been exposed

to time-based prices, prior analyses suggest they are willing and able to adjust consumption in response

(see, for example, EPRI, 2012).3

       To reap benefits from time-varying pricing, though, utilities need to enroll more customers in time-

varying pricing programs. In what follows, we describe a large-scale field experiment designed to evaluate

a novel approach to increasing participation among residential electricity customers.


3.1      The Experiment

The experiment was implemented as part of the Smart Grid Investment Grant (SGIG) program, which

received $3.4 billion in funds from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. The goal of
   3
     In a 2012 meta-analysis, authors identified what they deemed to be the best seven U.S. residential pricing studies up to that
time (EPRI, 2012). These studies document peak demand response to time-varying pricing in the range of 13-33%, depending on the
existence of automated control technology (e.g., programmable communicating thermostat).These estimates imply an elasticity
of substitution in the range of 0.07 - 0.24 and an own-price elasticity in the range of -0.07 - -0.3. Note that the experimental nature
of our study allows us to assess many dimensions of customers’ responses to time-based pricing, including spillovers within and
across days. Some previous evaluations of time-based pricing have relied on within-customers comparisons, which assume there
are no spillovers of this sort.


                                                                  7
this program was to invest in the expansion of the smart grid in the U.S., and thereby create jobs and

accelerate the modernization of the nation’s electric system (DOE, 2012). One of the objectives articulated

in the Funding Opportunity Announcement (DE-FOA-0000058) under the heading of Consumer Behavior

Studies (CBS) was to document the impacts and benefits of time-based rate programs and associated en-

abling control and information technologies. To be eligible for funding, the use of randomized controlled

experimental designs for evaluating these impacts and benefits was required.

       The Sacramento Municipal Utility District (SMUD), a municipal utility that serves approximately 530,000

residential households in and around Sacramento, California, implemented one of the 11 CBS studies that

were funded under the SGIG program.4 They were awarded a $127 million grant overall, which comprised

part of a $308 million smart grid project. SMUD viewed the opportunity to study the impact of time-varying

rates within their own service territory as a major benefit to participating in the program (Jimenez et al.,

2013). SMUD had some demand response programs in place prior to the SGIG program (e.g., an air condi-

tioner direct control program and some rates that varied by time-of-use), but these programs had not been

broadly emphasized or marketed for a long time. Historic adoption of their "legacy" Time-of-Use rates had

been extremely low. From SMUD’s perspective, the SGIG program was an opportunity to maximize the

benefits of their smart-grid technology investments, and to test time-varying rates that were designed to

meet their evolving load management needs (Jimenez et al. 2013).

       The study sample was drawn from SMUD’s larger population of residential customers. To define the

experimental population, several selection criteria were applied. Households were excluded if their smart

meter had not provided a year’s worth of data by June 2012, if they were participating in SMUD’s Air

Conditioning Load Management program, Summer Solutions study, PV solar programs, budget billing

programs, or medical assistance programs, or if they had master-metered accounts. After these exclusions,

approximately 174,000 households remained eligible for the experimental population.5

       Households in the experimental population were randomly assigned to one of ten groups, five of which

are the focus of this paper.6 Households in four of these five groups were encouraged to participate in a new
   4
      The other ten studies are described in Cappers and Sheer (2016). Most evaluated other aspects of time-varying pricing, such
as the impact of providing customers with “shadow” bills, which documented how much they would have paid under standard
pricing. Only one of the other studies compared opt-in and opt-out recruitment approaches (Lakeland Electric) but the data the
utility provided did not contain enough detail to perform a comparable analysis.
    5
      SMUD reports no statistically significant differences between the households in the study sample and the larger residential
customer base. We did not have access to these sample comparisons, and we do not know which variables were analyzed. Most
residential customers had smart meters in time for the experiment, though many were excluded because many meters had not
reported a full year of data by June 2012.
    6
      The other five groups were defaulted to another time-varying rate that did not have a corresponding opt-in group treatment


                                                               8
pricing program; the fifth group received no encouragement and serves as the control group. There were

two pricing treatments: a Time-of-Use (TOU) and a Critical Peak Pricing (CPP) program. There were also

two forms of encouragement: opt-in, where households were encouraged to enroll in the rate program;

and opt-out, where households were notified that they were enrolled by default, but had the opportunity

to leave the program if they wished. All encouraged households (opt-in and opt-out) were also offered

enabling technology – an in-home display that provided real-time information on consumption and the

current price.

    Figure 2 summarizes the standard, TOU, and CPP rate structures that are evaluated in this study. All

SMUD customers face an increasing block pricing structure. This means that the price paid for the first

block or “tier” of electricity consumed during a billing period is lower than the price paid for the higher

tier. During the time period of our study, customers on the standard rate plan (i.e., customers in the control

group) paid a $10 monthly fixed charge plus $0.0938 per kWh for the first 700 kWh of consumption and

$0.1765 per kWh for consumption above 700 kWh. Under the TOU program, customers faced the same

monthly fixed charge of $10. These customers pay a higher rate, $0.2700 per kWh, for electricity consumed

during the “peak period” from 4PM to 7PM on non-holiday weekdays. They pay a lower rate (relative to the

standard rate structure), in all other “off-peak” hours, $0.0846 per kWh for the first 700 kWh and $0.1660 for

consumption above 700 kWh. (On-peak consumption did not count towards the 700 kWh total.) Customers

on the CPP plan pay a significantly higher rate, $0.7500 per kWh, for consumption between 4PM and 7PM

on twelve “event days” over the course of the summer. Customers were alerted about event days at least

one day in advance. Consumption outside of the CPP event window was charged at a rate of $0.0851 per

kWh up to 700 kWh and $0.1665 per kWh beyond.

                                                  [FIGURE 2 HERE]

    Both the CPP and TOU rates were only in effect between June 1 and September 30 for the two sum-

mers in the study (2012 and 2013). Low-income customers enrolled in the Energy Assistance Program Rate

(EAPR) were eligible to participate in the study. No matter the pricing plan, EAPR customers received

about a 30 percent discount on their rates. Both the TOU and CPP rates were designed to be approxi-

mately revenue neutral to the utility if customers selected their rate plan randomly and did not adjust

their consumption (see Jimenez et al. 2013).
(a CPP plus TOU rate), encouraged to opt in to CPP or TOU without the enabling technology described below or were part of a
recruit and deny randomized controlled trial for Time of Use rates.


                                                            9
      To summarize, the five randomized groups we study include: the CPP opt-in group, which was en-

couraged to enroll in the CPP program; the CPP opt-out group, which was notified of enrollment and

encouraged to stay in the CPP program; the TOU opt-in group, which was encouraged to enroll in TOU

program; the TOU opt-out group, which was notified of enrollment and encouraged to stay in TOU pro-

gram; and the control group, which was not encouraged to participate in a rate program and remained on

SMUD’s standard rates.


3.2     Encouragement Messages

Customers assigned to the CPP or TOU treatment arms were encouraged to enroll in time-varying pricing.

Materials and messaging were virtually identical across the opt-in and opt-out groups. The encouragement

effort for opt-in households consisted of two separate mailed packets. The first was sent in either October

2011, to about 20 percent of the encouraged households, or November 2011, to the remaining 80 percent.

The second was sent in January 2012. Each packet included a a letter, a brochure, and a postage-paid

business reply card that the household could mail back to SMUD indicating their choice to either join

the program or not. The recruitment materials listed generic benefits of participating in rate programs,

including saving money, taking control, and helping the environment. In March of 2012, door hangers

were placed on the doorknobs of encouraged households. Finally, an extensive phone bank campaign was

carried out throughout April and May of 2012, with calls going out almost daily.

      Recruitment activities and program enrollment are summarized in Figure 3. About half of the cus-

tomers enrolled following the packet and door hanger recruitment phase, while the second half were

successfully enrolled over the timeframe of the phone campaign (though about 22 percent of these still

indicated their desire to enroll by way of the business reply cards).

                                             [FIGURE 3 HERE]

      The opt-out groups were mailed one packet containing a letter, brochure, and business reply card.

These materials were designed to look as similar as possible to the materials received by members of the

opt-in groups. Each packet mailing was followed up within two weeks by a reminder post card. About 10

percent of the packets were sent on March 12, 2012 and the remaining 90 percent were sent on April 5,

2012.

      The TOU opt-in group received slightly different encouragement messages from the other groups be-


                                                     10
cause they were part of a recruit-and-delay randomized controlled trial (which we are not incorporating

into this study). In the first packet mailed in late 2011, the households were given the same information

as other groups regarding the starting date of the pricing experiment. However, in the packet mailed in

January 2012, there was text that informed them that if they decided to opt-in to the rate program, they

would be randomly assigned to a start date of either 2012 or 2014. The other three groups were told that

their participation date would start in 2012 if they decided to opt-in or not opt-out throughout all com-

munications they received. This means that the set of always takers in the CPP opt-in group could be

somewhat different from the always-takers in the TOU group, as the TOU always takers had to be willing

to accept some probability that their enrollment would be delayed. Thus, while the CPP opt-in group can

be directly compared to the CPP opt-out group, comparisons between the TOU opt-out and opt-in groups

are drawn with the caveat that these two groups were encouraged and recruited somewhat differently.



4      Data and Methodology

4.1     Data Description

The data we use in our analysis are comprised of household-specific data, electricity consumption data,

and weather data. The household-specific data includes experimental cell assignment, dates of enroll-

ment, disenrollment, and account closure information for households who moved. In addition, we observe

whether households were on SMUD’s Energy Assistance Program Rate (EAPR) for low-income customers,

as well as whether or not they had set up a “My Account” online to interface with their SMUD account,

and the number of times they had signed in to their My Account page. Finally, for some households, we

have responses to two large-scale surveys administered to customers on the new rate programs as well as

a sample of control households, including a demographic survey and a customer satisfaction survey.

      We also have data on households’ energy consumption, as well as their associated expenditures. Specif-

ically, we have data on hourly energy consumption for each household starting on June 1, 2011 and contin-

uing through October 31, 2013, the end of the pilot period. Electricity consumption is measured in kilowatt

hours (kWh). We collect energy consumption data for all households in the experimental sample, including

the control group, for the duration of the study period. Households that moved are one exception. These

households were not tracked to their new location, so data for these households ends when they moved

from their initial location.


                                                     11
      In addition to the hourly energy consumption data, billing data were also obtained for all households

in the experiment. These data include the total energy (kWh) charged in each bill, as well as the total dollar

amount of the bill. Hourly energy consumption and billing data are quite complete. Less than one percent

of these data are missing. The frequency of missing data does not differ systematically across treatment

groups, nor across households who did or did not opt in or opt out of treatment.

      The final type of data we use are hourly weather data, including dry and wet bulb temperature as well

as humidity. There is only one weather station in close proximity to all participants in the SMUD service

area, so the weather data does not vary across households, only over time.


4.2     Validation of Randomization

Table 1 provides summary statistics by experimental group. The top three rows summarize information on

daily consumption, the ratio of peak to off-peak energy consumption and billing from the pre-treatment

summer (June to September 2011). SMUD households consume slightly less electricity than the average

U.S. household – approximately 27 kWh per day during the four summer months compared to almost 31

kWh per day across the U.S. in 2011. The ratio of peak to off-peak usage provides one indication of a

customer’s exposure to the higher peak prices under CPP or TOU, and bill amounts reflect the average

monthly bill in the pre-treatment summer. Bills in our sample are very close to the national average,

reflecting that SMUD customers pay higher prices than the average U.S. residential customer. For all three

variables, we also report t-statistics on the test that the mean for each treatment group equals the mean for

the control group. In only one case is the t-statistic above one, suggesting that the randomization yielded

groups with very similar means across these three variables.7

      The next two variables measure the share of households that would pay less on either the CPP or

TOU pricing policy, assuming no change in their consumption. (Following industry convention, we refer

to households who would pay less as “structural winners.”) Approximately half of all customers are esti-

mated to be structural winners, based on consumption data collected prior to the intervention. The bottom

four rows summarize the household-level covariates that we were able to observe for every household in

the experiment. “My Account” is a dummy variable indicating whether or not the household had signed

up to use SMUD’s online portal prior to our experiment. For those customers who have enrolled in the
    7
      Given that we will be analyzing consumption across hours of the day, we are particularly concerned about balance in con-
sumption profiles. In addition to the ratio of peak to off-peak usage, the appendix provides a breakdown of consumption across
all 24 hours of the day (Figures A1-A2). Again, all four treatment groups look very similar to the control group.


                                                             12
online portal, logins are tracked. “My Account logins” summarizes the number of log-ins across enrolled

customers. Paperless is a dummy variable indicating whether or not the household had signed up to re-

ceive electronic bills. Finally, “low income” is a dummy variable indicating enrollment in the low-income

rate. Of the 24 t-statistics reported across these six variables, only one exceeds two, again confirming the

integrity of the randomization process.


                                                     [TABLE 1 HERE]


4.3      Methodology

4.3.1     Estimating ITT for experimental treatment groups

We estimate a difference-in-differences (DID) specification using data from the pre-treatment and treat-

ment periods to identify the average intent to treat (ITT) effect. Equation (1) serves as our baseline es-

timating equation, where yit measures hourly electricity consumption for household i in hour t. These

specifications are estimated separately for the opt-in and opt-out groups. Zit is an indicator variable equal

to one starting on June 1, 2012 if household i was encouraged to be in the treatment group, and zero other-

wise. γi is a household fixed effect that captures systematic differences in consumption across households,

and τt is an hour-of-sample fixed effect.



                                           yit = α + βIT T Zit + γi + τt + εit                                               (1)

       We estimate four sets of regression equations. Each set uses data from the control group and one of the

four treatment groups. The coefficient of interest is βIT T , which captures the average difference in hourly

electricity consumption across treated and control groups, controlling for any pre-treatment differences

by group.8 Within each set, we estimate the model separately using data from event day peak hours (4pm

to 7pm on the twelve CPP days in each summer) and non-event day peak hours (4pm to 7pm on non-event,

non-holiday weekdays during the summer).9
   8
      We present specifications with the dependent variable measured in levels because the cost savings from time-varying pricing
are a function of kWh reduced, not the percent reduction. Our results are not sensitive to alternative functional forms, and the
appendix presents specifications in logs (Tables A1 to A3).
    9
      Note that customers under the TOU pricing plan face the same prices on event and non-event days. We estimate separate
impacts for comparison to CPP.




                                                               13
4.3.2      Estimating LATE for experimental treatment groups

We estimate a DID instrumental variables (IV) specification using data from the pre-treatment and treat-

ment periods to identify a Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE). Specifically, we estimate equation 2,

where yit , γi , and τt are defined as in equation 1. T reatit is an indicator variable equal to one starting on

June 1st, 2012 if household i was actually enrolled in treatment, zero otherwise (estimated separately for

the opt-in and opt-out groups). We instrument for T reatit using the randomized encouragement to the

corresponding treatment Zit .



                                          yit = α + βLAT E T reatit + γi + τt + εit                                               (2)

       The βLAT E coefficient captures the Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE). In this specification, the

LATE measures the average reduction in household electricity consumption among customers enrolled

in the time-varying pricing program. To interpret βLAT E as a causal effect, we must invoke an exclu-

sion restriction, which requires that the encouragement (i.e., the offer to opt in or default assignment into

treatment with the ability to opt out) affects electricity consumption only indirectly via an effect on par-

ticipation. We also invoke a monotonicity assumption which requires that our encouragement weakly

increases (versus reduces) the participation probability for all households. Appendix 3 discusses these

assumptions in more detail.10


4.3.3      Estimating LATE for Complacents

Conceptually, our sample of residential customers can be divided into three groups (see Figure 4). Never-

takers are households who opt-out of an opt-out program and do not enroll in an opt-in program. Com-

placents are households who do not actively enroll in an opt-in program, but who also do not actively

drop out of an opt-out program. Always-takers are households who actively enroll in an opt-in program

and remain in an opt-out program. Note that a comparison of average electricity consumption across the

opt-in and opt-out groups (the top two rows in Figure 4) estimates the average effect of being assigned to

the opt-in versus opt-out groups. Scaling this difference by our estimate of the population share of com-

placents yields an unbiased estimate of the average effect of time-varying rates on electricity consumption
  10
       Ancillary analysis which assesses the plausibility of this exclusion restriction assumption is included in the appendix.




                                                                  14
among complacents.11


                                                     [FIGURE 4 HERE]


         We estimate the DID IV specification using data from the opt-in and opt-out groups, as shown in

equation 2, where all variables are defined as above, except now T reatit is instrumented for with an

indicator variable equal to one for observations starting on June 1, 2012 if a household was encouraged

into the opt-out treatment group only.

         This IV specification provides an intuitive way to isolate the average causal effect of these pricing

programs on electricity consumption among complacents. To interpret our estimates in this way, we again

invoke the exclusion restriction which requires that the encouragement (the offer to opt-in or the default

assignment with the ability to opt-out) does not directly affect electricity consumption among always

takers, never takers, or complacents.



5         Main Results

5.1        Default Effects on Program Adoption

Table 2 summarizes customer acceptance of time-varying pricing in the opt-in and opt-out groups, respec-

tively. The columns titled “Initial” summarize customer participation at the beginning of June 2012 (the

month the time-varying rates went into effect). The columns titled “Endline” summarize participation at

the end of the second summer (September 30, 2013). In both sets of results, the first column reflects the

share of customers on the time-varying rate while the second column reports the number of customers on

the rate.


                                                     [TABLE 2 HERE]


         The initial participation results provide striking evidence of the default effect. For both the CPP and

TOU rates, approximately 20 percent of those assigned to the opt-in encouragement elected to opt-in.

Fewer than 5 percent opted out when defaulted onto the new rate structure, leaving over 95 percent of the
    11
    Our approach to isolating the response of the complacents is very similar to Kowalski (2016), although our setting is consid-
erably more straightforward since we randomized the selection of both the opt-in and the opt-out treatments.




                                                               15
customers on the new rates in the default treatment.12

      To interpret the “Endline” columns, it is important to understand how we are describing the eligible

population. If customers moved, they were no longer eligible for the time-based rate structure, even if

they moved within SMUD’s service territory. Also, new occupants were not included in the pilot program.

The numbers in Table 2 report rates and enrollees after dropping movers. For instance, the number of

customers on CPP from the opt-in group fell from 1568 to 1169 because 399 households (approximately 25

percent) moved between June 2012 and September 2013. SMUD reports move rates of approximately 20

percent per year across their entire residential population, so a move rate of 25 percent over a 16-month

period that includes the summer, when moves are most likely, is reasonable. Across the four columns, the

move rates are very similar, ranging from 23.4 percent in the CPP opt-out group to 25.8 percent in the TOU

opt-in.13


5.2     Choice Modification

We observe some modifications to consumers’ participation choices after the program started. In this

setting, modifications to the participation choice were somewhat constrained. Customers in the opt-in

group were not allowed to enroll after June 1, 2012; customers in the opt-out group who had already

opted-out were not allowed to change their minds and enroll. However, customers in both groups who

had initially chosen to participate in the time-varying rate program could revert to the standard rate at

any time.

      The final column of Table 2 reports the difference between initial and endline participation rates, di-

vided by the initial participation rate. Participation in both of the opt-in groups fell by fewer than 1.5

percentage points, reflecting fewer than 10 percent of the original participants. Participation in both of

the opt-out groups fell by more percentage points (6.6 in the case of CPP opt out, 96.0 – 89.4, and 5.3 in

the case of TOU opt out), but again reflected fewer than 10 percent of the original participants.

      With such a small share of households dropping out of these programs, tests comparing attrition rates

across the opt-in and opt-out groups are low powered. The appendix reports results from a hazard analysis
   12
      It is worth noting that SMUD was more successful than expected at recruiting customers onto time-varying rates. The
company’s expectations, and the basis for our ex ante statistical power calculations, were that between ten and fifteen percent
of customers would opt-in. On the other hand, given that SMUD customers are generally satisfied with the utility and trust its
recommendations, they may have been more likely to accept the default. We anticipated that approximately 50 percent of the
customers would remain on the rate with opt-out.
   13
      Moving rates are not statistically significantly different from one another (z-statistic on the largest difference equals 1.3).



                                                                 16
of drop outs. Several interesting patterns emerge. First, although the rates of attrition over the entire study

were similar, the opt-in participants (both TOU and CPP) dropped out sooner than opt-out. For households

in the opt-out groups, the reminder sent to participants before the second summer had a statistically sig-

nificant effect on drop-outs.

       In sum, sections 5.1 and 5.2 provide strong evidence of a default effect and relatively little evidence of

subsequent re-optimization.


5.3      Follow-on Behavior

5.3.1     Intent to Treat (ITT) Effects

Table 3 summarizes the estimation results for the difference-in-differences (DID) specification of equation

1 that uses data from the pre-treatment and treatment periods to identify an intent to treat (ITT) effect.

The first two columns use data from peak hours on “critical event” days. In the post-treatment period,

these correspond to days when a CPP event was called. In the pre-treatment period, these correspond to

the hottest non-holiday weekdays during the summer of 2011.14 The right two columns use data from all

other summer weekdays. In all cases the analysis is limited to the peak periods of the relevant days (4PM

to 7PM).


                                                   [TABLE 3 HERE]


       If we interpret the coefficients in Table 3 as estimates of the causal impact of encouragement to join

the time-varying rates, we conclude that providing households the opportunity to opt-in to the CPP treat-

ment leads to an average reduction in electricity consumption of 0.130 kWh during peak hours of event

days (averaged across all household that received the opt-in offer). The estimate for the opt-out group is

considerably larger at 0.299 kWh across all households defaulted onto the CPP rate.

       The coefficients in the last two columns show that CPP customers reduced their consumption during

peak hours on non-event days (by 0.028 kWh per household in the opt-in group and 0.095 kWh per house-

hold in the opt-out group). Recall that CPP customers faced rates that are slightly lower than the standard

rates on these non-event days. These kWh reductions are considerably smaller compared to event days for
  14
    We have also estimated specifications based on random samples of 12 days within the hottest 24 days. Our results are not
sensitive to this choice.




                                                            17
the CPP households, but still statistically significant. Why might consumers respond to a decrease in elec-

tricity price with a decrease in consumption? This is consistent with habit formation, learned preferences,

(e.g., if households learn that they can comfortably open windows instead of turning on the air condition-

ing), or a fixed adjustment cost (e.g., if customers set programmable thermostats to run air conditioning

less between 4 and 7 PM on all days, even when they only face higher prices on a subset of those days).

      In the case of the TOU group, who faced higher prices during peak hours for all weekdays (not just

event days,) the results show that households reduced their daily peak consumption by 0.090 kWh on

average in the opt-in treatment, and 0.129 kWh on average in the opt-out treatment on days that were called

as event days for CPP customers (i.e., relatively hotter days). On all other peak days average reductions are

estimated to be 0.055 kWh per household in the opt-in treatment, and 0.100 kWh per hour in the opt-out

treatment. Given that non-event-day consumption is considerably lower, the results are approximately the

same in percentage terms (3.6-5.1% for the opt-in group and 5.9 - 7.2% for the opt-out group – see Appendix

4).

      The exclusion restriction implies that always takers in the opt-out group are responding to the time-

varying rates in the same way as their counterparts in the opt-in group. Under this assumption, differences

in these estimated ITT effects across the opt-in and opt-out groups are driven by a demand response among

complacents. We have also estimated the opt-in and opt-out equations jointly so that we could test equality

of the coefficients. We can reject equality with at least 95% certainty in all cases except for event day TOU,

where p = 0.055.

      Finally, we regenerate the results reported in Table 3 using only the post-intervention data. In other

words, we do not use the pre-period data, and we simply compare treated households’ consumption to the

control households’ during event and non-event peak hours. This exercise yield qualitatively similar re-

sults; the average reductions for the opt-out group are nearly 3 times larger than the average reductions for

the opt-in group for CPP and 1.5 to 2 times larger for TOU. The coefficient estimates do differ slightly from

those reported in Table 3 since there were some pre-period differences by group, even if those differences

are not statistically significant.


5.3.2    Local Average Treatment Effects (LATE)

Table 4 reports on the instrumental variables specifications (equation 2). Similar to Table 3, the columns

on the left of the table report estimates using data from CPP event hours and the columns on the right

                                                     18
report results estimated using data from non-event-day peak hours. The top of the table corresponds to

CPP customers while the bottom corresponds to customers participating in TOU programs.

       Local average treatment effect (LATE) estimates in the first two columns suggest that the always-

takers in the opt-in CPP group reduced consumption during event-day peaks by almost twice as much as

the larger group of always takers and complacents participating in the CPP program in the opt-out group

(0.664 compared to 0.323 kWh per household). The magnitude of the reduction for the opt-in group (664

watts per hour) is quite large and suggests consumers did more than simply turn off a few light bulbs.

Given that electricity rates increased by almost 100 percent during critical peak events, this reduction off a

mean of almost 2,500 watts is consistent with a price elasticity of approximately -0.25. This is on the high

side of other short-run demand elasticities estimated for electricity consumption, though typically those

estimates are based on demand reductions over longer time periods (EPRI, 2012). In the fourth and fifth

columns, we see again that households in both the opt-in and opt-out CPP treatments were reducing their

consumption on non-event peak days significantly.

       In the case of the TOU treatments, the LATE estimates indicate that always-takers reduced consump-

tion during daily peaks that were called as event days for the CPP treatment by about three times as much

as the combination of always-takers and complacents in the TOU opt-out group (0.473 relative to 0.136

kWh per household), and almost three times as much (0.288 relative to 0.105 kWh per household) during

non-event regular peak days.15


                                                        [TABLE 4 HERE]


       The results in the third and sixth column isolate the effect of time-varying rates on electricity con-

sumption among the complacent households. Comparing the results in the first column (always-takers),

to the results in the third column (complacents), suggests that the average response among always tak-

ers to the CPP rate was about 2.5 times larger than the response among complacents during event hours.

Complacents were somewhat more similar to always takers during non-event peak hours, reducing by

only half as much.16 Differences between always takers and complacents are more pronounced with the

TOU rates. Given that there are so many more complacents exposed to the rates under an opt-out exper-
  15
      In joint specifications, we can reject that the coefficient estimates are equal across the opt-in and opt-out groups in all cases
except for the CPP treatment on non-event days (p=0.249).
   16
      Note that the coefficient estimates for the opt-out group in Table 4 are equal to the weighted sum of the coefficients for the
always takers (e.g., -0.664 for CPP event hours) and the complacents (-0.233), with weights set equal to the share of always takers
relative to total opt-out enrollees and one minus this number from Table 2 .


                                                                  19
imental design, the aggregate savings from an opt-out design is significantly higher than from an opt-in

design (as is made evident in Table 3).

         Tables 3 and 4 have averaged treatment effects across all peak hours. Figure 5 illustrates these effects

graphically, disaggregating by hour. The figure depicts hour-by-hour LATE estimates for event days across

the four treatment groups relative to the control group. We also test for changes in consumption during

non-peak hours. One might expect that some consumers would increase consumption in the hours leading

up to the peak period (cooling the house when prices are relatively low, for example). However, we find

that consumers are reducing consumption in the hours before the peak period, statistically significantly

so for the always takers in both the CPP and TOU groups.


                                                   [FIGURE 5 HERE]



6         Cost-Effectiveness and System-Wide Impacts

This section summarizes the impact of the pricing plans on customer bills and utility revenues. To inform

this analysis, we estimate an alternative form of equation 2 using customer-by-month observations and

total bill amount as the dependent variable. Table 5 summarizes the estimation results. The coefficient

estimate in the first column of the top panel suggests that bills for customers who opted in to the CPP rate

plan fell by approximately 5% on average, with a mean reduction of $6.52 on an average summer bill of

nearly $115. Bills for the typical participant in the opt-out group fell by less – around $4.50 for the group

overall and slightly less for the complacents. This is consistent with the results presented in Table 4, which

shows how complacent households reduced consumption by less during critical peak periods.17

         Table 6 analyzes the pricing programs from the perspective of the utility, comparing the costs of en-

rolling participants and implementing the program against the benefits (i.e., costs avoided when peak con-

sumption is reduced). The analysis in Table 6 assumes each pricing program was scaled to SMUD’s entire

residential customer base and run for 10 years. Some of these program benefits and costs are summarized

in Nexant (2014), a consulting report prepared to help SMUD decide whether to expand the pilot. We also

obtained details not included in the report from personal communications with SMUD and their consul-

tants. Appendix section 5 summarizes underlying assumptions, and explains why some of the assumptions
    17
     Bill reductions should not be interpreted as a measure of consumer welfare impacts; customers may have made adjustments
that were costly from a monetary or welfare perspective. We return to this point below.



                                                            20
pertaining to program benefits are likely conservative.

         The two columns on the left summarize the two main benefits of the program. Reduced demand during

CPP and TOU peak hours avoids two types of expenses – the costs incurred to supply sufficient electricity

to meet peak demand during these hours, and the expected cost of new investments in peaking plants

needed to meet demand in peak hours. To estimate the avoided capacity costs, the expectation is taken

over the probability that demand in CPP or TOU hours would drive capacity expansion decisions. Notably,

the avoided energy costs are considerably smaller than the avoided capacity costs, particularly for the CPP

programs. This reflects the fact that electricity demand in a small number of peak hours drives costly

generating capacity expansions. Given that electricity is not storable, current electricity systems include

peaking plants that only operate several hours a year. Reducing demand in peak periods avoids the need

to construct and maintain these plants going forward.18

         We break the program costs into three components: (1) one-time fixed costs, which include items such

as IT costs to adjust the billing system and initial program design costs, (2) one-time per-household costs

which primarily include the customer acquisition costs, including the in-home devices offered to customers

as part of the recruitment, and (3) recurring annual fixed and variable costs, which include personnel costs

required to administer the program. The one-time variable cost of recruiting customers is lower under the

opt-out programs than under the opt-in. As we note in section 3, more effort was invested in recruiting

customers assigned to the opt-in group.

         Net benefits are reported in the final column of Table 6. We estimate that both opt-out programs would

be cost-effective. The CPP opt-in program is estimated to be marginally cost-effective. The TOU opt-in

program, which led to much smaller demand reductions than the CPP program, is projected to incur costs

in excess of savings.



7         Explanations for the Default Effect

In addition to assessing the program outcomes from the perspective of the utility, we are also interested in

understanding why customers are predisposed to choose the default option. Some explanations for default

effects presume known preferences and well-informed choices. Under alternative explanations, defaulting
    18
     As we explain in the appendix, the calculations reflected in Table 6 may understate the capacity benefits, for example because
they do not measure reductions in transmission and distribution level investments. Because the numbers in Table 6 reflect private
benefits to the utility, they do not incorporate the value of avoided pollution. Given that the avoided energy savings are low
relative to the avoided capacity, we suspect that avoided pollution would not change the overall cost-benefit calculus by much.


                                                                21
inattentive or uninformed customers to a new pricing regime encourages customers to learn about a new

experience and “construct” their preferences. These different rationalizations of a default effect can have

very different implications for consumer welfare.

      Prior studies have identified several potential explanations for default effects but have made little

progress identifying precisely which mechanisms are at work in a given setting. We are uniquely posi-

tioned to investigate alternative explanations for the default effect as we have detailed information about

the determinants of the initial choice, together with rich data on follow-on behavior, as well as responses

to survey questions on attitudes towards time-varying pricing.


7.1     Standard Economic Model

As a starting point, we begin with a standard economic model that assumes consumers make informed

decisions based on known preferences. Within this framework, costs incurred to switch away from the

default choice can give rise to a default effect. In what follows, we use this model to generate qualitative

predictions that can be evaluated empirically.

      Suppose that consumers choose the electricity price structure P to maximize utility subject to a budget

constraint:



                                      maximize : u(e (P )) + V (P, 1, Y )                                     (3)
                                          P


      The first term captures disutility from effort, which is only expended if the customer actively switches

to a different pricing plan. The second term captures the indirect utility from future consumption, which is

a function of electricity prices, the price of all other goods (normalized to 1), and income Y. For notational

ease, we will refer to this indirect utility component as V (P ).

      Let P̄ denote the vector of electricity prices under the uniform price regime and let P̃ denote the

vector of time-varying prices. Let d denote the default choice. This model can generate a default effect

if switching away from the default option incurs some cost (i.e., u(e(P )) < 0). To see this, note that if

d = P , the consumer opts out if V (P ) < V (Pe) + u(e). In contrast, if d = Pe, the consumer opts out if

V (P ) + u(e) > V (Pe).

      Figure 6 illustrates a stylized application of this modeling framework. In both Figures 6(a) and 6(b),

the vertical axis measures the difference in indirect utility: V (P̃ ) − V (P̄ ). The figures plot a hypothetical


                                                       22
distribution of these indirect utility differences. For expositional ease, switching costs u(e) are assumed

to be constant across all customers and independent of V (P̃ ) − V (P̄ ).

   Within this stylized framework, the top panel illustrates participation choices if the default is d = P̄

and customers can chose to switch to P̃ (i.e., the opt-in treatment). A qualitative prediction is that only

those customers with the largest indirect utility gains (i.e., gains that exceed the switching costs) will

opt-in. Thus, the customers who actively switch to the time-varying rate lie within the blue shaded area.

Taken together, these customers (the always takers) incur switching costs E; the net gain in utility is area

F. Customers represented by area D would have higher utility if they switched to time-varying prices, but

the utility gain does not offset the switching costs, so they remain on the flat rate, represented by the red

shaded area. Customers represented in areas A,B, and C would experience utility losses switching to the

new pricing structure, so they do not switch.

   The bottom panel reflects the alternative scenario where d = P̃ . The model precdicts that consumers

who actively opt-out of the program are those with the largest indirect utility losses. The share of cus-

tomers participating in the time-varying rate (shaded blue) is now much larger. The so-called never takers

(red) now incur a switching cost represented by area B to avoid a utility loss under time-varying prices. A

share of the complacents experience a negative impact on utility represented by area C, but this utility cost

is smaller than the switching cost they would need to incur. Always takers avoid switching costs (area E)

and some complacents experience higher level of utility under the time-varying price regime (area D).

   In this stylized illustration, it is straightforward to show that total consumer welfare is maximized

by setting d = Pe. The welfare gain from switching the default to Pe from P̄ is ED − CB. Of course,

in our applied setting, we cannot directly observe the utility each household associates with alternative

pricing regimes. To quantitatively estimate the welfare implications of switching the default choice, we

would need to explicitly specify the form of the utility function in Equation (3). Rather than impose this

degree of structure, we introduce a set of weaker assumptions which allow us to empirically evaluate the

qualitative predictions of the model and estimate a lower bound on consumers’ welfare loss from switching.

   To draw empirically testable implications out of the model, we continue to assume that the consumer

has well-defined preferences over electricity pricing programs, and that the consumer chooses the program

that maximizes her utility. We note that the welfare impacts of switching to a time-varying electricity

rate can manifest in three ways. First, any change in electricity expenditures affect residual savings or

expenditures on other goods. Second, any re-optimization of energy consumption patterns in response to

                                                     23
the price change (such as turning up the thermostat on a hot day) will affect the level of utility derived from

energy consumption. Finally, re-optimization of energy consumption patterns can require effort through

learning or adjustment costs which we denote A.

    If we further assume that utility is quasilinear in electricity and all other goods, a monetary measure

of the utility change associated with a switch from P to Pe can be summarized as:

                                             n                                 o
                                                                  e − P 0X − A
                        V (Pe) − V (P ) = max Pe0 X − P̄ 0 X, Pe0 X                                            (4)

where X̃ reflects the optimal vector of electricity consumption under time-varying prices and X reflects

the optimal vector of electricity consumption under uniform pricing. The first argument in brackets mea-

sures the change in electricity expenditures associated with switching to time-varying pricing, holding

consumption patterns constant. This provides an upper bound on the welfare loss (among structural

losers), or a lower bound on the welfare gains (among structural winners). The second argument mea-

sures the change in electricity expenditures net of adjustment costs in a scenario where the consumer

adjusts consumption in response to time-varying pricing. In theory, the consumer will only choose to

re-optimize if the benefits exceed the adjustment costs.
                            0
    We can estimate Pe0 X −P X empirically using rich data from the pre-intervention period. Figure 7 (a)-
                                                                          0
(d) summarize the distribution of customer-specific estimates of Pe0 X − P X in a histogram. These figures

show how approximately half of the consumers in the CPP treatments are structural winners. Under some

fairly restrictive assumptions, these figures can be interpreted as empirical analogs to Figure 6. The first

set of assumptions pertains to the underlying utility maximization (i.e., preferences are fixed and well-
                                                                                                       0
defined and utility is quasilinear in electricity and all other goods). As noted above, these Pe0 X − P X

measures can only be interpreted as estimates of the monetized change in indirect utility in cases where

consumers do not re-optimize consumption in response to the change in price structure. Releasing this

restrictive no-adjustment assumption, Figure 7 bounds the distribution of utility changes under a rank-

preservation assumption (i.e., any re-optimization to X̃ does not change the rank order of utility changes

across consumers). This would be violated if, for example, consumers were most likely to reoptimize if

they would otherwise pay higher bills under the new pricing (“structural losers” in the terminology used

above). In Appendix Table A6, we report versions of equation 2 which allow the response to vary for

structural losers and find that, if anything, structural losers are less likely to adjust their consumption.


                                                      24
      Having estimated customer-specific structural gains, we can ask whether the observed participation

choices are qualitatively consistent with predictions of the model that assumes well-defined, pre-determined

preferences and switching costs. Figure 7 summarizes participation decisions by decile of savings. Similar

to Figure 6, we represent the opt-in scenarios in the top two figures and opt-out in the bottom. We use

blue shading to represent customers who are participating in the new pricing program and red shading to

represent customers who continue to face standard pricing. For example, in Figure 7a, 10% of the house-

holds would have experienced losses of more than $30 over summer 2011 had they been on a CPP rate

instead of the flat rate. Of these, however, 15% opted in to the new rate. In general, the patterns depicted in

Figure 7 starkly contrast with Figure 6. In all cases, a significant share of the structural losers participate in

the new rate and even some of the households that stand to gain the most from the rate without adjusting

their consumption opt-out. These patterns cast doubt on the usefulness of a model that suggests switching

costs explain the default effect in this context.


7.2     Alternative Explanations

There are a number of alternative explanations for the default effect that could apply in this setting. One

potential explanation is rooted in rational inattention, a form of bounded rationality. When information

is costly to acquire, consumers may sometimes choose to act on incomplete information rather than incur

the cost to become perfectly informed. Sallee (2014) argues that it will often be rational for consumers

to choose among energy-consuming durables, like automobiles or home appliances, without acquiring

complete information about energy efficiency. Given the relatively small gains from switching to a time-

varying pricing regime, a similar argument could apply here. For many customers, it could be rational to

rely on cues, such as default choices, rather than invest in collecting full information about this electricity

price plan choice.

      A second explanation is predicated on the idea that consumers have inconsistent expectations about

their own actions. This type of model would predict procrastination, which could be one explanation

for consumers remaining on the default plan when they would prefer not to be. For example, customers

assigned to the opt-out group may have intended to opt-out of the plan, but never got around to it. Con-

versely, customers assigned to the opt-in treatment may have intended to opt in but never acted on that

intent. If this procrastination behavior is pervasive, it could explain a significant default effect. And, wel-

fare analysis based on a model that rationalizes the impact of a default switch using switching costs can

                                                       25
overestimate the cost of the default switch.

       A third perspective, which departs even further from a standard model, posits that preferences are

constructed – versus uncovered – by consumers as they weigh and experience alternative options. In this

setting, observed choices reveal not only the agent’s valuation of the alternatives, but also the processing

strategies used to construct the preferred choice. This perspective introduces some additional heuristic ex-

planations for default effects. For one, people may interpret the default choice as an informative suggestion

or endorsement helping to guide an otherwise uninformed choice. Or, the default choice can serve as an

anchor or point of reference. If preferences are formed as customers experience the new pricing structure,

welfare analysis becomes more complicated. Standard approaches that seek to rationalize default effects

using switching costs and information costs may overestimate the role of these costs if, in fact, preferences

are learned and constructed.

       We cannot definitively distinguish between these alternative explanations in our context. Instead,

we investigate heterogeneity in default proclivity, systematic differences in follow-on behavior and some

survey results from after the experiment. The patterns we uncover provide suggestive evidence on the

mechanisms behind the default effect and the implications for customer utility.


7.2.1     Heterogeneity in Default Sensitivity

Table 7 summarizes household-characteristics for never-takers (i.e., households assigned to the opt-out

group who actively opt-out), always-takers (i.e., households assigned to the opt-in group who actively opt-

in) and imputed values for complacents. To calculate the summary statistics for complacents, we leverage

the random assignment across opt-in and opt-out groups which implies that the share of always-takers,

never-takers, and complacents will be the same in expectation across the two groups.19 The three columns

on the right summarize statistical significance levels (p-values for the t- or z-test on differences) for each

pairwise comparison. The top of the table applies to the CPP treatments and the bottom to TOU.

       With respect to average usage, the ratio of peak to off-peak consumption, and electricity bills during

summer months, there are very few statistically significant differences across the groups in either the

CPP or TOU settings. The indicators for structural winner, summarized in the fourth and fifth rows of
  19
     Specifically, we calculate the mean of each variable for the complacents as follows:                              µC       =
(µOpt−out − pOpt−in ∗ µOpt−in ) / (pOpt−out − pOpt−in ) where µOpt−out and pOpt−out are the means and proportions
for all participants in the opt-out group and µOpt−in and pOpt−in are the means and proportions for all participants in the opt-in
group.



                                                               26
both the top and bottom panels, suggest that never-takers were statistically significantly more likely than

complacents to be structural winners for TOU, which is the opposite of what a switching cost-based model

would suggest. Several of the other differences are similarly the opposite sign from what a switching cost

model would predict, and are nearly statistically significant.

   “My Account” and “My Account logins” reflect actions that customers could proactively take to mon-

itor their consumption in the pre-treatment period. Customers who have historically engaged with these

pre-existing information programs are more likely to take an active choice and either opt-in or opt-out.

This is true for both CPP and TOU treatments. In both cases, the differences between complacents and

always takers as well as between complacents and never takers are statistically significant for both My

Account and the number of logins (which provides a measure of how frequently a customer accesses her

usage information). If we interpret these variables as proxies for attentiveness, we find that complacent

households have historically been significantly less attentive to their electricity consumption. This could

reflect that members of the complacent group incur higher costs to engage and monitor their use in gen-

eral. The lack of engagement with the existing programs could also raise the costs of making an active

choice about enrolling in time-varying pricing.

   The “low income” indicator summarizes participation in the utility’s low-income electricity pricing

program. We find that low-income consumers are significantly more likely to opt in to time-varying pricing

programs and somewhat less likely to opt-out, though the second difference is not statistically significant

for CPP. We note that households must proactively sign up for this low-income rate, so with this indicator

we are capturing the response among relatively attentive and engaged low-income households.


                                             [TABLE 7 HERE]


   In sum, we find systematic differences in the extent to which customers have historically been engaged

in monitoring their electricity consumption, with complacent households significantly less engaged than

other households in the sample. This is consistent with the default effect reflecting inattention (rational

or otherwise). The average projected gain or loss from switching to a time-varying rate is quite small

(average gains among winners, and average loss among losers, are on the order of $15 over an entire

summer). Given that gathering information about consumption patterns and alternative rate structures to

make an informed decision requires time and effort, inattention to these savings could be rational.



                                                     27
7.2.2      Heterogeneity in Follow-on Behavior

We also test for systematic heterogeneity in the electricity consumption response to time-varying prices

along several dimensions. We first estimate a more flexible specification of Equation 2 that includes an

interaction between the participation indicator and several of the household characteristics summarized

in Table 7. Note that the direct effects of these variables on electricity consumption are absorbed by the

customer fixed effect.

       The top panel of Table 8 reports interactions with My Account indicator. The coefficients on the

interaction terms are negative in 11 out of the 12 cases and statistically significant in 6 of those 11. In other

words, customers who had signed up for My Account prior to the study, and are presumably more attentive

to their energy consumption, reduced consumption by significantly more on average during both event

and non-event peak hours. The most striking differences are found among complacents. The coefficient on

the interaction term is negative and larger than the coefficient on the treatment variable alone for the CPP

group, though only statistically significant during event hours (column (3)). We note that the responses of

complacents enrolled in My Account appear more similar to always takers than for complacents who have

not activated My Account. For TOU, the effects are large for complacents, even proportionately larger

than for always takers, but the point estimates are small, so they are not statistically significant.

       The middle panel of Table 8 tests for systematic variation in price responsiveness across income groups.

The results indicate that always takers on the low-income rate are significantly less responsive during event

and non-event hours for both the CPP and the TOU treatments. This indicates that low-income customers

that actively opted in did not provide as much peak savings.20 Among complacents, the average demand

response among low-income customers is also smaller during critical events, although the differences are

not statistically significant. The demand response of low-income customers who were susceptible to the

default effect – and may be of particular interest to regulators – is statistically indistinguishable from the

other complacent households.

       Since our study period includes two years of post-intervention data, we can analyze how electricity

demand response to the time-varying rates evolves over time. In particular, we can test for differences in

this evolution across customers who actively opted in and the complacent households who were nudged

in by the opt-out encouragement. We modify Equation 2 to include an interaction between the treatment
  20
       This results holds when we estimate specifications using log consumption. See Table A3.




                                                                28
indicator and an indicator for the second summer. The bottom panel of Table 8 summarizes the estimation

results. For the CPP treatments, the interaction term is positive for the always takers in the opt-in group

(columns 1 and 4) and negative for the complacents (columns 3 and 6). Three out of four of the coefficients

are statistically significant.21 This pattern suggests that demand response is attenuating over time among

always takers. In contrast, the average demand response is increasing over time among complacents. This

could be due to a growing number of complacents responding over time, or an increasing demand response

from those complacent customers who had been actively responding in the first summer.

       Taken together, our findings suggest that as complacent customers gain experience with the new pric-

ing regime, they mount a more significant demand response. Recall from Section 5.2. that complacents are

no more likely than always takers to exit the program after gaining some experience. These results are

consistent with the complacents gradually learning about and acclimating to the time-varying rate, and

less consistent with a scenario in which complacents had well-formed preferences for the rates, knew they

would dislike it but elect to remain on account of high switching costs or procrastination.


7.2.3     Survey Results

Another source of evidence on households’ preferences and decision processes is a set of follow-up surveys

that SMUD conducted after the pricing program ended. The survey was sent to all households enrolled on

the CPP and TOU pricing plans and a subset of the control group. While the survey respondents are by

no means a random subset of the larger sample, the responses can provide some insight into consumers’

motivations and sentiments about the pricing programs. The opt-out participants were less likely to re-

spond to the survey – 26% for opt-out (N=566) versus 36% for opt-in (N=183), consistent with the general

finding thus far that complacents tend to be less engaged and less responsive. Also, only 60% of the re-

spondents from the opt-out groups demonstrate that they understood the time-varying rates they were

paying, compared to around 85% of the respondents from the opt-in group.

       Survey responses generally suggest that customers are not averse to the new pricing plans. In both

the opt-in and opt-out groups, fewer than 7% disagree with the statement, “I want to stay on my pricing

plan.” More of the opt-in customers strongly agree with that statement and more of the opt-out customers

express, “no opinion,” perhaps indicative of their complacency. Similarly, across both groups, almost 90%
  21
    The results are not as pronounced for the TOU treatment, although columns 1 and 4 suggest that the always takers are
responding less over time.



                                                          29
of respondents are either “Very satisfied” or “Somewhat satisfied” with their current pricing plan, with

no statistically significant differences across those two categories by group. In contrast, only 80% of the

control group respondents are “very” or “somewhat” satisfied with the standard rate.

    Overall, the results in this section suggest that customers who are more engaged with utility programs

are more likely to make an active choice and either opt in to or opt out of the time-varying pricing pro-

grams. Customers who were expected to have lower bills on the program without changing their behavior

(so-called “structural winners”) were no more likely to enroll in the program, even if they were engaged

in utility programs. We find these patterns inconsistent with explanations for the default effect that rely

on consumers performing well-informed, cost-benefit calculations before making their choice and more

consistent with other explanations, such as inattention and possibly some form of constructed preferences.

    Once on time-varying pricing, consumers who were more attentive are also more likely to respond to

the prices, although we still see significant reductions by the less attentive consumers in both the always

taker and complacent populations. We also see convergence between always takers and complacents in the

second summer, which we take as evidence that nudged consumers acclimated to the new pricing regimes.

Finally, at least among consumers who responded to the survey, there seems to be general acceptance of

dynamic pricing. In sum, we see these results as consistent with a scenario where consumers are nudged

onto the rates, perhaps because they are not paying attention, and once on the rates, they learn to adjust

to them and some even prefer them to standard rates.



8    Conclusion

The default effect is one of the most powerful and consistent behavioral phenomena in economics, with

examples documented across many settings, including health care, personal finance and internet market-

ing. This paper studies this phenomenon in a new context – time-varying pricing programs for electricity.

Residential customers served by a large municipal utility in the Sacramento area were randomly allocated

to one of three groups: (1) a treatment group in which they were offered the chance to opt in to a time-

varying pricing program, (2) a treatment group that was defaulted on to time-varying pricing unless they

opted out, and (3) a control group. We document stark evidence of a default effect, with only about 20% of

customers opting into the new pricing programs and over 90% staying on the programs when it was the

default option. This holds for both Critical Peak Pricing and Time-of-Use programs.


                                                    30
    Our study offers several innovations relative to the existing literature on default effects. First, in ad-

dition to observing the initial decision that was directly manipulated by the default effect, we also collect

detailed data on follow-on behavior. We distinguish between follow-on behavior that modifies she orig-

inal choice, such as opting out of the dynamic pricing program once it has begun, and behavior that is

conditional on, but distinct from, the original choice. In our case, the latter involves adjusting electricity

consumption in response to time-varying electric prices. We argue that this conditional behavior can be

equally, if not more, important than the original choice. To our knowledge, ours is the first study to identify

and study this form of follow-on behavior.

    We find that consumers do adjust electricity consumption in response to the time-varying prices, even

if they did not actively select them. In particular, the complacents in our study (i.e., consumers who would

not have actively enrolled in the pricing program but did not opt out) reduced their consumption during

Critical Peak Pricing periods by about 10%, when the price of electricity increased by nearly a factor of

10. Always takers, who actively selected the rates, reduced consumption by more than 25%, although over

time, the always takers respond less and the complacents respond more.

    Our second innovation is to analyze the initial decisions and follow-on behavior across different groups

in our study in order to draw inferences about the likely explanations for the default effect in our context.

Our findings cast doubt on explanations for the default effect based on high switching costs. We argue

that the data are more consistent with explanations that feature consumers who are not paying attention

to the initial choice, but come to understand it and like it.

    In sum, we find that placing households onto time-varying pricing by default can lead to significantly

more customers on time-varying pricing and, more importantly, significantly higher responses to price

changes, all without evidence of significant welfare losses. We expect that future work can similarly use

follow-on behavior to draw inferences about default effects.

    UC, BERKELEY and NBER

    UC, BERKELEY and NBER

    LAWRENCE BERKELEY NATIONAL LABORATORY

    LAWRENCE BERKELEY NATIONAL LABORATORY

    STANFORD UNIVERSITY

    LAWRENCE BERKELEY NATIONAL LABORATORY



                                                      31
References

Abadie, A. and S. Gay (2006). The impact of presumed consent legislation on cadaveric organ donation: A

  cross-country study. Journal of Health Economics 25(4), 599–620.

Barkan, R. and J. R. Busemeyer (2003). Modeling dynamic inconsistency with a changing reference point.

  Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 16(4), 235–255.

Bellman, S., E. J. Johnson, and G. L. Lohse (2001). To opt-in or opt-out?: It depends on the question.

  Communications of the ACM 44(2), 25–27.

Bernheim, B. D., A. Fradkin, and I. Popov (2015). The welfare economics of default options in 401 (k) plans.

  The American Economic Review 105(9), 2798–2837.

Beshears, J., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian (2009). The importance of default options for re-

  tirement saving outcomes: Evidence from the United States. In Social security policy in a changing

  environment, pp. 167–195. University of Chicago Press.

Boiteux, M. (1964a). The Choice of Plant and Equipment for the Production of Electricity. In J. R. Nelson

  (Ed.), Marginal Cost Pricing in Practice, pp. 199–214. Englewood, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Boiteux, M. (1964b). Marginal Cost Pricing. In J. R. Nelson (Ed.), Marginal Cost Pricing in Practice, pp.

  51–58. Englewood, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Borenstein, S. and S. Holland (2005). On the Efficiency of Competitive Markets with Time-Invariant Retail

  Prices. RAND Journal of Economics 36(3), 469–93.

Cappers, P. and S. Sheer (2016). American recovery and reinvestment act of 2009: Final report on customer

  acceptance, retention, and response to time-based rates from consumer behavior studies. Lbnl-1007279,

  LBNL.

Carroll, G. D., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick (2009, November). Optimal Defaults

  and Active Decisions. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1639–1674.

Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick (2002). Defined contribution pensions: Plan rules, par-

  ticipant choices, and the path of least resistance. In James M. Poterba (Ed.), Tax Policy and the Economy,

  Volume 16, pp. 67–114. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

                                                     32
Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick (2004). For better or for worse: Default effects and

  401 (k) savings behavior. In Perspectives on the Economics of Aging, pp. 81–126. University of Chicago

  Press.

EPRI (2012, October). Understanding Electric Utility Consumers - Summary Report: What We Know and

  What We Need to Know. Final Report, Electric Power Research Institution (EPRI).

Handel, B. R. (2013). Adverse selection and inertia in health insurance markets: When nudging hurts. The

  American Economic Review 103(7), 2643–2682.

Handel, B. R. and J. T. Kolstad (2015). Health insurance for “humans”: Information frictions, plan choice,

  and consumer welfare. The American Economic Review 105(8), 2449–2500.

Hoeffler, S. and D. Ariely (1999). Constructing stable preferences: A look into dimensions of experience

  and their impact on preference stability. Journal of Consumer Psychology 8(2), 113–139.

Johnson, E. J., S. Bellman, and G. L. Lohse (2002, February). Defaults, Framing and Privacy: Why Opting

  In-Opting Out. Marketing Letters 13(1), 5–15.

Johnson, E. J. and D. Goldstein (2003, November). Do Defaults Save Lives? Science 302(5649), 1338–1339.

Johnson, E. J., J. Hershey, J. Meszaros, and H. Kunreuther (1993). Framing, probability distortions, and

  insurance decisions. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 7, 35–51.

Ketcham, J. D., N. V. Kuminoff, and C. A. Powers (2016). Estimating the heterogeneous welfare effects of

  choice architecture: An application to the medicare prescription drug insurance market. NBER Working

  Paper.

Kressel, L. M. and G. B. Chapman (2007). The default effect in end-of-life medical treatment preferences.

  Medical Decision Making 27(3), 299–310.

Madrian, B. C. and D. F. Shea (2001). The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation and Savings

  Behavior. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4), 1149–1187.

Park, C. W., S. Y. Jun, and D. J. MacInnis (2000). Choosing what I want versus rejecting what I do not

  want: An application of decision framing to product option choice decisions. Journal of Marketing

  Research 37(2), 187–202.

                                                    33
Pichert, D. and K. V. Katsikopoulos (2007).        Green defaults: Information presentation and pro-

  environmental behaviour. Journal of Environmental Psychology 28(1), 63–73.

Sallee, J. M. (2014). Rational inattention and energy efficiency. The Journal of Law and Economics 57(3),

  781–820.

Simon, D., D. C. Krawczyk, A. Bleicher, and K. J. Holyoak (2008). The transience of constructed preferences.

  Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 21(1), 1–14.

Sims, C. A. (2005). Rational inattention: a research agenda. Discussion Paper Series 1: Economic Studies 34.




                                                    34
        Figure 1: Hourly electricity demand (SMUD) and wholesale electricity price (CAISO)




Notes: Fluctuations of hourly electricity demand and wholesale spot prices over a week in June, 2011.
Wholesale spot prices reported by the California independent system operator (CAISO).




                                                 35
                                 Figure 2: Electricity rate structures




Notes: SMUD electricity rate structures in place during the treatment period. On the base rate, cus-
tomers are charged $0.1016 for the first 700 kWh in the billing period, with additional usage billed
at $0.1830. Participants on the TOU rate were charged an on-peak price of $0.27/kWh between the
hours of 4 PM and 7 PM on weekdays, excluding holidays. For all other hours, participants were
charged $0.0846/kWh for the first 700 kWh in each billing period, with any additional usage billed
at $0.1660/kWh. On the CPP rate, participants were charged a price of $0.75/kWh during CPP event
hours. There were 12 CPP events caller per summer on weekdays during the hours of 4 PM and 7 PM
on weekdays. For all other hours, participants were charged $0.0851/kWh for the first 700 kWh in each
billing period, with any additional usage billed at $0.1665/kWh.




                                                  36
                                                                    Figure 3: Encouragement efforts


                                                                                   CPP opt-out

                                      1
                                      .95
                                      .9




                                                                                                                   Packet




                                                                                                                                     Packet
                                      .85
               Proportion enrolled
                                      .8




                                                                                   TOU opt-out
                                      1
                                      .95
                                      .9




                                                                                                                   Packet




                                                                                                                                     Packet
                                      .85
                                      .8
                                          11




                                                                                                       12



                                                                                                                                 2




                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                1




                                                                                                                                                      01
                                           0




                                                                                                     20



                                                                                                                             20
                                        t2




                                                                                                                                                   n2
                                                                                                 ar



                                                                                                                            r
                                     oc




                                                                                                                         ap




                                                                                                                                                 ju
                                                                                                m
                         25




                                                                                                                      05




                                                                                                                                                 01
                                                                                                12




                                                                                   CPP opt-in
                                      .2




                                                                                                     Door hanger




                                                                                                                                    Phone bank
                                                        Post card
                                      .15

                                               Packet
                                      .1
                                      .05
               Proportion enrolled
                                      0




                                                                                   TOU opt-in
                                      .2




                                                                                                     Door hanger




                                                                                                                                    Phone bank
                                                        Post card
                                      .15

                                               Packet
                                      .1
                                      .05
                                      0
                                       08 011

                                             v2 11
                                                  1




                                                                                   2

                                                                                         2

                                                                                                12




                                                                                                                                 2




                                                                                                                                                       2
                                               01




                                                                                 01

                                                                                        01




                                                                                                                             01




                                                                                                                                                      01
                                         no 20




                                                                                              20
                                             t2




                                                                              n2

                                                                                     b2




                                                                                                                            r2




                                                                                                                                                  n2
                                       15 v




                                                                                              ar
                                     oc




                                                                                                                            ap
                                           o




                                                                             ja

                                                                                   fe




                                                                                                                                                 ju
                                                                                            m
                                         n
                         25




                                                                            30

                                                                                  14




                                                                                                                     04




                                                                                                                                                 01
                                                                                         01




                                                                                       Date



Notes: Pre-period encouragement efforts and enrollment proportion. For opt-out groups, vertical lines
indicate dates on which packets were mailed out to the households. For opt-in groups, the first three
solid vertical lines are dates on which packets were mailed out, the three dotted vertical lines indicate
dates on which follow-up post cards were mailed out, and the final solid vertical line depicts distri-
bution of door hangers on March 1st, 2012. Gray vertical lines between April 4th and June 1st, 2012
indicate phone bank campaign, when calls went out on almost a daily basis. The solid decreasing
(increasing) lines in each figure represent the proportion of households in the opt-out (opt-in) that
remained enrolled (chose to enroll) in treatment over the course of the recruitment efforts.




                                                                                    37
             Table 1: Comparison of means by treatment assignment
                                                       Treatment groups
                          Control group              CPP              TOU
                                            Opt-in     Opt-out    Opt-in     Opt-out
Daily usage (kWh)              26.6            26.8       26.9       26.5       26.4
                                            (-0.818)   (-0.452)    (0.825)    (0.713)
Peak to off-peak ratio         1.77            1.77       1.78       1.78       1.78
                                             (0.017)   (-0.503)   (-0.565)   (-0.374)
Bill amount ($)                 109            109        109        108        108
                                            (-0.342)   (-0.006)     (1.08)    (0.687)
Structural winner (CPP)        0.509          0.512      0.516       0.51      0.502
                                             (-0.51)   (-0.389)   (-0.112)    (0.703)
Structural winner (TOU)        0.343          0.344      0.346      0.341      0.332
                                            (-0.133)   (-0.145)    (0.411)     (1.14)
My Account                     0.425           0.43      0.442      0.432      0.419
                                             (-0.78)   (-0.974)    (-1.26)    (0.591)
My Account logins              6.71            7.09       7.14       6.82       6.35
                                            (-0.823)   (-0.428)   (-0.249)    (0.565)
Paperless                      0.209          0.209      0.204      0.208      0.193
                                             (0.128)    (0.351)    (0.286)     (2.01)
Low income                     0.194          0.196       0.21       0.2        0.2
                                            (-0.247)    (-1.13)    (-1.38)   (-0.697)
Households                    45,839         9,190       846      12,735      2,407

Notes: Table compares household characteristics and pre-period usage statistics
 across control and treatment groups. Cells contain group means, t-statistics (in
 parentheses) obtained from a two-sample t-test between treated group and control
 group. Daily usage is the average per-customer electricity usage during the pre-
 period summer. Peak to off-peak ratio is the average hourly consumption during
 peak periods (4-7pm on weekdays) divided by the hourly kWh used during non-
 peak times during the pre-period. Bill amounts reflect monthly bills. Structural
 winner is an indicator variable for whether the household would have experienced
 reduced bills in the pre-period summer had they been enrolled in either the CPP
 or TOU pricing plans. My Account is an indicator variable equal to one if the cus-
 tomer has enrolled in the online My Account program. My Account logins are the
 count of logins conditional on having logged in at least once. Paperless indicates
 that the household elected to recieve electronic bills. Low income indicates house-
 holds had enrolled in the low income rate. Households are eligible for the low in-
 come rate if their income does not exceed 200 percent of the federal poverty level.




                                       38
              Figure 4: Identification of always takers, complacents, and never takers




Notes: Figure describes enrollment choice of different customer types under different experimental
groups. Rows indicate the three groups into which customers in our sample were randomly assigned:
opt-out, opt-in, and control. Columns signify types of customers (never takers, always takers, and
complacents). Shading indicates that the customer type enrolls in time-based pricing program under
the associated experimental group.




                                                39
                     Table 2: Participation rates
                      Initial                 Endline          Attrition
               Proportion       Count    Proportion   Count    Change
CPP opt-in        0.201         1, 568     0.189      1, 169    0.057
CPP opt-out       0.960          701       0.894       537      0.070
TOU opt-in        0.193         2, 088     0.181      1, 551    0.062
TOU opt-out       0.979         2, 019     0.926      1, 507    0.055

Notes: Participation rates at beginning and end of enrollment period.
  Proportions are the count of enrolled customers divided by the count
  of total customers in each group, counts are the count of enrolled cus-
  tomers. Initial participation reflects the beginning of the treatment
  period (June 1st, 2012), while endline participation reflects rates at
  the end of the treatment period (September 30th, 2013). Enrollment
  is counted if the customer entered the program (either by opting in
  or by being defaulted in) and did not opt-out before the given date.
  Customers who moved away are removed from both the count of en-
  rolled customers and the count of total customers on the date they
  move. The attrition rate is the percentage change between initial and
  end-line participation.




                                    40
                      Table 3: Intent to treat effects
                              Critical event              Non-event peak
                           Opt-in          Opt-out       Opt-in      Opt-out

Encouragement (CPP)        –0.129***       –0.305***    –0.029***    –0.094***
                           (0.010)         (0.037)      (0.006)      (0.020)

  Mean usage (kW)            2.49         2.5             1.8          1.8
  Customers                 55,028       46,684          55,028       46,684
  Customer-hours          4,832,874    4,104,263       31,198,201   26,495,612

Encouragement (TOU)        –0.091***       –0.130***    –0.054***    –0.100***
                           (0.008)         (0.019)      (0.006)      (0.013)

  Mean usage (kW)            2.49         2.5             1.8          1.8
  Customers                 55,028       46,684          55,028       46,684
  Customer-hours          4,832,874    4,104,263       31,198,201   26,495,612

* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001, standard errors clustered by customer.
Notes: Table estimates impact of encouragement assignment on average
   hourly electricity usage in kilowatts, irrespective of enrollment status.
   To estimate the critical event hour effects, data include 4-7pm during
   simulated CPP events in 2011 (hottest 12 non-holiday weekdays) and
   4-7pm during actual CPP events in 2012-2013. To estimate the peak
   period non-event hour effects, data include 4-7pm on all non-holiday
   weekdays during the 2011, 2012 and 2013 summers, excluding simu-
   lated CPP event days in 2011 and excluding actual CPP event days in
   2012 and 2013. Intent to treat effects are identified by comparing the
   opt-in and opt-out experimental groups to the control group. Intent to
   treat effects are estimated using ordinary least squares. All regressions
   include customer and hour of sample fixed effects.




                                      41
                                   Table 4: Average treatment effects
                                Critical event hours                    Non-event day peak hours
                       Opt-in       Opt-out      Complacents     Opt-in        Opt-out     Complacents
                        (AT)        (AT+C)          (C)           (AT)         (AT+C)         (C)
Treatment (CPP)        –0.664***     –0.323***     –0.233***     –0.145***     –0.102***     –0.059***
                       (0.052)       (0.041)       (0.053)       (0.031)       (0.022)       (0.018)
  Mean usage (kW)        2.51          2.51          2.46         1.79           1.79          1.75
  Customers             55,028       46,684         10,036       55,028         46,684        15,142
  Customer-hours      4,833,063     4,104,416      880,117     31,198,012     26,495,459    8,555,399
Treatment (TOU)        –0.473***     –0.136***     –0.051*       –0.288***     –0.105***     –0.059***
                       (0.044)       (0.020)       (0.027)       (0.029)       (0.014)       (0.018)
  Mean usage (kW)        2.51          2.51          2.45         1.78           1.79          1.75
  Customers             58,573       48,245         15,142       58,573         48,245       15,142
  Customer-hours      5,142,174     4,240,313     1,325,125    33,195,763     27,374,126    8,555,399

* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001, standard errors clustered by customer.
Notes: Table estimates impact of enrollment on average hourly electricity usage in kilowatts. AT stands
   for always takers, C stands for complacents. Sample for critical event hours includes hours between
   4pm and 7pm during simulated CPP events in 2011 (hottest 12 non-holiday weekdays between June
   and September) and actual CPP events in 2012-2013. Sample for non-event day peak hours include
   hours between 4pm and 7pm of non-holiday, non-CPP event weekdays during the 2011-2013 sum-
   mers (June to September). Opt-in and opt-out effects estimated by comparing the opt-in and opt-out
   experimental groups, respectively, to the control group. Complacent effect estimated by comparing
   the opt-out experimental group to the opt-in experimental group. Treatment effects estimated using
   two-stage least squares, with randomized encouragement into treatment used as an instrument for
   treatment enrollment. All regressions include customer and hour of sample fixed effects.




                                                  42
                                                  Figure 5: Event day average treatment effects by hour

                                      CPP opt−in                                       CPP opt−out                                        CPP complacents
                        0.2




                                                                            0.2




                                                                                                                               0.2
                        0.0




                                                                            0.0




                                                                                                                               0.0
Usage (kWh)




                                                              Usage (kWh)




                                                                                                                 Usage (kWh)
                        −0.2




                                                                            −0.2




                                                                                                                               −0.2
                        −0.4




                                                                            −0.4




                                                                                                                               −0.4
                        −0.6




                                                                            −0.6




                                                                                                                               −0.6
                           −0.8




                                                                            −0.8




                                                                                                                               −0.8
                 Usage (kWh)




                                  0         12   16 19   23                        0           12   16 19   23                        0           12   16 19   23

                                      TOU   opt−in
                                      Hour beginning                                   TOU   opt−out
                                                                                        Hour beginning                                    TOU complacents
                                                                                                                                            Hour beginning
              0.2




                                                                            0.2




                                                                                                                               0.2
                        0.0




                                                                            0.0




                                                                                                                               0.0
Usage (kWh)




                                                              Usage (kWh)




                                                                                                                 Usage (kWh)
                        −0.2




                                                                            −0.2




                                                                                                                               −0.2
                        −0.4




                                                                            −0.4




                                                                                                                               −0.4
                        −0.6




                                                                            −0.6




                                                                                                                               −0.6
                        −0.8




                                                                            −0.8




                                                                                                                               −0.8




                                  0         12   16 19   23                        0         12 16 19       23                        0           12   16 19   23
                                                                                        Hour starting
                                      Hour beginning                                   Hour beginning                                       Hour beginning



Notes: Figure depicts hourly impacts of enrollment on electricity usage in kilowatts during event days.
Sample for critical event hours includes hours between 4pm and 7pm during simulated CPP events
in 2011 (hottest 12 non-holiday weekdays between June and September) and actual CPP events in
2012-2013. Opt-in and opt-out effects estimated by comparing the opt-in and opt-out experimental
groups, respectively, to the control group. Complacent effect estimated by comparing the opt-out
experimental group to the opt-in experimental group. Treatment effects estimated using two-stage
least squares, with randomized encouragement into treatment used as an instrument for treatment
enrollment. Dashed lines indicate the 95 percent confidence interval of the estimates with standard
errors clustered by customer. The vertical bars indicate the peak period, between 4pm and 7pm.




                                                                                          43
                               Table 5: Bill impacts of enrollment
                                 Opt-in              Opt-out             Complacents
                                  (AT)               (AT+C)                 (C)
Treatment (CPP)                 –6.515***            –4.499***              –3.121**
                                 (2.358)              (1.428)                (1.485)
  Mean bill ($)                   114                  114                    114
  Customers                      55,029              46,685                 10,036
  Customer-months               552,087              468,843                100,552
Treatment (TOU)                 –2.816               –1.985**               –1.423
                                 (2.196)              (0.872)                (0.935)
  Mean bill ($)                   114                  114                    113
  Customers                      58,574              48,246                 15,142
  Customer-months               587,406              484,364                151,392

* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001, standard errors clustered by customer.
Notes: Table documents impact of treamtment enrollment on monthly bill. Sample composed of sum-
   mer months. AT stands for always takers, C stands for complacents. Opt-in and opt-out effects
   estimated by comparing the opt-in and opt-out experimental groups, respectively, to the control
   group. Complacent effect estimated by comparing the opt-out experimental group to the opt-in
   experimental group. Treatment effects estimated using two-stage least squares, with randomized
   encouragement into treatment used as an instrument for treatment enrollment. Treatment effects
   estimated using two-stage least squares, with randomized encouragement into treatment used as
   an instrument for treatment enrollment. All regressions include customer and month of sample
   fixed effects.




                                               44
                                      Table 6: Cost-effectiveness
                     Benefits                                   Costs                     Benefits - Costs
                                                                    Recurring
                                       One-time        One-time
              Avoided      Avoided                                   Annual     10-year
                                        Fixed          Variable
              Capacity     Energy                                     Total      NPV
                                        Costs           Costs
                                                                      Costs
CPP opt-in       44.0           0.9        1.4           31.0           0.9      36.5           8.4
CPP opt-out      92.1           2.1        1.4           21.0           3.1      38.8          55.4
TOU opt-in       27.0           5.0        0.8           30.0           0.5      32.5          -0.5
TOU opt-out      41.8           7.3        0.8           18.5           1.3      26.1          23.0
   Notes: Table estimates cost-effectiveness of each treatment group. All figures in millions of dollars
   and assume the program is scaled to SMUD’s whole residential customer base and run for 10 years.
   See Appendix section 5 for details.




                                                  45
                   Figure 6: Program participation under a switching cost model




                                0

                                    B




                                                         P
                                                         arc
                                                           ipa
                                                             tesi
                                                                n me
                                                                   -va
                                                                     ryi
                                                                       ngpr
                                                                          ici
                                                                            ng

                                                         Doe
                                                           snotpa
                                                                rci
                                                                  pat
                                                                    e




                                             a) Opt-in




                                0

                                    B




                                                         P
                                                         arc
                                                           ipa
                                                             tesi
                                                                n me
                                                                   -va
                                                                     ryi
                                                                       ngpr
                                                                          ici
                                                                            ng

                                                         Doe
                                                           snotpa
                                                                rci
                                                                  pat
                                                                    e




                                             b) Opt-out

Notes: Figures depict predictions of enrollment choices under switching cost model. The vertical axis
measures the utility gain to the consumer from adopting time-varying pricing, and u(e) captures the
effort costs of switching away from the default pricing regime.




                                                 46
                                                               Figure 7: Program participation by estimated savings (Empirical)
                                                         30
   Estimated savings on CPP/TOU with no price response




                                                                                                                Estimated savings on CPP/TOU with no price response

                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                         20
                                                         10




                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                         0
                                                         −10




                                                                                                                                                                      −20
                                                         −20




                                                                                       Not participating                                                                                            Not participating
                                                                                                                                                                      −40
                                                         −30




                                                                                       Participating                                                                                                Participating




                                                                   Decile of savings                                                                                            Decile of savings



                                                               a) CPP opt-in                                                                                                b) TOU opt-in
                                                                                                                                                                      30
                                                         30
   Estimated savings on CPP/TOU with no price response




                                                                                                                Estimated savings on CPP/TOU with no price response

                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                      10
                                                         10




                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                      −10
                                                         −10




                                                                                                                                                                      −20
                                                                                                                                                                      −30
                                                         −20




                                                                                       Not participating                                                                                            Not participating
                                                                                                                                                                      −40




                                                                                       Participating                                                                                                Participating
                                                         −30




                                                                   Decile of savings                                                                                            Decile of savings



                                                               c) CPP opt-out                                                                                               d) TOU opt-out

Notes: Figures document customer enrollment by estimated savings. Vertical axis measures the pre-
dicted savings in dollars per household under time-varying pricing compared to standard pricing, based
on 2011 consumption. Households grouped by decile of predicted savings.




                                                                                                           47
                        Table 7: Household characteristics by customer type
                                 AT          C            NT       AT-C       AT-NT       C-NT
CPP households
  Daily usage                     27         27             27     [0.81]      [0.95]     [0.98]
                                 (16)       (18)           (25)
  Peak to off-peak               1.77       1.78           1.79    [0.62]      [0.76]     [0.99]
                                (0.56)     (0.57)         (0.55)
  Bill amount                    106        110            113     [0.42]      [0.59]     [0.83]
                                 (77)       (90)          (132)
  Structural winner (CPP)        0.50       0.52           0.49    [0.34]      [0.87]     [0.51]
                                (0.50)     (0.50)         (0.50)
  Structural winner (TOU)        0.35       0.34           0.33    [0.73]      [0.54]     [0.70]
                                (0.48)     (0.48)         (0.47)
  My Account                     0.54       0.42           0.52    [0.00]      [0.64]     [0.03]
                                (0.50)     (0.49)         (0.50)
  My Account logins              9.16       6.65          11.81    [0.00]      [0.30]     [0.04]
                               (23.00)     (2.86)        (28.35)
  Paperless                      0.24       0.19           0.18    [0.02]      [0.12]     [0.80]
                                (0.43)     (0.40)         (0.39)
  Low income                     0.29       0.19           0.15    [0.00]      [0.00]     [0.32]
                                (0.45)     (0.40)         (0.36)
TOU households
  Daily usage                     27         26             27     [0.22]      [0.70]     [0.33]
                                 (16)       (17)           (18)
  Peak to off-peak               1.74       1.78           1.73    [0.03]      [0.79]     [0.12]
                                (0.54)     (0.63)         (0.52)
  Bill amount                    107        108            115     [0.81]      [0.19]     [0.25]
                                 (81)       (85)           (98)
  Structural winner (CPP)        0.53       0.50           0.57    [0.05]      [0.14]     [0.01]
                                (0.50)     (0.50)         (0.50)
  Structural winner (TOU)        0.35       0.33           0.39    [0.17]      [0.13]     [0.02]
                                (0.48)     (0.47)         (0.49)
  My Account                     0.53       0.39           0.48    [0.00]      [0.07]     [0.01]
                                (0.50)     (0.49)         (0.50)
  My Account logins              8.25       5.91          10.79    [0.00]      [0.05]     [0.00]
                               (25.90)     (4.36)        (20.66)
  Paperless                      0.24       0.18           0.22    [0.00]      [0.52]     [0.11]
                                (0.43)     (0.38)         (0.42)
  Low income                     0.29       0.18           0.11    [0.00]      [0.00]     [0.00]
                                (0.46)     (0.40)         (0.32)

  Notes: Table compares household characteristics by customer types. AT, C, and NT indicate always
    takers, complacents, and never takers, respectively. Columns (1) through (3) are means with stan-
    dard deviations in parentheses, where (1) and (3) are sample means and standard deviations and
    (2) is computed from a comparison of the participants in the opt-out and opt-in groups. Columns
    (4) through (6) show p-values in brackets for differences between listed groups.



                                                    48
          Table 8: Heterogenous treatment effects (My Account, low income, second year)
                               Critical event hours                Non-event day peak hours
                      Opt-in     Opt-out     Complacents       Opt-in    Opt-out      Complacents
                       (AT)      (AT+C)         (C)             (AT)     (AT+C)          (C)
My Account
 Treatment (CPP)      –0.600*** –0.225***        –0.151***     –0.152*** –0.077***       –0.063**
                      (0.080)   (0.045)          (0.056)       (0.049)   (0.026)         (0.032)
   × My Account       –0.108    –0.251***        –0.238**       0.012    –0.057          –0.067
                      (0.104)   (0.085)          (0.117)       (0.063)   (0.046)         (0.062)
  Treatment (TOU)     –0.336*** –0.080***        –0.032        –0.204*** –0.065***       –0.039*
                      (0.070)   (0.024)          (0.030)       (0.046)   (0.017)         (0.021)
   × My Account       –0.274*** –0.143***        –0.055        –0.157*** –0.099***       –0.058
                      (0.089)   (0.043)          (0.059)       (0.059)   (0.030)         (0.040)
Low income
  Treatment (CPP)     –0.815*** –0.370***        –0.267***     –0.181*** –0.096***       –0.075**
                      (0.066)   (0.047)          (0.060)       (0.040)   (0.025)         (0.032)
   × Low income        0.543*** 0.176**           0.104         0.122** –0.023           –0.076
                      (0.098)   (0.089)          (0.125)       (0.062)   (0.051)         (0.072)
  Treatment (TOU)     –0.547*** –0.148***        –0.061**      –0.321*** –0.111***       –0.063***
                      (0.056)   (0.024)          (0.031)       (0.037)   (0.017)         (0.021)
   × Low income        0.227*** 0.055             0.051         0.117**   0.026           0.020
                      (0.086)   (0.043)          (0.061)       (0.057)   (0.030)         (0.042)
Year 2
  Treatment (CPP)     –0.714*** –0.298***        –0.186***     –0.161*** –0.079***       –0.057**
                      (0.054)   (0.043)          (0.056)       (0.031)   (0.022)         (0.029)
   × Year 2            0.126** –0.069*           –0.124**       0.036    –0.051**        –0.075**
                      (0.054)   (0.037)          (0.049)       (0.035)   (0.023)         (0.030)
  Treatment (TOU)     –0.545*** –0.156***        –0.058**      –0.310*** –0.112***       –0.062***
                      (0.046)   (0.021)          (0.028)       (0.029)   (0.014)         (0.018)
   × Year 2            0.146*** 0.044**           0.017         0.056*    0.018           0.007
                      (0.049)   (0.020)          (0.027)       (0.033)   (0.013)         (0.017)

  * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001, standard errors clustered by customer.
  Notes: Table estimates heterogenous treatment impacts on hourly energy usage in kW by enroll-
     ment in My Account, low income indicator, and second year of program. My Account is an indi-
     cator variable equal to one if the customer has enrolled in the online My Account program. Low
     income is households enrolled in the low income rate. Year 2 is the second year of treatment pe-
     riod. For columns 1, 2, 4, and 5, regressors are instrumented with indicators for encouragement
     group and its interaction with the indicator variable for structural winners. Sample for columns
     1, 2, 4, and 5 is composed of the control group and given treatment group. For columns 3 and 6,
     the instruments are enrollment into opt-out group and its interaction with the indicator variable
     for structural winners and sample includes only opt-in and opt-out treatment groups. Event hours
     include simulated critical peak events in 2011 and actual events in 2012 and 2013. Non-event peak
     day hours include all peak hours excluding critical event hours. All models include customer and
     hour of sample fixed effects, plus an interaction between the post-treatment period and given di-
     mension of heterogeneity. Standard errors clustered by customer in parentheses.

                                                 49
