                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS, WITH AN APPLICATION TO
                       DIGITAL RIGHTS MANAGEMENT

                                      Joachim Freyberger
                                       Bradley J. Larsen

                                      Working Paper 23569
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23569


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2017




We thank Dominic Coey, Dan Quint, Yoshi Rai, and Caio Waisman for helpful comments. This
project was supported by NSF Grant SES-1530632. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Joachim Freyberger and Bradley J. Larsen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Identification in Ascending Auctions, with an Application to Digital Rights Management
Joachim Freyberger and Bradley J. Larsen
NBER Working Paper No. 23569
July 2017
JEL No. C1,C57,D44,L0,L96,O3

                                          ABSTRACT

This study provides new identification and estimation results for ascending (traditional English or
online) auctions with unobserved auction-level heterogeneity and an unknown number of bidders.
When the seller's reserve price and two order statistics of bids are observed, we derive conditions
under which the distributions of buyer valuations, unobserved heterogeneity, and number of
participants are point identified. We also derive conditions for point identification in cases where
reserve prices are binding (in which case bids may be unobserved in some auctions) and present
general conditions for partial identification. We propose a nonparametric maximum likelihood
approach for estimation and inference. We apply our approach to the online market for used
iPhones and analyze the effects of recent regulatory changes banning consumers from
circumventing digital rights management technologies used to lock phones to service providers.
We find that buyer valuations for unlocked phones dropped after the unlocking ban took effect.


Joachim Freyberger
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
jfreyberger@ssc.wisc.edu

Bradley J. Larsen
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
bjlarsen@stanford.edu
2                                   FREYBERGER AND LARSEN

                                        1. Introduction

    This paper presents an approach to jointly solve two identification challenges to
empirical auctions work in ascending auctions: unobserved heterogeneity at the auc-
tion level and an unknown number of bidders. Unlike sealed-bid auctions, ascending
auctions—both traditional English auctions as well as online auctions—proceed se-
quentially, and some potential bidders planning to place a bid are not observed doing
so. Hence the number of bidders (N )—a key element for identification arguments
in empirical auctions methods—is often unobserved to the researcher. Previously
proposed solutions to this problem of unknown N rely on the assumption of indepen-
dent, private values (IPV), and consequently little empirical work exists in English or
online auctions with unknown N outside of the IPV framework. The IPV framework
does not allow for bidder’s values to be correlated through unobserved heterogeneity
in the auctioned items, but such unobserved heterogeneity is common in practice.1
Previous research has suggested solutions to this challenge of unobserved heterogene-
ity, but these methods require that the researcher observe N and, furthermore, while
useful in first price auctions (where often all bids are observed by the researcher)
these methods do not immediately apply to English or online auctions given the in-
completeness of bid data in ascending auctions (where the researcher rarely observes
all bids—i.e., the thresholds at which each player would drop out of the bidding).
In this paper, we provide a unified framework for nonparametric identification and
estimation when both problems exist. In particular, we derive conditions for point
identification of the distributions of bidder valuations, unobserved heterogeneity, and
the number of bidders, as well as partial identification results when these conditions
are not met.

    We build on the identification arguments of Song (2004), who suggested an ap-
proach to handling settings where the number of bidders is unknown and the re-
searcher observes multiple order statistics of bids in English or online auctions. The
1For  example, in online auctions, listings often contain pictures and detailed descriptions about
characteristics of the items sold that both the seller and potential buyers can observe, but such
information is difficult for the econometrician to quantify. Therefore, items in different auctions can
differ dramatically in ways that are observable to the seller and bidders but not to the econometrician.
                       IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                              3

Song (2004) approach relies on the assumption that bidders have independent private
values, in which case the density of a higher order statistic conditional on a lower order
statistic will not depend on N . We demonstrate that the same argument holds even
if bidders valuations are only independent conditional on auction-level heterogeneity
and such heterogeneity is unobserved by the econometrician. We also demonstrate
that the distribution of the number of bidders is identified.

  To nonparametrically identify the distribution of unobserved heterogeneity, we use
a similar approach to Li and Vuong (1998), Li, Perrigne, and Vuong (2000), and Kras-
nokutskaya (2011), relying as they do on the deconvolution result of Kotlarski (1967).
These approaches require that the researcher observe two bids that are independent
conditional on auction-level unobserved heterogeneity. This approach has been ap-
plied to first price auctions in a number of papers (see, for example, Decarolis 2017,
Krasnokutskaya and Seim (2011), and others). Various studies (Athey and Haile 2002;
Athey, Levin, and Seira 2011; Aradillas-López, Gandhi, and Quint 2013), however,
have highlighted that the deconvolution approach to unobserved heterogeneity can-
not be applied to English or online auctions using bids alone because bids represent
order statistics and not all order statistics are observed, leading to correlation in the
observed bids even when individual valuations represent independent draws from the
same underlying distribution.

  Our approach circumvents this issue of correlated order statistics by relying on
an alternative measure of unobserved heterogeneity available to the researcher in
many settings. Specifically, we rely on sellers’ reserve prices reported to the auction
platform. We demonstrate that when reserve prices are secret or non-binding, the
distributions of unobserved heterogeneity and buyer valuations are nonparametrically
point identified. When reserve prices are public, this can introduce correlation be-
tween reserve prices and observed bids, as bids are only recorded if they exceed the
public reserve price. We demonstrate how these binding reserve prices affect the like-
lihood of observed bids and we derive support conditions under which we still obtain
point identification. When these conditions are not met, our results yield partial iden-
tification. The data requirements for all of our identification arguments, in which the
4                              FREYBERGER AND LARSEN

researcher is concerned with both unobserved heterogeneity and an unknown number
of bidders, are the following: 1) the econometrician observes the seller’s reserve price;
2) if reserve prices are secret, the econometrian observes at least two order statis-
tics of bids; and 3) if reserve prices are public, the econometrian observes two order
statistics of bids if these exceed the reserve price.

    For estimation we propose a nonparametric maximum likelihood approach to jointly
estimate the distibutions of unobserved heterogeneity and buyer valuations. Our es-
timator differs from previous studies relying on the result of Kotlarski (1967), in that
these previous studies have generally applied an explicit deconvolution approach, di-
rectly estimating a joint characteristic function and then applying inverse Fourier
transforms to recover underlying distributions. We take an alternative approach
based on nonparametric sieve maximum likelihood estimation (see Gallant and Ny-
chka 1987), which allows us to estimate all parameters in one step. Our framework
also nests the possibility of using flexible parametric or semiparametric models for
the unknown distributions.

    We apply the approach to study the impact of recent legislation regarding con-
sumers circumventing digital rights management. Digital rights management refers
to technological locks restricting how consumers use software or hardware. These
digital locks are used in computer software, e-books, music, film, cell phones, and
in many other products. The US Digital Millenium Copyright Act (DMCA) bans
circumvention of these digital locks or production of technologies intended to aid con-
sumers in circumventing digital locks. However, tools and tips for how to cirumvent
digital locks are readily available on the Internet, and punishment mechanisms for
violators of these laws are not necessarily salient to consumers. Therefore, it is un-
clear whether the DMCA or related legislation has any effect in practice on market
primitives, such as consumers’ willingness to purchase—or sellers’ willingness to sell—
potentially illegally tampered products. Using data from auctions of used iPhones, we
analyze the impact of a recent regulatory change banning smartphone unlocking on
bidder valuations for unlocked phones. While our application is primarily included as
an illustration of our methodology, it provides insights into this previously unstudied
                          IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                                     5

question. In particular, we find that buyer valuations for unlocked smartphones were
lower after the ban was put into place than before. The estimated difference in the
means of the distributions of buyer valuations for unlocked smartphones in the pre
and post periods corresponds to a decrease in the dollar valuation for the phones of
about 27%. This difference suggests that the regulatory change may indeed have had
real effects on consumers’ willingness to engage in potentially shady behavior.


                                    Related Literature

  This paper contributes to several strands of the empirical auctions literature. First,
it extends the approach of Song (2004), which Hortacsu and Nielsen (2010) argued
has long been “the standard to beat in the empirical online auctions literature” due to
its distinct ability to handle an unknown number of bidders. Other papers building
on the Song (2004) approach include Kim and Lee (2014), who developed a test
of the independent private values assumption in the Song (2004) environment, and
Sailer (2006), who embedded the Song (2004) approach in a repeated auction setting.
Other approaches to handling an unknown number of bidders include An, Hu, and
Shum (2010), who considered first price auctions and demonstrated identification
when the econometrician observes an instrument for the number of potential bidders
(not all of whom necessaily place bids).2 Canals-Cerdá and Pearcy (2013), Platt
(2015) and Hickman, Hubbard, and Paarsch (2016) provided approaches to estimating
the distributions of valuations in online auctions with independent private values,
obtaining identification by exploiting the arrival order of bidders. Our nonparametric
identification argument is the first of which we are aware for ascending auctions with
unobserved heterogeneity and an unknown number of bidders.3
2Hu,  McAdams, and Shum (2013) extended the results of An, Hu, and Shum (2010) to apply to
settings with non-separable unobserved auction-level heterogeneity (where the number of potential
bidders in An, Hu, and Shum (2010) can be considered a form of unobserved heterogeneity in their
model) when three bids are observable in first price auctions. Additional work studying unobserved
heterogeneity in first price auctions includes Armstrong (2013), and Balat (2015, 2016). As explained
above, existing deconvolution approaches (Li and Vuong 1998; Li, Perrigne, and Vuong 2000; Kras-
nokutskaya 2011) have thus far been applied primarily in first price auctions (with a known number
of bidders) where, unlike ascending auctions, independent bids are available.
3Canals-Cerdá and Pearcy (2013) provide a parametric identification result that incorporates unob-
served heterogeneity.
6                              FREYBERGER AND LARSEN

    Second, our paper illustrates the use of variation in potentially binding reserve
prices to obtain partial identification. Athey and Haile (2007) discussed several al-
ternative uses of reserve price information. Recent work by Decarolis (2017) applied
the Krasnokutskaya (2011) approach using the reserve price and transaction price
from first price auctions as two measurements of unobserved heterogeneity, focusing
on a sample in which reserve prices were nearly always non-binding in order to avoid
the issue of correlation between bids and reserve prices that we address in this pa-
per. Roberts (2013) presented a control function approach to handling unobserved
heterogeneity in settings in which the reserve price is monotonic in the unobserved
heterogeneity, which does not apply in the settings we study given that reserve prices
are chosen by sellers who may have a privately known valuation for the good, and
hence reserve prices may not be monotonic in the realization of unobserved auction-
level heterogeneity.

    Third, our approach provides new positive identification results for ascending auc-
tions. As demonstrated in Athey and Haile (2002), even when the number of bidders
is known, the joint distribution of bidder valuations is not identified in ascending
auctions under arbitrary correlation because the willingness to pay of the highest-
valuation bidder is rarely observed (it is never observed in English auctions, but may
be observed in some online auction data) and often bids of lower-value bidders are
also not observed. Instead of considering arbitrary correlation, we focus on a par-
ticular form of correlation among valuations through additively (or multiplicatively)
separable auction-level heterogeneity unobserved to the econometrician. Several re-
cent papers have demonstrated that certain objects of interest, such as bounds on
optimal reserve prices, or buyer and seller surplus, are identified in ascending auc-
tion settings with correlated private values under the assumption that the number
of bidders is known (Aradillas-López, Gandhi, and Quint 2013; Coey, Larsen, and
Sweeney 2016; Coey, Larsen, Sweeney, and Waisman 2017). Unlike these studies, our
approach yields estimates of the underlying valuation distributions, which are useful
for studying revenue and welfare under counterfactual auction formats. Quint (2015)
provides an alternative argument, related to these papers, that also yields valuation
                      IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                           7

identification when the number of bidders is unobserved to the econometrian and
when observations are available from auctions under at least two different known
probability distributions for the number of bidders.

  Our application contributes to a small literature on digital rights management
(e.g. Liu, Safavi-Naini, and Sheppard 2003; Von Lohmann 2004; Walker 2003; Stall-
man 1997) and the literature on piracy and copyright enforcement more broadly
(Harbaugh and Khemka 2010). It remains an open question in this literature how
effective regulation is at altering consumers’ willingness to engage in circumvention.
The specific application of cellphone unlocking relates to a variety of previous stud-
ies that have examined the role digital locks play in raising switching costs of con-
sumers. This work has focused on non-US markets, including, among others, Tallberg,
Hämmäinen, Töyli, Kamppari, and Kivi (2007) (studying Finland), Maicas, Polo, and
Sese (2009) (studying Spain), Nakamura (2010) (studying Japan), and Park and Koo
(2016) (studying South Korea). Baker (2007) describes several costs consumers face
when unlocking a phone, including time and monetary costs and potential invalidation
of the handset’s warranty. Farrell and Klemperer (2007) describe general theoretical
arguments for how lock-in practices such as handset locking can create inefficien-
cies and increase firm profits, in particular in settings with network effects such as
telecommunications markets. Finally, in focusing our application on smartphones,
we contribute to a nacent literature on this industry more broadly. Sinkinson (2014)
and Zhu, Liu, and Chintagunta (2015) examine exclusive contracting deals between
Apple and AT&T. Fan and Yang (2016) provides a broad study of the welfare effects
of product proliferation and competition in the smartphone industry.


                                 2. Identification

2.1. Introduction of Model. We analyze static, single-unit ascending auctions
where bidders have symmetric private values. For each bidder i, we specify the value
of bidder i to take the following form:

                                    Vi = X + Ui .
8                                  FREYBERGER AND LARSEN

In many settings, as in our empirical application, the researcher may prefer to model
valuations in a multiplicative form, Vi = eX eUi and work with logs; all our results
hold under multiplicative separability as well, but we state the additively separable
version here for ease of exposition. The random variable X is independent of Ui for
all i and represents a common component through which bidders’ valuations (and the
seller’s reserve price, described below) are correlated. This X is observed by bidders
and the seller but is unobserved to the econometrician. Let Ui ∼ FU with density fU ,
X ∼ FX with density fX , and Vi ∼ FV with density fV . We assume bidders follow
the weakly dominant strategy of bidding their valuations, and hence we will refer to
bids and valuations interchangeably.4 Let Bi be the bid of bidder i.

    Let N be a random variable with realizations n representing the number of bidders
in an auction. We assume N is independent of X and U . Let U j refer to the j th highest
U in an auction with at least j bidders but unconditional on the actual realization
of the number of bidders N . We refer to U j as the j th unconditional order statistic,
to distinguish it from the traditional use of the term order statistic, which refers to
an order statistic conditional on a realization or N = n.5 Thus, U 1 is the maximum
unconditional order statistic, U 2 is the second unconditional order statistic, etc., and
similarly for order statistics of other random variables (e.g. B and V ).

    We allow for the seller’s reserve price to be either secret or public. To be precise, in
this paper a reserve price is termed to be public if the auction is such that only bids
exceeding the reserve price are recorded, and a reserve price is termed to be secret if
4As the primary focus in this study is unobserved heterogeneity and the unknown number of bidders,
we do not focus on bidders potentially bidding below their values as in Haile and Tamer (2003).
5We use this notation and terminology, rather than the traditional notation U n:n , U n−1:n , etc.,
because in our case the order statistics come from samples of varying sizes. That is, U j is the j th
highest U among N bidders, unconditional on the realization of the random variable N , and is thus
a draw from the distribution
                                       X
                            FU j (u) ≡    Pr(N = n|N ≥ j)FU n−j+1:n (u)
                                       n

where FU n−j+1:n is the distribution of the j th highest bid conditional on N = n, which, given that
draws of U are i.i.d., is given by the following (see David and Nagaraja 2003):
                                                                              
                                             n      
                                             X      n
                        FU n−j+1:n (u) ≡              FU (u)k (1 − FU (u))n−k 
                                                    k
                                        k=n−j+1
                          IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                                       9

the auction is such that bids need not exceed the reserve price in order to be recorded.
We specify the seller’s reserve price as

                                           R = X + W.

We assume that W is independent of (X, U, N ). Let W ∼ FW with density fW and
R ∼ FR with density fR . We do not directly model the seller’s valuation or choice
of reserve price (nor assume that these reserve prices are optimal), but rather simply
assume reserve prices take the above form, as in Decarolis (2017). Roberts (2013)
takes a different approach, assuming away the seller-specific term W and assuming
instead that R is an unknown monotonic function of X. Under standard auction
rules, optimality of the reserve price combined with an additively (or multiplicatively)
separable valuation for the seller would be sufficient conditions for the reserve price
to take the form we assume.6

      We assume the econometrician observes realizations of R. In the secret reserve
price case, we assume the econometrician also observes at least two unconditional
order statistics of bids, B j and B k , with j < k. In the public reserve price case, the
econometrian observes B j and B k if these exceed R. In other words, in the secret
reserve price case, we assume that at least k bidders wish to place a bid and indeed
do place a bid, whereas, in the public reserve price case, at least k bidders wish to
place a bid but may be prevented from doing so if the reserve price exceeds their
valuation. The econometrician does not observe realizations of X, U , W , or N . We
demonstrate identification of the distributions of each of these random variables. We
6If
  the auction rules are such that the highest bidder wins the good if and only if B 1 ≥ R, paying
R when B 1 ≥ R > B 2 and paying B 2 otherwise, then the optimal reserve price for a seller of value
X + S, where S is independent of X and Ui for all i, would satisfy
                                                1 − FV (R)
                                 R=X +S+
                                                  fV (R)
                                                1 − FU (R − X)
                                    =X +S+
                                                  fU (R − X)
Letting W be the random variable such that W = S + 1−F          U (W )
                                                             fU (W )   will yield the form R = X + W ,
as above, with W independent of X and U . A common alternative rule for ascending auctions (e.g.
Larsen 2014) with secret reserve prices is that the highest bidder wins the good if and only if B 2 > R
and pays B 2 . In this case a seller with value X + S would optimally choose a reserve price of X + S,
yielding again the form R = X + W above, with W = S.
10                               FREYBERGER AND LARSEN

describe three main identification results: First, we obtain point identification when
reserve prices are secret. Second, we obtain point identification when reserve prices
are public and a support condition is satisfied. Third, we obtain partial identification
when reserve prices are public and the support condition is not satisfied.

     Throughout, we will let subscripts j and k, with j < k, be any fixed, positive
integers. We denote the lower bound of the support of any random variable Y by Y
and the upper bound by Y . Notice that V j = V k = V and V j = V k = V because
V j and V k are unconditional order statistics from the same distribution as V , and
similarly for the supports of U , U j , and U k . Let φY (t) denote the characteristic
function of a random variable Y .

     We summarize the key assumptions from our discussion thus far in Assumption 1.


Assumption 1. (i) For an auction with n bidders, R = X + W and Vi = X + Ui for
i = 1, . . . n, where X, W , U1 , . . . , Un are mutually independent, (ii) N is independent
of X, W , and Ui for all i = 1, . . . , N , (iii) B j = V j and B k = V k .


     We also assume the following:


Assumption 2. E[|B j | + |B k | + |R|] < ∞ and E[X] = 0.


Assumption 3. (i) φW and φX have only isolated real zeros. (ii) The real zeros of
φU j and φ0U j are disjoint.


     Notice that the means of X, W , U , are not identified without a location normal-
ization. To see why let X̃ = X − c, W̃ = W + c, Ũi = Ui + c. Then Vi = X̃ + Ũi
and R = X̃ + W̃ . To identify the distributions we therefore impose in Assumption 2
that E[X] = 0, but normalizing the mean of W instead yields analogous results. The
other moment condition in Assumption 2 is a mild regularity condition and Assump-
tion 3 imposes technical conditions on characteristic functions, which are satisfied by
standard distributions. These type of conditions are common in models with multiple
measurements; see, for example, Li and Vuong (1998).
                       IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                             11

2.2. Identification with Secret Reserve Prices. In the case of secret reserve
prices, when the econometrician observes B j , B k , and R, we obtain the following
result:


Theorem 1. Suppose that Assumptions 1-3 hold. Then FX , FW , and FU are identi-
fied from the joint distribution of bids B j and B k and secret reserve prices R. If the
number of points of support of N is finite and FU is continuous, then the distribution
of N is identified as well.


  The theorem implicitly assumes that we always observe B j and B k , which implies
that N ≥ k. We could allow for the possibility that realizations of N may be less
than k, in which case we have to assume that, whenever N ≥ k, we always observe B j
and B k . We then can simply do our analysis conditional on N ≥ k and still identify
FX , FW , and FU because X, W , and U are independent of N . The distribution of the
number of bidders is then identified conditional on N ≥ k (that is P (N = n | N ≥ k)
for all n ≥ k) under the assumptions of Theorem 1.

  The formal proof, which is in the appendix, proceeds in three steps. First we
use one observed bid and the reserve price to identify the distributions of X and
W , which follows from an extension of Kotlarski’s Lemma; see Kotlarski (1967) and
Evdokimov and White (2012). While the formal arguments are more involved, it is
easy to see that the first two moments of X and W are identified from E[X] = 0,
E[W ] = E[R], var(X) = cov(W, U j ), and var(W ) = var(R) − var(X). Second, we
show that knowledge of the characteristic function of X implies identification of the
joint distribution of U j and U k . Finally, arguments related to those in Song (2004)
then yield identification of the distribution of valuations and the number of bidders.
Also notice that since X, W , and U are independent, identification of the marginal
distributions is equivalent to identification of the joint distribution. The arguments in
the proof of the theorem can also be used to demonstrate that it is generally possible
to identify a parametric distribution of N , even if the support is infinite, for example,
if N followed a Poisson distribution.
12                               FREYBERGER AND LARSEN

2.3. Identification with Public Reserve Prices. In the case of public reserve
prices, bids will only be observed if they lie above R. Define D1 = 1(R > B j ≥ B k ),
D2 = 1(B j ≥ R > B k ), and D3 = 1(B j ≥ B k ≥ R). We assume that the observed
data is a random sample from the distribution of (R, D1 , D2 , D3 , B j ·(D2 +D3 ), B k ·D3 )
with D1 + D2 + D3 = 1. Notice that we therefore assume that N ≥ k and that if
B k is not observed, then B k < R. Point identification is still achieved in this case as
long as the support of B is greater than that of R in the strong set order, as we state
in the following result.

Theorem 2. Suppose Assumptions 1, 2, and 3(i) hold and that R ≤ B < ∞. Then
FX , FW , and P (U ≤ uj | U ≥ uk ) for all uj , uk ≥ W are identified from the joint
distribution of (R, D1 , D2 , D3 , B j · (D2 + D3 ), B k · D3 ). Moreover, if in addition B ≥
R > −∞, then (i) FU is identified and (ii) the distribution of N is identified if N has
finite support and FU is continuous.

     The intuition for the identification result is as follows. By the additivity assumption
and independence, conditioning on B j = B is equivalent to conditioning on X = X
and U j = U . Since W is independent of X and U , it follows that

                   P (R ≤ r | B j = B) = P (R ≤ r | X = X, U j = U )

                                          = P (W ≤ r − X).

Hence, the distribution of W is identified up to a location shift, which is fixed by the
assumption that E[R] = E[W ]. Similarly, the joint distribution of U j and U k is iden-
tified by considering P (B j ≥ bj , B k ≥ bk | R = R). Finally, using similar arguments
as in the proof of Theorem 1 we can then show identification of the distributions of
X, U , and N . If B < R, however, then only P (U ≤ uj | U ≥ uk ) for all uj , uk ≥ W
is identified, but we cannot point identify P (U ≤ u).

                             3. Estimation and Inference

     In this section we discuss estimation of the unknown densities fX , fW , fU , and
fU k in both the secret and the public reserve price cases using a nonparametric or
                         IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                                    13

semiparametric maximum likelihood approach. Our approach does not require esti-
mating P (N = n). We also describe an inference procedure for certain features of
the auctions, which is robust to a lack of point identification. Finally, we describe
our specific recommendation of a nonparametric or semiparametric estimator.




3.1. Estimation and Inference in the Secret Reserve Case. In the secret re-
serve price case, the likelihood of the joint distribution of B j , B k and R can be
obtained by first writing

     P (B j ≤ bj , B k ≤ bk , R ≤ r)
                           Z
                        = P (B j ≤ bj , B k ≤ bk , R ≤ r | X = x)fX (x)dx
                           Z
                        = P (U j ≤ bj − x, U k ≤ bk − x, W ≤ r − x | X = x)fX (x)dx
                           Z
                        = P (U j ≤ bj − x, U k ≤ bk − x)P (W ≤ r − x)fX (x)dx.

The first step uses the law of iterated expectations and the remaining steps the
independence assumptions. It follows that
                                 Z
    fB j ,B k ,R (bj , bk , r) =   fU j ,U k (bj − x, bk − x)fW (r − x)fX (x)dx.
                                 Z
                               =   fU j |U k (bj − x | bk − x)fU k (bk − x)fW (r − x)fX (x)dx.

Notice that fU j |U k (bj − x | bk − x) is a function of fU only. For example, when j = 2
and k = 3,
                                                  2(1 − FU (bj − x))fU (bj − x)
                 fU j |U k (bj − x, | bk − x) =                                 .
                                                       (1 − FU (bk − x))2

  Denote the data by Zt = (Btj , Btk , Rt ), where t = 1, . . . , T denotes an auction.
Let θ0 = (fX , fW , fU , fU k ) ∈ Θ, where Θ denotes the parameter space. Define the
contribution of an individual auction t to the log-likelihood as
                       Z                                                            
                                      j        k            k
    ls (θ0 , Zt ) = ln    fU j |U k (Bt − x | Bt − x)fU k (Bt − x)fW (Rt − x)fX (x)dx ,
14                                 FREYBERGER AND LARSEN

where the s subscript on ls (·) denotes the secret reserve price case. Thus, given
a random sample of T auctions {Btj , Btk , Rt }Tt=1 , we can estimate θ0 by maximum
likelihood. Searching over the entire parameter space of densities satisfying certain
regularity conditions would prove infeasible. We instead maximize the likelihood over
a finite-dimensional approximation. In particular, let ΘT be a finite-dimensional sieve
space of Θ, which depends on the sample size T and has the property that θ0 can
be approximated arbitrary well by some element in ΘT when T is large enough (see
Section 3.3 for a specific recommendation, as well as Chen (2007) for an overview on
sieve estimation). We can now estimate θ0 by
                                                     T
                                                  1X
                                  θ̂s = arg max         ls (θ, Zt ).
                                           θ∈ΘT   T t=1

     Consistency of the estimator follows from standard arguments and regularity con-
ditions, such as Theorem 3.1 in Chen (2007). Furthermore, we can conduct inference
about certain functionals of the densities by inverting a likelihood ratio test. Let
g(θ0 ) : Θ → R be some functional of interest, such as moments of the distributions,
the optimal reserve price, or bidders’ surplus. Suppose we are interested in testing
H0 : g(θ0 ) = m for some m ∈ R. Define Ls (θ) = Tt=1 ls (θ, Zt ). The likelihood ratio
                                                 P

test is based on                                                           !
                        T̂s = 2     sup Ls (θ) −        sup        Ls (θ) .
                                    θ∈ΘT            θ∈ΘT :g(θ)=m

                                                                       d
Shen and Shi (2005) provide conditions under which T̂s → χ21 if H0 is true. Hence,
we reject H0 : g(θ0 ) = m if T̂s > c1−α , where c1−α is the 1 − α quantile of the χ21
distribution. Finally, let

              CIg(θ0 ) = {m ∈ R : do not reject H0 : g(θ0 ) = m at level α} .

Then, by construction, CIg(θ0 ) is a 1 − α confidence set for g(θ0 ).

     An alternative is to specify the model semiparametrically, for example, by assuming
parametric distributions for X, W , U but allowing for a nonparametric distribution
of U k , thus retaining the flexibility to accommodate an unknown distribution of the
                                IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                                                       15

number of bidders. In such a model, inference about the finite-dimensional parameters
can be carried out by using the outer product form of the estimated covariance matrix
(see Ackerberg, Chen, and Hahn 2012).




3.2. Estimation and Inference in the Public Reserve Case. If the reserve price
is public we can still derive the log-likelihood function. To do so, define
                                                     ∂
                                         p1 (r) =       P (R ≤ r, D1 = 1),
                                                     ∂r
                                                 ∂
                              p2 (r, bj ) =           P (B j ≤ bj , R ≤ r, D2 = 1),
                                               ∂bj ∂r
and
                                            ∂
                p3 (r, bj , bk ) =                 P (B j ≤ bj , B k ≤ bk , R ≤ r, D3 = 1).
                                        ∂bj ∂bk ∂r
We show in Appendix B that
                Z ∞ Z r−x
       p1 (r) =           FU j |U k (r − x | uk )fU k (uk )duk fW (r − x)fX (x)dx,
                         −∞        −∞
                         Z    ∞    Z   r−x
         p2 (r, bj ) =                       fU j |U k (bj − x | uk )fU k (uk )duk fW (r − x)fX (x)dx,
                              −∞   −∞
and
                              Z    ∞
         p3 (r, bj , bk ) =            fU j |U k (bj − x | bk − x)fU k (bk − x)fW (r − x)fX (x)dx.
                                −∞

Notice that since fU j |U k and FU j |U k depend on fU only, all three expressions only
depend on the four densities fX , fW , fU , and fU k . Now define
                    X                              X                                X
      Lp (θ0 ) =              ln(p1 (Rt )) +                ln(p2 (Rt , Btj )) +              ln(p3 (Rt , Btj , Btk )),
                   t:D1t =1                      t:D2t =1                          t:D3t =1

where p in Lp (·) denotes the public reserve price case. Under the condition of Theorem
2, where θ0 is point identified, and the regularity conditions of Theorem 3.1 in Chen
(2007), we can consistently estimate θ0 by

                                                θ̂p = arg max Lp (θ).                                                     (1)
                                                            θ∈ΘT
16                               FREYBERGER AND LARSEN

Moreover, we can obtain confidence intervals for certain functionals of θ0 by inverting
a likelihood ratio test, analogous to the secret reserve price setting, or do inference in
a semiparametric setting.

     As shown in Theorem 2 and the related discussion, in general θ0 might not be
point identified if the reserve price is public. In this case, θ̂p will not be a consistent
estimator of θ0 , but we can still conduct inference using a likelihood ratio test. Similar
to before, let g(θ0 ) : Θ → R be some functional and suppose we are interested in
testing H0 : g(θ0 ) = m for some m ∈ R. The likelihood ratio test is based on
                                                            !
                       T̂p = 2    sup Lp (θ) −               sup      Lp (θ) .
                                  θ∈ΘT                 θ∈ΘT :g(θ)=m


If θ0 is not point identified, T̂p does not converge to a χ21 in distribution. Nevertheless,
we can obtain the critical values by using a weighted bootstrap as shown by Chen,
Tamer, and Torgovitsky (2011). While this procedure is very flexible and allows for
partial identification under weak assumptions, a downside is that it is computationally
very demanding.




3.3. Computational and Practical Details. In our application in Section 4 below,
we choose as our sieve space the space of normalized, orthogonal Hermite polynomials,
as in Gallant and Nychka (1987). This allows us to flexibly approximate the density
function for any random variable Y ∈ {W, U k , U, X} by
                                 K                          !2                       2
                          1                         y − µY          1 −1
                                                                            
                                 X                                              y−µY
                 fY (y) ≈              θkY Hk                      √ e 2         σY
                          σ      k=0
                                                      σY            2π

where K is a smoothing parameter and θY , µY , and σY are estimated. Hk are
Hermite polynomials defined by H1 (x) = 1, H2 (x) = x, and, for k > 2, Hk (x) =
                √
√1 [xHk−1 (x) −  k − 1Hk−2 (x)].
  k

  Plugging in these approximating polynomials, we maximize the above likelihood
                                       PK Y 2
expressions subject to the constraints  i=1 (θi ) = 1 for each random variable
Y ∈ {W, U k , U, X}, which ensures each approximated function is indeed a density
                       IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                               17

function, and also subject to the constraint E[X] = 0. The location and scale pa-
rameters {µY , σY }Y ∈{W,U k ,U,X} are not required for consistent estimation but improve
the performance of the estimator. We estimate them in a parametric initial step,
maximizing the likelihood while fixing the vectors θY to have the first element θ0Y = 1
and the remaining elements θkY = 0 for all k > 0. That is, each density fY is approxi-
mated by a N (µY , σY ). We then plug in the estimated values of {µ̂Y , σ̂Y }Y ∈{W,U k ,U,X}
into the likelihood expression and maximize over {θY }Y ∈{W,U k ,U,X} . We perform the
integration in the likelihood by Gauss-Hermite quadrature (see Judd 1998).

  In the application below, we also present results from estimating the model semi-
parametrically. In the semiparametric estimation, we specify the distributions of X,
U , and W to be normally distributed and we approximate the density of U k using Her-
mite polynomials, as above, retaining flexibility to allow for an unknown distribution
for the number of bidders.


                4. Application to Used Smartphone Auctions

4.1. Background on Digital Rights Management and Smartphone Unlock-
ing. Digital rights management (DRM) refers to technological locks placed on soft-
ware or hardware to restrict its use or modification. The use of these locks has been
highly controversial. Proponents of DRM argue that these restrictions are necessary
to prevent copyright infringement of digital intellectual property (Liu, Safavi-Naini,
and Sheppard 2003). Opponents argue that DRM takes a step beyond traditional
copyright law by controlling how consumers access or use goods or digital content
they have legally purchased, suggesting that these laws instead serve primarily to
restrict competition between producers (Von Lohmann 2004; Walker 2003; Stallman
1997). A number of products are controlled through DRM, including, among many
others, computer software, with digital locks enforcing limited installs or requiring
activation keys; e-books, music, or film, with limits on sharing or on device compati-
bility; and cellular handsets, with digital locks between the subscriber identification
module (SIM) and the phone’s software, restricting the handset to only function on
a particular provider’s cellular service network.
18                             FREYBERGER AND LARSEN

     In the United States, the key law regarding DRM is the Digital Millennium Copy-
right Act (DMCA) of 1998. This law was implemented in response to the 1996
copyright treaty of the World Intellectual Property Organization, which required
its members (including the United States) to adopt measures to prohibit tamper-
ing with digital locks. In the early years of the DMCA, cellular handset unlocking
was granted an explicit exemption, and consumers could legally unlock their out-of-
contract phones through a variety of do-it-yourself or third-party services (Van Camp
2013). In late 2012, the copyright office of the Library of Congress failed to renew
this exemption, arguing that phone unlocking tampers with copyrighted firmware
and hence is arguably in violation of the law (Federal Register 2012; Couts 2012).
This change made phone unlocking illegal as of January 26, 2013, imposing a fine of
$500,000 and a sentence of five years in prison for unauthorized unlocking (Wyatt
2013). Contemporary conversations among consumers online suggest that consumers
were nervous as to how this massive fine and prison sentence would be enforced and
to whom it would apply (Velazco 2013; Khanna 2013). In response to backlash from
consumer advocates (Wyatt 2013), a bill was eventually signed into law in 2014 to
re-allow consumer unlocking of phones.

     Although laws such as the DMCA have arisen to prohibit the production or dis-
tribution of technology intended to circumvent these digital locks, these laws and
copyright laws in general are notoriously difficult to enforce (Harbaugh and Khemka
2010) and violations are difficult to police. Given this enforcement challenge, it
remains an open question whether these laws are effective in altering individuals’
(buyers and sellers) willingness to engage in DRM circumvention. We contribute to
this question by examining buyers’ willingness to pay and sellers’ pricing for DRM-
tampered goods—unlocked smartphones—before and after the January 2013 ban on
unlocking. While the purpose of this exercise is primarily to illustrate our method
rather than provide a definitive answer to the effects of this regulatory change, the
analysis provides several insights that we discuss below.
                          IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                                    19

4.2. Data on Used Smartphone Auctions. We use a new dataset of eBay auctions
for used iPhones. The sample consists of used iPhone 4 and 4S models with 8, 16, or
32 gigabytes (GB) of memory and of black or white color. These models were the most
frequently auctioned iPhone models during our sample period, September 22, 2012
to May 21, 2013. We choose this sample period as it begins after the introduction
of the iPhone 5 (September 21, 2012) and includes the date of the regulatory change
banning phone unlocking, January 26, 2013. The models we study were released
between June 24, 2010 and October 14, 2011, prior to the start date of our sample,
and thus a large number of used (unlocked and locked) iPhone 4 and 4S handsets had
accumulated and were being sold in our sample period.7

  As with many real-world ascending-like auctions, the number of bidders is not
observed in our setting: potential bidders who arrive at the auction after the standing
bid has passed their values will not be observed placing a bid. These auctions also
exemplify a setting in which it is important to account for unobserved heterogeneity,
as used smartphones can differ dramatically in ways that are observable to the seller
and bidders but not to the econometrician, such as through a cracked screen, scratched
surface, missing USB adapter, or faulty battery, or in positive ways, such as a lack
of wear and tear.8 Pictures and detailed descriptions posted by the seller contain
information about these characteristics that both the seller and potential buyers can
observe, but such information is difficult for the econometrician to quantify.9

  We focus our application on auctions in which the seller used a secret reserve price.
For each auction, the data contains the second and third unconditional order statistics
of bids, the seller’s secret reserve price, the shipping fee, and an indicator for whether

7The  precise release dates were June 24, 2010 for the black iPhone 4 16 GB and 32 GB; April 28,
2011 for the white iPhone 4 16 GB and 32 GB; and October 14, 2011 for either color of the iPhone
4 8GB and either color of the iPhone 4S 16 or 32 GB. The iPhone 4S 8 GB was not released until
after our sample, on September 20, 2013.
8Our focus on used phones is also due to the fact that new unlocked phones are more likely to have
been unlocked (legally) by the original vendor, and thus the alteration of the DMCA is less likely to
have impacted new phones.
9When observable to the econometrican, text descriptions could be exploited using natural language
parsing algorithms or images could be analyzed with image processing algorithms, and this could
aid in accounting for item-level heterogeneity. In such cases our approach would remain useful to
account for remaining unobserved heterogeneity.
20                               FREYBERGER AND LARSEN

the phone was locked to a particular carrier (Verizon or AT&T) or unlocked. We
drop all auctions in which the bids, the reserve price, or the shipping fee lies outside
of their respective 0.01 and 0.99 quantiles. We also drop auctions in which the bids
or the reserve price lie above the contemporary price of a brand new iPhone 5 ($649)
sold at the Apple Store (see Wyatt 2013). This leaves a sample of 12,890 auctioned
iPhones.


4.3. Estimation Results. Using this data, we estimate, for different carriers and
for unlocked phones, the distributions of unobserved heterogeneity, bidder valuations,
and reserve prices, where the latter two distributions are net of the unobserved het-
erogeneity. Therefore, the objects of interest are FU , FW , and FX . By Theorem 1,
each of these objects is point identified. We note that our method treats bidders
in these auctions as though they are short lived, exiting the auction market after
one attempt.10 We also treat bidders as having private values; as with many auc-
tion settings, allowing for interdepencies in valuations would be preferable but would
be beyond the state of the methodological literature. However, we believe that the
private values assumption is a reasonable approximation to reality here in that all
buyers have access to the same information on the website about the product. Also,
lemons-like interdependencies—arising from the seller withholding information from
the buyer about the quality of the good—are less likely to be a concern in our data
than in many other auction settings due to buyer protection plans and sanctions
against deceptive sellers, which eBay has incorporated in recent years.

     To implement our method, we adopt the log (i.e. multiplicatively separable) speci-
fication of the model described at the beginning of Section 2. We account for shipping
fees simply by adding them to the observed bids and reserve prices. We then control
for observable heterogeneity in the smartphones using the standard homogenization
step of Haile, Hong, and Shum (2003) by regressing log reserve prices on observable
characteristics, consisting of fully saturated model of indicators for all combinations

10Inpractice, this appears to be a reasonable approximation, as 71% of bidders in our data bid in
at most one auction for a given phone specification.
                          IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                                    21

of iPhone model (4 or 4S), memory size (8, 16, or 32 GB), and color (black or white).11
We then compute homogenenized bids and reserve prices by subtracting the regres-
sion’s predicted value from the log bids and log reserve prices.

  With these homogenized bids and reserve prices, we apply the steps described in
Section 3 to estimate the model’s primitives, estimating FU , FW , and FX separately
for each carrier code (AT&T, Verizon, and unlocked) and separately for each time
period, with the pre period (prior to the unlocking ban) being September 22, 2012
through January 25, 2013 and the post period (after the unlocking ban took effect)
being January 26, 2013 through May 21, 2013.

  We begin by estimating the semiparametric model. We specify the marginal den-
sities fU , fW , and fX , to all be Normal, but we specify fU k to be a fourth-degree
Hermite polynomial. This flexibility in the k th unconditional order statistic density
fU k permits the model to accommodate the unknown distribution of the number of
bidders. The results of the semiparametric model are displayed in Table 1. Panel A
displays the estimated parameters for the pre period and panel B displays the results
for the post period.

  We find that, in the pre period, the means of buyer valuations and seller reserve
prices are higher for unlocked phones than for AT&T or Verizon phones (although, in
the case of buyer valuations for unlocked vs. AT&T phones, this difference is small
in magnitude). This ordering of locked vs. unlocked phones is intuitive, as unlocked
phones should obtain a premium given that they can be used on any carrier. The
fact that consumers value Verizon phones less than AT&T phones is likely simply an
artifact of Apple phone contracts for Verizon being a relatively new phenomenon dur-
ing our sample period when compared to such contracts for AT&T. We find that the
standard deviations of seller reserve prices and unobserved heterogeneity are similar
across carriers.12


11We  perform this homogenization step using using log reserve prices as the left hand side variable,
but the log of bids could have be used instead of (or in addition to) the log of reserve prices.
12Recall that the mean of the unobserved heterogeneity distribution is mechanically the same for
each carrier, but the standard deviation is allowed to differ.
22                                 FREYBERGER AND LARSEN

     Comparing across the two time periods, we see that several model parameters are
quite similar before and after the unlocking ban for all carriers and unlocked phones,
including the standard deviation of seller reserve prices and the standard deviation
of unobserved heterogeneity. The distributions of buyer valuations and seller reserve
prices for AT&T phones also stayed roughly constant before and after the ban. For
Verizon phones, the mean of buyer valuations decreased from −0.287 to −0.340 log
points and the mean of seller reserve prices decreased from −0.072 to −0.145 log
points. For unlocked phones, the mean of seller reserve prices changed only slightly,
but the mean of buyer valuations had a much larger shift, dropping from 0.036 to
−0.155 log points after the ban went into affect. The difference of 0.119 is roughly
equal to a decrease of 0.5 standard deviations of the estimated distribution of log-
valuations, or a decrease in the dollar valuation for the phone of about 11%. Moreover,
the standard deviation increased by roughly 20%.

     To examine whether any of the above implications are driven by parametric restric-
tions, we now turn to the results of the nonparametric model. For this exercise, we
specify fU , fW , and fU k each as fourth-degree Hermite polynomials. For the density
fX we use a third-degree Hermite polynomial.13 Figure 1 includes all of the non-
parametric estimates for AT&T, Verizon, and unlocked phones in the pre period, and
Figure 2 contains the analogous estimates in the post period.

     Figures 1 and 2 suggest, as did the results of the semiparametric model, that the
distribution of unobserved heterogeneity is similar for AT&T, Verizon, and unlocked
phones, both before and after the unlocking ban. We also find again that distributions
of seller reserve prices have a clear stochastic ordering in both the pre and post periods,
with unlocked phones being highest, then AT&T phones, and then Verizon phones.
The ordering for buyer valuations in the pre period is roughly the same, although
13This   latter choice is driven by the fact that X, the unobserved heterogeneity, is the dimension
over which we integrate in computing the likelihood, and, even with many Gauss-Hermite nodes,
there can be few nodes close to zero. With an even-degree polynomial, this can yield an estimated
density with little mass exactly at zero and a mode on either side of zero. With a third-degree
polynomial approximation, the integration and estimation result in an estimated density that is
single-peaked. The qualitative results and the pre and post comparison are similar when all densities
are approximated with fourth-degree polynomials. Figures 7 and 8 in the Appendix displays these
results.
                       IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                               23

buyer valuations for AT&T and unlocked phones are quite similar to one another.
In the post period, however, we see that the ordering for buyer valuations changes,
with unlocked phones being valued much less than AT&T phones, although still more
than Verizon phones. This shift is suggestive that buyers may have been less willing
to pay for technologically circumvented handsets after the unlocking ban took effect.

  Figures 3–5 display these same estimates separately by carrier code for the pre
vs. post time period. In each of these three figures, the distribution of unobserved
heterogeneity is similar pre and post the unlocking ban. In Figure 3 the distributions
of buyer valuations for AT&T phones is slightly lower in the post period, which is
likely due in part to the passage of time, depreciating buyers’ willingness to pay for a
fixed model. The distribution of seller reserve prices for AT&T phones is similar pre
and post. Figure 4 displays a similar decrease in buyer valuations for Verizon phones,
and also a decrease in seller valuations, in the post period relative to the pre period.
In Figure 5, however, there is a dramatic shift in buyer valuations for unlocked phones.
The estimated difference in means of the distributions in the pre and post periods is
0.31, corresponding to about 0.9 standard deviations of the estimated distribution of
log-valuations, or a decrease in the dollar valuation for the phone of about 27%. The
estimated mean decreases in the dollar valuations for AT&T and Verizon phones are
only 5.1% and 4.6%, respectively. This is again suggestive evidence that buyers may
have incorporated into their valuations a distaste for violations of digital rights laws.

  Thus far we have not attempted to identify seller valuations directly, but rather
worked only with sellers’ reported reserve prices. We now consider the seller val-
uations that would be implied by the data if the reserve prices are interpreted as
having been set optimally by the seller (given the distribution of buyer valuations).
As explained in Section 2, if the seller has a valuation that is additively separable
in the auction-level heterogeneity, the optimal reserve price (net of auction-level het-
                                        1−FU (W )
erogeneity) would satisfy W = S +        fU (W )
                                                  , and thus the seller’s net   valuation is
                                    1−FU (W )
given by S = M RU (W ) ≡ W −         fU (W )
                                              , where the notation M RU (·)     denotes the
24                                  FREYBERGER AND LARSEN

buyer’s marginal revenue as in Bulow and Roberts (1989).14 The distribution of seller
valuations is then given by FS (s) = FW (M RU−1 (s)).

     We compute the implied seller distributions for AT&T, Verizon, and unlocked
phones in the pre and post periods using the estimated parameters from the semi-
parametric model from Table 1.15 We show these distributions in Figure 6. We find
that implied seller valuations for AT&T phones, the top panel, increased slightly and
implied seller valuations for Verizon phones, the middle panel, decreased slightly from
the pre period to the post period. Implied seller valuations for unlocked phones ap-
pear nearly identical before and after the unlocking ban. These findings are consistent
with our findings above that the primary change in market valuations for these used
smartphones occurred on the buyers’ side and only for unlocked phones.


                                         5. Conclusion

     This paper introduces a new approach to identification in auctions with unobserved
auction-level heterogeneity and an unknown number of bidders. The methodology re-
lies on deconvolution ideas for handling unobserved heterogeneity—which have been
applied extensively to first price auctions but not to ascending auctions due the
complicating factor of correlation between order statistics. The approach also re-
lies on order statistics comparisons which have previously been limited to settings
that do not allow for unobserved heterogeneity. We bring these ideas together in a
unified framework, exploiting information contained in reserve prices—either secret
or public—chosen by the seller. We provide point identification as well as partial
identification results for these settings and propose a nonparametric sieve maximum
likelihood approach or semiparametric approach for estimation and inference.

14This  same property holds in logs for the case where valuations are multiplicatively separable in
the unobserved heterogeneity term.
15We use the semiparametric rather than nonparametric model to simplify the inversion from ob-
served reserve prices to seller valuations. Specifically, the normality assumption for FU in the semi-
parametric model ensures that FU is regular in the sense of Myerson (1981), i.e. ψ(w) ≡ w − 1−F    U (w)
                                                                                                fU (w)
will be strictly increasing in w and hence will correspond to marginal revenue. If ψ(w) is not strictly
increasing (i.e., the distribution is irregular ) then
                                                    R w marginal revenue, M RU (w), would instead be
computed as the derivative of the convex hull of 0 ψ(y)dy (the ironed marginal revenue function).
                       IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                            25

  We apply this framework to analyze changes in bidders’ willingness to pay and
sellers’ reserve prices before and after 2013 regulatory changes banning the removal
of digital locks on cellphones. We find that, for phones locked to AT&T or Verizon
phones, as well as for unlocked phones, the distributions of unobserved heterogeneity
and of seller reserve prices were quite similar before and after the unlocking ban. We
also find that the distribution of buyer valuations was similar before and after the ban
for AT&T and Verizon phones. However, for unlocked phones—those which, after the
law took effect, were potentially in violation of digital rights legislation—there was a
clear drop in buyer valuations, suggestive that digital rights management laws, while
difficult to enforce in practice, may have real effects on consumers’ willingness to pay.

  We believe our methodology has applications to ascending auctions more broadly,
whether they be traditional English auctions, such as for timber, cattle, or used cars;
or online auctions for e-commerce or display advertising. In many of these settings,
unobserved heterogeneity in the auctioned items is a major concern, and the number
of bidders is often unknown to the econometrician, as many such auctions do not
require all bidders to register in any fashion prior to the auction and hence their
would-be bids are unobserved.
26                                 FREYBERGER AND LARSEN

                                       References

Ackerberg, D., X. Chen, and J. Hahn (2012): “A practical asymptotic vari-
     ance estimator for two-step semiparametric estimators,” Review of Economics and
     Statistics, 94(2), 481–498.
An, Y., Y. Hu, and M. Shum (2010): “Estimating first-price auctions with an un-
     known number of bidders: A misclassification approach,” Journal of Econometrics,
     157(2), 328–341.
Aradillas-López, A., A. Gandhi, and D. Quint (2013): “Identification and in-
     ference in ascending auctions with correlated private values,” Econometrica, 81(2),
     489–534.
Armstrong, T. B. (2013): “Bounds in auctions with unobserved heterogeneity,”
     Quantitative Economics, 4(3), 377–415.
Athey, S., and P. A. Haile (2002): “Identification of standard auction models,”
     Econometrica, 70(6), 2107–2140.
            (2007): “Nonparametric approaches to auctions,” Handbook of Economet-
     rics, 6, 3847–3965.
Athey, S., J. Levin, and E. Seira (2011): “Comparing open and sealed bid
     auctions: Evidence from timber auctions,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     126(1), 207–257.
Baker, C. A. (2007): “Consumer switching costs in the US marketplace for wireless
     telephone service,” Working paper, AARP Public Policy Institute.
Balat, J. (2015): “Highway procurement and the stimulus package: Identification
     and estimation of dynamic auctions with unobserved heterogeneity,” Working pa-
     per, Johns Hopkins University.
            (2016): “Identification and estimation of affiliated private values auctions
     with unobserved heterogeneity,” Working paper, Johns Hopkins University.
Bulow, J., and J. Roberts (1989): “The simple economics of optimal auctions,”
     Journal of Political Economy, pp. 1060–1090.
Canals-Cerdá, J. J., and J. Pearcy (2013): “Arriving in time: Estimation
     of English auctions with a stochastic number of bidders,” Journal of Business &
                      IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                           27

  Economic Statistics, 31(2), 125–135.
Chen, X. (2007): “Large sample sieve estimation of semi-nonparametric models,” in
  Handbook of Econometrics, ed. by J. Heckman, and E. Leamer, vol. 6 of Handbook
  of Econometrics, chap. 76, pp. 5550–5623. Elsevier.
Chen, X., E. T. Tamer, and A. Torgovitsky (2011): “Sensitivity analysis in
  semiparametric likelihood models,” Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper 1836.
Coey, D., B. Larsen, and K. Sweeney (2016): “The bidder exclusion effect,”
  NBER Working Paper 20523.
Coey, D., B. Larsen, K. Sweeney, and C. Waisman (2017): “Ascending auc-
  tions with bidder asymmetries,” Quantitative Economics, 8(1), 181–200.
Couts, A. (2012): “Unlocking your smartphone will soon be illegal, and other
  DMCA new rule insanity,” Url:http://www.digitaltrends.com/mobile/unlocking-
  your-smartphone-will-soon-be-illegal-and-other-new-dmca-rule-insanity/.       Posted
  October 26, 2012. Retrieved July 26, 2016.
David, H. A., and H. N. Nagaraja (2003): Order Statistic. New York: Wiley.
Decarolis, F. (2017): “Comparing public procurement auctions,” International
  Economic Review, forthcoming.
Evdokimov, K., and H. White (2012): “Some extensions of a lemma of Kotlarski,”
  Econometric Theory, 28(4), 925–923.
Fan, Y., and C. Yang (2016): “Competition, product proliferation and welfare: A
  study of the US smartphone market,” Working paper, University of Michigan.
Farrell, J., and P. Klemperer (2007): “Coordination and lock-in: Competition
  with switching costs and network effects,” Handbook of Industrial Organization, 3,
  1967–2072.
Federal Register (2012): “Exemption to prohibition on circumvention of copy-
  right protection systems for access control technologies,” Federal Register, 77(208),
  Url:http://copyright.gov/fedreg/2012/77fr65260.pdf.
Gallant, A., and D. Nychka (1987): “Semi-nonparametric maximum likelihood
  estimation,” Econometrica, pp. 363–390.
28                                     FREYBERGER AND LARSEN

Haile, P. A., H. Hong, and M. Shum (2003): “Nonparametric tests for common
     values at first-price sealed-bid auctions,” NBER Working Paper 10105.
Haile, P. A., and E. Tamer (2003): “Inference with an incomplete model of
     English auctions,” Journal of Political Economy, 111(1), 1–51.
Harbaugh, R., and R. Khemka (2010): “Does copyright enforcement encourage
     piracy?,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 58(2), 306–323.
Hickman, B. R., T. P. Hubbard, and H. J. Paarsch (2016): “Identification
     and estimation of a bidding model for electronic auctions,” Quantitative Economics,
     forthcoming.
Hortacsu, A., and E. R. Nielsen (2010): “Commentary: Do bids equal values
     on eBay?,” Marketing Science, 29(6), 994–997.
Hu, Y., D. McAdams, and M. Shum (2013): “Identification of first-price auctions
     with non-separable unobserved heterogeneity,” Journal of Econometrics, 174(2),
     186–193.
Judd, K. (1998): Numerical Methods in Economics. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Khanna,            D.        (2013):        “The   most     ridiculous      law     of    2013
     (so   far):        It    is   now     a   crime   to   unlock       your     smartphone,”
     Url:https://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2013/01/the-most-ridiculous-
     law-of-2013-so-far-it-is-now-a-crime-to-unlock-your-smartphone/272552/.             Posted
     January 27, 2013. Retrieved May 30, 2017.
Kim, K. i., and J. Lee (2014): “Nonparametric estimation and testing of the sym-
     metric IPV framework with unknown number of bidders,” Working paper, Michigan
     State University.
Kotlarski, I. (1967): “On characterizing the Gamma and Normal distribution,”
     Pacific Journal of Mathematics, 20(1), 69–76.
Krasnokutskaya, E. (2011): “Identification and estimation of auction models with
     unobserved heterogeneity,” Review of Economic Studies, 78(1), 293–327.
Krasnokutskaya, E., and K. Seim (2011): “Bid preference programs and par-
     ticipation in highway procurement auctions,” American Economic Review, 101(6),
     2653–2686.
                     IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                          29

Larsen, B. (2014): “The efficieny of real-world bargaining: Evidence from wholesale
  used-auto auctions,” NBER Working Paper 20431.
Li, T., I. Perrigne, and Q. Vuong (2000): “Conditionally independent private
  information in OCS wildcat auctions,” Journal of Econometrics, 98(1), 129–161.
Li, T., and Q. Vuong (1998): “Nonparametric estimation of the measurement error
  model using multiple indicators,” Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 65(2), 139–165.
Liu, Q., R. Safavi-Naini, and N. P. Sheppard (2003): “Digital rights man-
  agement for content distribution,” in Proceedings of the Australasian information
  security workshop conference on ACSW frontiers 2003-Volume 21, pp. 49–58. Aus-
  tralian Computer Society, Inc.
Maicas, J. P., Y. Polo, and F. J. Sese (2009): “Reducing the level of switching
  costs in mobile communications: The case of mobile number portability,” Telecom-
  munications Policy, 33(9), 544–554.
Myerson, R. B. (1981): “Optimal auction design,” Mathematics of Operations
  Research, 6(1), 58–73.
Nakamura, A. (2010): “Estimating switching costs involved in changing mobile
  phone carriers in Japan: Evaluation of lock-in factors related to Japans SIM card
  locks,” Telecommunications Policy, 34(11), 736–746.
Park, Y., and Y. Koo (2016): “An empirical analysis of switching cost in the
  smartphone market in South Korea,” Telecommunications Policy, 40(4), 307–318.
Platt, B. (2015): “Inferring ascending auction participation from observed bidders,”
  Working paper, Brigham Young University.
Quint, D. (2015): “Identification in symmetric English auctions with additively
  separable unobserved heterogeneity,” Working paper, University of Wisconsin.
Roberts, J. W. (2013): “Unobserved heterogeneity and reserve prices in auctions,”
  RAND Journal of Economics, 44(4), 712–732.
Sailer, K. (2006): “Searching the eBay marketplace,” CESifo Working Paper Series
  1848.
Shen, X., and J. Shi (2005): “Sieve likelihood ratio inference on general parameter
  space,” Science in China Series A: Mathematics, 48(1), 67–78.
30                               FREYBERGER AND LARSEN

Sinkinson, M. (2014): “Pricing and entry incentives with exclusive contracts: Evi-
     dence from smartphones,” Working paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Song, U. (2004): “Nonparametric estimation of an eBay auction model with an
     unknown number of bidders,” Working paper, University of British Columbia.
Stallman, R. (1997): “The right to read,” Communications of the ACM, 40(2),
     85–87.
Tallberg, M., H. Hämmäinen, J. Töyli, S. Kamppari, and A. Kivi (2007):
     “Impacts of handset bundling on mobile data usage: The case of Finland,” Telecom-
     munications Policy, 31(10), 648–659.
Van Camp, J. (2013): “Stick it to the man!              Phone unlocking skyrockets 70
     percent since becoming illegal,” Url:http://www.digitaltrends.com/mobile/phone-
     unlocking-skyrockets-since-ban/. Posted August 13, 2013. Retrieved September 1,
     2016.
Velazco, C. (2013): “Unlocking your phone is now illegal, but what does that
     mean for you?,” Url:https://techcrunch.com/2013/01/26/unlocking-your-phone-is-
     now-illegal-but-what-does-that-mean-for-you/. Posted January 26, 2013. Retrieved
     May 30, 2017.
Von Lohmann, F. (2004): “Measuring the Digital Millennium against the Darknet:
     Implications for the regulation of technological protection measures,” Loyola of Los
     Angeles Entertainment Law Review, 24, 635.
Walker, J. (2003): “The digital imprimatur: How big brother and big media can
     put the Internet genie back in the bottle,” Knowledge, Technology, and Policy,
     16(3), 24–77.
Wyatt, E. (2013): “FCC backs consumers in unlocking of cellphones,” New York
     Times, p. B1, March 5, 2013.
Zhu, T., H. Liu, and P. K. Chintagunta (2015): “Wireless carriers exclusive
     handset arrangements: An empirical look at the iPhone,” Customer Needs and
     Solutions, 2(2), 177–190.
                       IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                            31

           Table 1. Estimated Parameters From Semiparametric Model


                                               AT&T Verizon Unlocked

            A. Pre Unlocking Ban

            Mean of buyer valuations (U )       0.032    -0.287     0.036
            Std of buyer valuations (U )        0.145     0.220     0.187
            Mean of seller reserve (W )         0.024    -0.072     0.183
            Std of seller reserve (W )          0.240     0.221     0.220
            Std of unobs heterogeneity (X)      0.100     0.105     0.102


            B. Post Unlocking Ban

            Mean of buyer valuations (U )       0.010    -0.340     -0.155
            Std of buyer valuations (U )        0.166     0.204      0.254
            Mean of seller reserve (W )         0.027    -0.145      0.167
            Std of seller reserve (W )          0.235     0.232     0.254
            Std of unobs heterogeneity (X)      0.104     0.106     0.107

Notes: Table displays estimates from semiparametric model, where densities fU , fW , and
fX are each Normally distributed and fU k is a fourth-degree Hermite polynomial. Units
are log points, after homogenization (i.e. subtracting off observable auction-level
heterogeneity).
32                                         FREYBERGER AND LARSEN



            Figure 1. Pre Unlocking Ban: Distribution Functions and Densities
            for AT&T, Verizon, and Unlocked Phones

      1                                                  4
              ATT Phones                                       ATT Phones
     0.8      Verizon Phones                                   Verizon Phones
                                                         3
              Unlocked Phones                                  Unlocked Phones
     0.6
                                                         2
     0.4

                                                         1
     0.2

      0                                                  0
       -2     -1.5      -1      -0.5   0     0.5   1      -2   -1.5      -1      -0.5   0   0.5   1



      1                                                  4
              ATT Phones                                       ATT Phones
     0.8      Verizon Phones                                   Verizon Phones
                                                         3
              Unlocked Phones                                  Unlocked Phones
     0.6
                                                         2
     0.4

                                                         1
     0.2

      0                                                  0
       -2               -1             0           1      -2             -1             0         1



      1                                                  6
              ATT Phones                                       ATT Phones
     0.8      Verizon Phones
                                                         5     Verizon Phones
              Unlocked Phones                                  Unlocked Phones
                                                         4
     0.6
                                                         3
     0.4
                                                         2
     0.2                                                 1

      0                                                  0
                        -1             0           1      -1                      0               1




Notes: Each plot shows nonparametric estimates for AT&T, Verizon, and unlocked phones in the
pre period. Panels on the left show distribution functions and on the right, densities, for the
noncommon component of buyer valuations FU (top row) and reserve prices FW (middle row), and
for the unobserved heterogeneity FX (bottom row). Units on the horizontal axes are log points,
after homogenization (i.e. subtracting off observable auction-level heterogeneity).
                                IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                               33



           Figure 2. Post Unlocking Ban: Distribution Functions and Densities
           for AT&T, Verizon, and Unlocked Phones

     1                                                4
             ATT Phones                                     ATT Phones
    0.8      Verizon Phones                                 Verizon Phones
                                                      3
             Unlocked Phones                                Unlocked Phones
    0.6
                                                      2
    0.4

                                                      1
    0.2

     0                                                0
      -2     -1.5      -1      -0.5   0   0.5   1      -2   -1.5      -1      -0.5   0   0.5   1



     1                                                4
             ATT Phones                                     ATT Phones
    0.8      Verizon Phones                                 Verizon Phones
                                                      3
             Unlocked Phones                                Unlocked Phones
    0.6
                                                      2
    0.4

                                                      1
    0.2

     0                                                0
      -2               -1             0         1      -2             -1             0         1



     1                                                6
             ATT Phones                                     ATT Phones
    0.8      Verizon Phones
                                                      5     Verizon Phones
             Unlocked Phones                                Unlocked Phones
                                                      4
    0.6
                                                      3
    0.4
                                                      2
    0.2                                               1

     0                                                0
                       -1             0         1      -1                      0               1




Notes: Each plot shows nonparametric estimates for AT&T, Verizon, and unlocked phones in the
post period. Panels on the left show distribution functions and on the right, densities, for the
noncommon component of buyer valuations FU (top row) and reserve prices FW (middle row), and
for the unobserved heterogeneity FX (bottom row). Units on the horizontal axes are log points,
after homogenization (i.e. subtracting off observable auction-level heterogeneity).
34                                   FREYBERGER AND LARSEN



            Figure 3. Estimates for AT&T-locked iPhones Before and After Un-
            locking Ban

      1                                                4
              Pre                                            Pre
     0.8      Post                                           Post
                                                       3

     0.6
                                                       2
     0.4

                                                       1
     0.2

      0                                                0
       -2     -1.5   -1   -0.5   0     0.5   1          -2   -1.5   -1    -0.5   0     0.5    1



      1                                                4
              Pre                                            Pre
     0.8      Post                                           Post
                                                       3

     0.6
                                                       2
     0.4

                                                       1
     0.2

      0                                                0
       -2            -1          0           1          -2          -1           0            1



      1                                                6
              Pre                                            Pre
     0.8                                               5
              Post                                           Post

                                                       4
     0.6
                                                       3
     0.4
                                                       2
     0.2                                               1

      0                                                0
                     -1          0           1          -1                 0                  1




Notes: AT&T phones only. Each plot shows the nonparametric estimate before and after the
regulatory change. Panels on the left show distribution functions and on the right, densities, for
the noncommon component of buyer valuations FU (top row) and reserve prices FW (middle row),
and for the unobserved heterogeneity FX (bottom row). Units on the horizontal axes are log
points, after homogenization (i.e. subtracting off observable auction-level heterogeneity).
                          IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                                    35



           Figure 4. Estimates for Verizon-locked iPhones Before and After Un-
           locking Ban

     1                                                 4
             Pre                                             Pre
    0.8      Post                                            Post
                                                       3

    0.6
                                                       2
    0.4

                                                       1
    0.2

     0                                                 0
      -2     -1.5   -1   -0.5   0    0.5    1           -2   -1.5   -1    -0.5   0     0.5    1



     1                                                 4
             Pre                                             Pre
    0.8      Post                                            Post
                                                       3

    0.6
                                                       2
    0.4

                                                       1
    0.2

     0                                                 0
      -2            -1          0           1           -2          -1           0            1



     1                                                 6
             Pre                                             Pre
    0.8                                                5
             Post                                            Post

                                                       4
    0.6
                                                       3
    0.4
                                                       2
    0.2                                                1

     0                                                 0
                    -1          0           1           -1                 0                  1




Notes: Verizon phones only. Each plot shows the nonparametric estimate before and after the
regulatory change. Panels on the left show distribution functions and on the right, densities, for
the noncommon component of buyer valuations FU (top row) and reserve prices FW (middle row),
and for the unobserved heterogeneity FX (bottom row). Units on the horizontal axes are log
points, after homogenization (i.e. subtracting off observable auction-level heterogeneity).
36                                 FREYBERGER AND LARSEN



     Figure 5. Estimates for Unlocked iPhones Before and After Unlocking Ban

      1                                                4
            Pre                                              Pre
     0.8    Post                                             Post
                                                       3

     0.6
                                                       2
     0.4

                                                       1
     0.2

      0                                                0
       -2   -1.5   -1   -0.5   0     0.5    1           -2   -1.5   -1    -0.5   0     0.5    1



      1                                                4
            Pre                                              Pre
     0.8    Post                                             Post
                                                       3

     0.6
                                                       2
     0.4

                                                       1
     0.2

      0                                                0
       -2          -1          0            1           -2          -1           0            1



      1                                                6
            Pre                                              Pre
     0.8                                               5
            Post                                             Post

                                                       4
     0.6
                                                       3
     0.4
                                                       2
     0.2                                               1

      0                                                0
                   -1          0            1           -1                 0                  1




Notes: unlocked phones only. Each plot shows the nonparametric estimate before and after the
regulatory change. Panels on the left show distribution functions and on the right, densities, for
the noncommon component of buyer valuations FU (top row) and reserve prices FW (middle row),
and for the unobserved heterogeneity FX (bottom row). Units on the horizontal axes are log
points, after homogenization (i.e. subtracting off observable auction-level heterogeneity).
                         IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                                   37



        Figure 6. Estimates of Implied Seller Valuations Before and After
        Unlocking Ban, Semiparametric Model


                          1
                                 Pre
                         0.8     Post

                         0.6

                         0.4

                         0.2

                          0
                           -2            -1             0             1


                          1
                                 Pre
                         0.8     Post

                         0.6

                         0.4

                         0.2

                          0
                           -2            -1             0             1


                          1
                                 Pre
                         0.8     Post

                         0.6

                         0.4

                         0.2

                          0
                           -2            -1             0             1




Notes: CDF of seller valuations implied by assuming that seller reserve prices are set optimally.
Each plot shows the semiparametric estimate before and after the regulatory change. Upper panel
shows AT&T phones, middle panel shows Verizon phones, and lower panel shows unlocked phones.
Units on the horizontal axes are log points, after homogenization (i.e. subtracting off observable
auction-level heterogeneity).
38                                        FREYBERGER AND LARSEN

                                           Appendix A. Proofs

Proof of Theorem 1. First write

                                                 Bj = X + U j

                                                   R = X + W.

By Lemma 1 of Evdokimov and White (2012), φX is identified. Moreover, notice that
by independence of X and (U j , U k , W ) we get

                      φB j ,B k ,R (tj , tk , t) = φX (tj + tk + t)φU j ,U k ,W (tj , tk , t)

for all (tj , tk , t) ∈ R3 . Therefore, for all (tj , tk , t) ∈ R3 such that φX (tj + tk + t) 6= 0,

                                                                φB j ,B k ,R (tj , tk , t)
                                 φU j ,U k ,W (tj , tk , t) =                              .
                                                                 φX (tj + tk + t)

It follows that φU j ,U k ,W (tj , tk , t) is identified for all (tj , tk , t) ∈ R3 such that φX (tj +
tk +t) 6= 0. Since the zeros of φX are isolated and since φU j ,U k ,W (tj , tk , t) is continuous,
φU j ,U k ,W (tj , tk , t) is identified for all (tj , tk , t) ∈ R3 . Identification of the characteristic
function is equivalent to identification of the density fU j ,U k ,W .

     Since we know the joint distribution of U j and U k , we can use arguments as in Song
(2004) to identify the distribution of valuations. Specifically, Song (2004) demon-
strated that the density of U j conditional on a realization of U k does not depend on
the realization of N :
                                 fU j ,U k (uj , uk )
         fU j |U k (uj |uk ) =
                                     fU k (uk )
                                 (k − 1)!(FU (uj ) − FU (uk ))k−j−1 (1 − FU (uj ))j−1 fU (uj )
                           =                                                                   .
                                          (k − j − 1)!(j − 1)!(1 − FU (uk ))k−1
Letting uk converge to the lower bound of the support of U identifies

                            (k − 1)!FU (uj )k−j−1 (1 − FU (uj ))j−1 fU (uj )
                                                                             ,
                                        (k − j − 1)!(j − 1)!
                           IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                                     39

which is the density of the (j − k)’th order statistic from a sample of size (j − 1) with
distribution function FU . Hence, from Theorem 1 in Athey and Haile (2002), FU is
identified.

  Finally, note that if N ∈ {n, . . . , n̄} with n ≥ k and n̄ < ∞, then
                        n̄
                                          " n                                #
                       X                     X      n
            FU k (u) =     Pr(N = n)                   FU (u)i (1 − FU (u))n−i
                       n=n                 i=n−k+1
                                                    i

and therefore for all z ∈ [0, 1]
                                             n̄    n      "              #
                                             X    X      n
                FU k (F −1 (z)) =     Pr(N = n)             z i (1 − z)n−i
                                  n=n           i=n−k+1
                                                         i
              Pn              n
                                                    
The terms        i=n−k+1       i
                                       z i (1 − z)n−i are polynomials of order n. Hence, the term
in FU k (F −1 (z)) belonging to the highest order polynomial, z n̄ , is
                                           n̄    
                           n̄
                                         X       n̄
                          z Pr(N = n̄)              FU (u)n̄ (−1)n̄−i .
                                       i=n̄−k+1
                                                 i
                Pn̄                n̄
                                       
Therefore, if       i=n̄−k+1       i
                                           (−1)n̄−i 6= 0, then Pr(N = n̄) is identified from the n̄’th
derivative of FU k (F −1 (z)) with respect to z. Indeed,
                              n̄                 k−1         
                            X       n̄      n̄−i
                                                   X       n̄
                                       (−1)      =                (−1)j
                          i=n̄−k+1
                                    i              j=1
                                                        n̄ −  j
                                                            k−1  
                                                            X     n̄
                                                          =          (−1)j
                                                            j=1
                                                                  j
                                                                          
                                                                 k−1 n̄ − 1
                                                          = (−1)
                                                                       k−1
                                                          6= 0.

Given identification of Pr(N = n̄), we know
                                         "        n̄                    #
                                                X       n̄
                 FU k (F −1 (z)) − Pr(N = n̄)              z i (1 − z)n̄−i ,
                                              i=n̄−k+1
                                                        i
40                                FREYBERGER AND LARSEN

which equals                            "                    #
                       n̄−1             n     
                       X               X      n i        n−i
                           Pr(N = n)            z (1 − z)      .
                       n=n           i=n−k+1
                                              i

Analogous arguments as above now show identification of Pr(N = n̄ − 1). Repeating
these steps yield identification of P (N = n) for all n ∈ {n, . . . , n̄}.




Proof of Theorem 2. Since B ≥ R, B is identified from the largest possible bid.
Notice that if B j = B, then U j = U and X = X. We can now observe for all
r ∈ [R, R] = [X + W , X + W ]

                  P (R ≤ r | B j = B) = P (R ≤ r | X = X, U j = U )

                                            = P (W ≤ r − X).

It follows that the distribution of W̃ = W + X is identified. But since E[W̃ ] =
E[W ] + X = E[R] + X and since E[R] is identified, it follows that X and hence the
distribution of W is identified. By independence of X and W ,

                                    φR (t) = φX (t)φW (t)

and for all t with φW (t) 6= 0,
                                                 φR (t)
                                      φX (t) =          .
                                                 φW (t)
Since φR (t) and φW (t) are identified and since φW (t) has only isolated zeros, φX (t) is
identified. Thus, FX is identified.

     Moreover,

 P (B j ≥ bj , B k ≥ bk | R = R) = P (B j ≥ bj , B k ≥ bk | X + W = X + W )

                                   = P (B j ≥ bj , B k ≥ bk | X = X, W = W )

                                   = P (U j ≥ bj − X, U k ≥ bk − X | X = X, W = W )

                                   = P (U j ≥ bj − X, U k ≥ bk − X)
                          IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                               41

Given X = X, the support of the observed B j is [X +W , X +U ]. Therefore, if B ≥ R
(and thus U ≥ W ), we can identify

             P (U j ≥ uj , U k ≥ uk ) = P (B j ≥ uj + X, B k ≥ uk + X | R = R).

for all uj , uk ∈ [U , U ]. In this case, just as in the proof of Theorem 1, identification
of FU j ,U k yields identification of FU and P (N = n).

  If instead B < R, we can only identify P (U j ≥ uj , U k ≥ uk ) for all uj ≥ uk ≥ W >
U . Analogous arguments identify P (U j ≥ uj ) and P (U k ≥ uk ) for all uj , uk ≥ W >
U . Now since
                                                         U
                                                             fU j ,U k (z, uk )
                                                     Z
                        FU j |U k (uj | uk ) = 1 −                              dz,
                                                     uj         fU k (uk )
FU j |U k (uj | uk ) for all uj ≥ uk ≥ W is identified as well. Therefore, by the arguments
from Song (2004), knowing FU j |U k (uj | uk ) implies knowledge of

                               (FU (uj ) − FU (uk ))/(1 − FU (uk ))

for all uj ≥ uk ≥ W . In other words, we can identify P (U ≤ uj | U ≥ uk ) for all
uj , uk ≥ W .

                        Appendix B. Likelihood Derivation

  Here we derive the expression for p1 , p2 , and p3 given in Section 3.2. For the first
part write

P (R ≤ r, D1 = 1) = P (R ≤ r, B k ≤ B j < R)

                      = P (R ≤ r, B j < R)
                        Z ∞
                      =     P (W ≤ r − x, U j ≤ W )fX (x)dx
                            −∞
                           Z ∞   Z   ∞
                      =                  P (W ≤ r − x, u ≤ W | U j = uj )fU j (uj )fX (x)duj dx
                            −∞    −∞
                           Z ∞   Z r−x
                      =                   P (uj ≤ W ≤ r − x)fU j (uj )fX (x)duj dx
                            −∞    −∞
                           Z ∞   Z r−x
                      =                   (P (W ≤ r − x) − P (W ≤ uj )) fU j (uj )fX (x)dudx
                            −∞    −∞
42                                               FREYBERGER AND LARSEN

Taking the derivative with respect to r (using Leibniz’s rule) yields
                            Z ∞ Z r−x
                 p1 (r) =             fW (r − x)fU j (uj )fX (x)duj dx
                                              −∞       −∞
                                             Z ∞
                                    =               FU j (r − x)fW (r − x)fX (x)dx.
                                              −∞

If the number of bidders is unknown, we need expressions in terms of the distributions
of U j | U k and U k and we use
                                                   Z   −∞
                               FU j (uj ) =                 FU j |U k (uj | uk )fU k (uk )duk .
                                                    −∞

Specifically, when B j is the second highest and B k is the third highest bid, then
                                                                2(1 − FU (uj ))fU (uj )
                                   fU j |U k (uj , | uk ) =                             .
                                                                   (1 − FU (uk ))2
Thus,
                                         uj
                                                 2(1 − FU (z))fU (z)
                                     Z
      FU j |U k (uj , | uk ) =                                       dz
                                        uk         (1 − FU (uk ))2
                                      (2FU (uj ) − FU (uj )2 ) − (2FU (uk ) − FU (uk )2 )
                               =                                                          1(uj ≥ uk ).
                                                       (1 − FU (uk ))2

     Similarly,

      P (B j ≤ bj , R ≤ r, D2 = 1)

           = P (B j ≤ bj , R ≤ r, B j ≥ R > B k )
             Z ∞
           =      P (U j ≤ bj − x, W ≤ r − x, U j ≥ W > U k )fX (x)dx
                  −∞
               Z   ∞   Z   ∞
           =                   P (U j ≤ bj − x, w ≤ r − x, U j ≥ w > U k | W = w)fW (w)fX (x)dudx
                  −∞   −∞
               Z   ∞   Z   min{bj −x,r−x}
           =                                     P (w ≤ U j ≤ bj − x, U k < w)fW (w)fX (x)dwdx
                  −∞   −∞
               Z   ∞   Z   min{bj −x,r−x}
                                                  P (U j ≤ bj − x, U k < w) − P (U j ≤ w, U k < w) fW (w)fX (x)dwdx.
                                                                                                  
           =
                  −∞   −∞
                            IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                                            43

If bj < r, then P (B j ≤ bj , R ≤ r, D2 = 1) does not depend on r and p2 (r, bj ) = 0. If
bj ≥ r, then
                       ∂
         p2 (b, r) =       P (B j ≤ bj , R ≤ r, D2 = 1)
                     ∂r∂bj
                     Z ∞
                           ∂
                   =           P (U j ≤ bj − x, U k < r − x)fW (r − x)fX (x)dx
                      −∞ ∂b  j
                     Z ∞
                   =     FU k |U j (r − x | bj − x)fU j (bj − x)fW (r − x)fX (x)dx.
                            −∞

Alternatively in terms of the distributions of U j | U k and U k write
                                                Z bj −x Z r−x
       ∂      j            k                 ∂
          P (U ≤ bj − x, U < r − x) =                            fU j ,U k (uj , uk )duj duk
      ∂bj                                   ∂bj −∞          −∞
                                           Z r−x
                                        =         fU j ,U k (bj − x, uk )duk
                                                           −∞
                                                          Z r−x
                                                     =            fU j |U k (bj − x | uk )fU k (uk )duk .
                                                           −∞

Then
                        Z   ∞   Z   r−x
        p2 (r, bj ) =                     fU j |U k (bj − x | uk )fU k (uk )duk fW (r − x)fX (x)dx.
                        −∞      −∞

Finally, using the same arguments as before
                         Z ∞
      p3 (r, bj , b2 ) =     fU j ,U k (bj − x, bk − x)fW (r − x)fX (x)dx
                                −∞
                            Z    ∞
                        =            fU j |U k (bj − x | bk − x)fU k (bk − x)fW (r − x)fX (x)dx.
                                −∞
44                                         FREYBERGER AND LARSEN



            Figure 7. Pre Unlocking Ban: Distribution Functions and Densities
            for AT&T, Verizon, and Unlocked Phones, with Fourth Degree Hermite
            Polynomial for Distribution of X

      1                                                  4
              ATT Phones                                       ATT Phones
     0.8      Verizon Phones                                   Verizon Phones
                                                         3
              Unlocked Phones                                  Unlocked Phones
     0.6
                                                         2
     0.4

                                                         1
     0.2

      0                                                  0
       -2     -1.5      -1      -0.5   0     0.5   1      -2   -1.5      -1      -0.5   0   0.5   1



      1                                                  4
              ATT Phones                                       ATT Phones
     0.8      Verizon Phones                                   Verizon Phones
                                                         3
              Unlocked Phones                                  Unlocked Phones
     0.6
                                                         2
     0.4

                                                         1
     0.2

      0                                                  0
       -2               -1             0           1      -2             -1             0         1



      1                                                  6
              ATT Phones                                       ATT Phones
     0.8      Verizon Phones
                                                         5     Verizon Phones
              Unlocked Phones                                  Unlocked Phones
                                                         4
     0.6
                                                         3
     0.4
                                                         2
     0.2                                                 1

      0                                                  0
                        -1             0           1      -1                      0               1




Notes: Each plot shows nonparametric estimates for AT&T, Verizon, and unlocked phones in the
pre period. Panels on the left show distribution functions and on the right, densities, for the
noncommon component of buyer valuations FU (top row) and reserve prices FW (middle row), and
for the unobserved heterogeneity FX (bottom row). Units on the horizontal axes are log points,
after homogenization (i.e. subtracting off observable auction-level heterogeneity). Estimates in this
figure use a fourth degree polynomial for X rather than a third-degree polynomial as in Figure 1.
                                IDENTIFICATION IN ASCENDING AUCTIONS                                  45



           Figure 8. Post Unlocking Ban: Distribution Functions and Densities
           for AT&T, Verizon, and Unlocked Phones, with Fourth Degree Hermite
           Polynomial for Distribution of X

     1                                                  4
             ATT Phones                                        ATT Phones
    0.8      Verizon Phones                                    Verizon Phones
                                                        3
             Unlocked Phones                                   Unlocked Phones
    0.6
                                                        2
    0.4

                                                        1
    0.2

     0                                                  0
      -2     -1.5      -1      -0.5   0   0.5   1        -2    -1.5      -1      -0.5   0   0.5   1



     1                                                  4
             ATT Phones                                        ATT Phones
    0.8      Verizon Phones                                    Verizon Phones
                                                        3
             Unlocked Phones                                   Unlocked Phones
    0.6
                                                        2
    0.4

                                                        1
    0.2

     0                                                  0
      -2               -1             0         1        -2              -1             0         1



     1                                                  6
             ATT Phones                                        ATT Phones
    0.8      Verizon Phones
                                                        5      Verizon Phones
             Unlocked Phones                                   Unlocked Phones
                                                        4
    0.6
                                                        3
    0.4
                                                        2
    0.2                                                 1

     0                                                  0
                       -1             0         1        -1                       0               1




Notes: Each plot shows nonparametric estimates for AT&T, Verizon, and unlocked phones in the
post period. Panels on the left show distribution functions and on the right, densities, for the
noncommon component of buyer valuations FU (top row) and reserve prices FW (middle row), and
for the unobserved heterogeneity FX (bottom row). Units on the horizontal axes are log points,
after homogenization (i.e. subtracting off observable auction-level heterogeneity). Estimates in this
figure use a fourth degree polynomial for X rather than a third-degree polynomial as in Figure 2.
