                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE ECONOMICS OF VALUE INVESTING

                                           Kewei Hou
                                           Haitao Mo
                                           Chen Xue
                                           Lu Zhang

                                      Working Paper 23563
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23563


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2017




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Kewei Hou, Haitao Mo, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Economics of Value Investing
Kewei Hou, Haitao Mo, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 23563
June 2017
JEL No. G12,G14,G31

                                         ABSTRACT

The investment CAPM provides an economic foundation for Graham and Dodd’s (1934) Security
Analysis. Expected returns vary cross-sectionally, depending on firms’ investment, profitability,
and expected investment growth. Empirically, many anomaly variables predict future changes in
investment-to-assets, in the same direction in which these variables predict future returns.
However, the expected investment growth effect in sorts is weak. The investment CAPM has
different theoretical properties from Miller and Modigliani’s (1961) valuation model and
Penman, Reggiani, Richardson, and Tuna’s (2017) characteristic model. In all, value investing is
consistent with efficient markets.

Kewei Hou                                       Chen Xue
Fisher College of Business                      Lindner College of Business
Ohio State University                           University of Cincinnati
820 Fisher Hall                                 405 Lindner Hall
2100 Neil Avenue                                Cincinnati, OH 45221
Columbus, OH 43210                              xuecx@ucmail.uc.edu
hou.28@osu.edu
                                                Lu Zhang
Haitao Mo                                       Fisher College of Business
Louisiana State University                      The Ohio State University
2931 Business Education Complex                 2100 Neil Avenue
Baton Rouge, LA 70803                           Columbus, OH 43210
haitaomo@lsu.edu                                and NBER
                                                zhanglu@fisher.osu.edu
1    Introduction

In their masterpiece, Graham and Dodd (1934) lay the intellectual foundation for value investing.

The basic philosophy is to invest in undervalued securities that are selling well below the intrinsic

value. The intrinsic value of a security is in turn the value that can be justified by the issuing firm’s

earnings, dividends, assets, and other financial statement information. The underlying premise is

that the intrinsic value justified by fundamentals is distinct from the market value “established by

artificial manipulation or distorted by psychological excesses (p. 17).”

    The academic literature on security analysis, pioneered by Ou and Penman (1989), has largely

subscribed to the Graham and Dodd (1934) perspective. “Firms’ (‘fundamental’) values are in-

dicated by information in financial statements. Stock prices deviate at times from these values

and only slowly gravitate towards the fundamental values. Thus, analysis of published financial

statements can discover values that are not reflected in stock prices. Rather than taking prices as

value benchmarks, ‘intrinsic values’ discovered from financial statements serve as benchmarks with

which prices are compared to identify overpriced and underpriced stocks. Because deviant prices ul-

timately gravitate to the fundamentals, investment strategies which produce ‘abnormal returns’ can

be discovered by the comparison of prices to these fundamental values (Ou and Penman, p. 296).”

    Our key insight is that an equilibrium framework, which we call the investment CAPM, provides

an economic foundation for Graham and Dodd’s (1934) Security Analysis, without mispricing. Un-

der the investment CAPM, expected returns varying cross-sectionally, depending on firms’ invest-

ment, expected profitability, and expected investment growth. This theoretical prediction validates

the widespread practice of security analysis, without contradicting the efficient markets hypothesis.

Empirically, many anomaly variables predict future changes in investment-to-assets, in the same di-

rection in which these variables predict future returns. However, cross-sectional forecasts of future

investment changes are noisy, and the expected investment growth effect in portfolio sorts is weak.

    The investment CAPM has more appealing theoretical properties than the two models that


                                                   1
currently dominate the fundamental analysis literature, the residual income model (Miller and

Modigliani 1961, Ohlson 1995) and an accounting-based characteristic model (Penman, Reggiani,

Richardson, and Tuna 2017). The investment CAPM characterizes the one-period-ahead expected

return, which is conceptually different from the long-term average expected return, or the internal

rate of return, characterized in the residual income model. We also provide new evidence on how

the internal rate of return estimates differ from the one-period-ahead average returns.

   We also clarify the subtle relations among investment-to-assets, book-to-market, expected in-

vestment, and the expected return. While profitability, book-to-market, and expected investment

appear to be three separate factors in the residual income model, investment-to-assets and book-

to-market are largely substitutable in the investment CAPM. Intuitively, the marginal cost of

investment (an increasing function of investment) equals marginal q, which in turn equals average

q under constant returns to scale. In addition, reformulating the residual income model in terms of

the one-period-ahead expected return, we show that the relation between the expected return and

the expected investment (growth) tends to be positive, consistent with the investment CAPM.

   Both the Penman-Reggiani-Richardson-Tuna (2017) model and the investment CAPM focus on

the one-period-ahead expected stock return. Reassuringly, both argue that the expected earnings

and expected growth are important drivers of the expected return. However, while Penman et al.

use powerful accounting intuition to relate the expected change in the market equity’s deviation

from the book equity to the expected earnings growth, the investment-q relation allows us to substi-

tute, mathematically, the expected capital gain with the expected investment growth. Also, while

the market equity remains in the Penman et al. model, the investment-q relation allows the substi-

tution of the market equity with investment-to-assets, making the investment CAPM perhaps even

more “fundamental.” Finally, while the Penman et al. focus on the expected earnings yield and

book-to-market, which serves as a proxy for the expected earnings growth, as the key drivers of the

expected return, the investment CAPM uses investment, profitability, and the expected investment

growth. Factor spanning tests show that the investment and profitability factors subsume factors

                                                 2
formed on the earnings yield and book-to-market, but the earnings yield and book-to-market factors

cannot subsume the investment and profitability factors.

   Our major contribution is to provide an economic framework and an efficient markets perspec-

tive of value investing, departing from the conventional mispricing perspective per Graham and

Dodd (1934). It is well established that time-varying expected returns provide an economic foun-

dation for stock market predictability (Marsh and Merton 1986), without mispricing advocated

by Shiller (1981). Analogously, the investment CAPM implies cross-sectionally varying expected

returns, which provide an economic foundation for cross-sectional predictability, without mispricing

advocated by Barberis and Thaler (2003). We also show that the investment CAPM has several

more appealing theoretical properties than the residual income model and the Penman-Reggiani-

Richardson-Tuna (2017) model that organize the existing fundamental analysis literature.

   The origin of the investment CAPM can be traced to Böhm-Bawert (1891). Böhm-Bawert

argues that output rises with the length of the period of production, and is counterbalanced by a

positive interest rate. The higher the interest rate, the shorter the optimal production period will

be, and the less capital (lower investment) will be tied up in the process. Fisher (1930) constructs

the first general equilibrium model with intertemporal consumption and production, in which the

equilibrium interest rate is determined from two equivalent ways via the intertemporal rate of sub-

stitution and the intertemporal rate of transformation. Hirshleifer (1958, 1965, 1970) extends the

Fisherian equilibrium into uncertainty with the state-preference approach.

   The investment CAPM is in the spirit of Modigliani and Miller (1958), who ask the cost of capital

question of firms with uncertainty. Their Proposition II gives the weighted average cost of capital in

terms of the cost of equity, the cost of debt, and leverage, a formulation preserved in the investment

CAPM. In their relatively overlooked Proposition III, Modigliani and Miller prescribe that a firm

should take an investment project if and only if its real rate of return is as large as or larger than

the weighted average cost of capital. This prescription is the essence of the net present value rule in



                                                  3
modern capital budgeting. However, when determining the cost of capital, Fama and Miller (1972)

and Fama (1976) turn to the investor-centric CAPM. We take the diametrical but complementary

perspective by treating the weighted average cost of capital equation as an asset pricing theory.

    Cochrane (1991) is the first in the modern era to study asset prices from the investment

perspective: “The logic of the production-based model is exactly analogous [to that of the

consumption-based model].      It ties asset returns to marginal rates of transformation, which

are inferred from data on investment (and potentially, output and other production variables)

through a production function. It is derived from the producer’s first order conditions for optimal

intertemporal investment demand. Its testable content is a restriction on the joint stochastic process

of investment (and/or other production variables) and asset returns (p. 210, original emphasis).”

    Liu, Whited, and Zhang (2009) and Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015) show the empirical power of

the investment CAPM in the cross section of expected stock returns. Zhang (2017) clarifies that

like any other prices, asset prices are equilibrated by both demand and supply (of risky assets), and

that while the consumption CAPM is based on demand, the investment CAPM on supply. Our

work differs by applying the investment CAPM to the vast fundamental analysis literature.

    Section 2 briefly reviews the fundamental analysis literature to motivate our work. Section 3

presents the investment CAPM, discusses its implications, and tests some of its new predictions.

Section 4 compares the investment CAPM with the residual income model, and Section 5 with

Penman, Reggiani, Richardson, and Tuna’s (2017) characteristic model. Section 6 concludes.


2    Security Analysis: Background

Graham and Dodd (1934) define security analysis as “concerned with the intrinsic value of the

security and more particularly with the discovery of discrepancies between the intrinsic value and

the market price (p. 17).” The intrinsic value is “that value which is justified by the facts, e.g.,

the assets, earnings, dividends, definite prospects, as distinct, let us say, from market quotations



                                                  4
established by artificial manipulation or distorted by psychological excesses (p. 17).” The intrinsic

value does not have to be exact, however. “It needs only to establish either that the value is ade-

quate—e.g., to protect a bond or to justify a stock purchase—or else that the value is considerably

higher or considerably lower than the market price (p. 18, original emphasis).”

   Graham and Dodd (1934) clearly differentiate the intrinsic value from the market value: “[T]he

influence of what we call analytical factors over the market price is both partial and indirect—

partial, because it frequently competes with purely speculative factors which influence the price in

the opposite direction; and indirect, because it acts through the intermediary of people’s sentiments

and decisions. In other words, the market is not a weighting machine, on which the value of each

issue is recorded by an exact and impersonal mechanism, in accordance with its specific qualities.

Rather should we say that the market is a voting machine, whereon countless individuals register

choices which are the product partly of reason and partly of emotion (p. 23, original emphasis).”

   How should an intelligent investor proceed? Graham and Dodd (1934) prescribe: “Perhaps he

would be well advised to devote his attention to the field of undervalued securities—issues, whether

bonds or stocks, which are selling well below the levels apparently justified by a careful analysis of

the relevant facts (p. 13).” However, Graham and Dodd also warn that price can be slow in ad-

justing to value: “Undervaluations caused by neglect or prejudice may persist for an inconveniently

long time, and the same applies to inflated prices caused by overenthusiasm or artificial stimulants.

The particular danger to the analyst is that, because of such delay, new determining factors may

supervene before the market price adjusts itself to the value as he found it. In other words, by the

time the price finally does reflect the value, this value may have changed considerably and the facts

and reasoning on which his decision was based may no longer be applicable (p. 22).”

   In an article titled “The superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville,” Warren Buffett (1984)

honors the 50th anniversary of Graham and Dodd (1934). Buffett reports the highly successful

investment performance of nine famous investors who follow Graham and Dodd, and “search for



                                                  5
discrepancies between the value of a business and the price of small pieces of that business in

the market (p. 7, original emphasis).” After concluding their success is beyond chance, Buffett

denounces academic finance: “Our Graham & Dodd investors, needless to say, do not discuss beta,

the capital asset pricing model or covariance in returns among securities. These are not subjects

of any interest to them. In fact, most of them would have difficulty defining those terms (p. 7).”

“There seems to be some perverse human characteristic that likes to make easy things difficult.

The academic world, if anything, has actually backed away from the teaching of value investing

over the last 30 years. It’s likely to continue that way. Ships will sail around the world but the Flat

Earth Society will flourish. There will continue to be wide discrepancies between price and value

in the market place, and those who read their Graham & Dodd will continue to prosper (p. 15).”

   Contrary to Buffett (1984), business schools have long taught value investing, often called secu-

rity analysis or financial statement analysis, in their standard curricula. In a prominent textbook,

Penman (2013) adopts Graham and Dodd’s (1934) basic premise: “Passive investors accept market

prices as fair value. Fundamental investors, in contrast, are active investors. They see that price

is what you pay, value is what you get. They understand that the primary risk in investing is

the risk of paying too much (or selling for too little). The fundamentalist actively challenges the

market price: Is it indeed a fair price? This might be done as a defensive investor concerned with

overpaying or as an investor seeking to exploit mispricing (p. 210, original emphasis).”

   In a pathbreaking article, Ou and Penman (1989) launch the academic literature on security

analysis. A large set of financial statement items is combined into one summary measure that

indicates the direction of one-year-ahead earnings changes. A long-short strategy formed on this

summary measure of future earnings earns an average two-year-holding-period return of 12.5%.

Lev and Thiagarajan (1993) use a priori conceptual arguments to select 12 fundamental signals,

and show that these signals have strong correlations with contemporaneous stock returns and fu-

ture earnings. Abarbanell and Bushee (1997) show that signals such as inventory changes, account

receivables changes, gross margin, changes in selling and administrative expenses, and tax expenses-

                                                  6
to-earnings predict one-year-ahead earnings changes and analysts’ forecast errors. Abarbanell and

Bushee (1998) show further that a trading strategy formed on these fundamental signals earns an

average size-adjusted abnormal return of 13.2% per annum.

    Frankel and Lee (1998) estimate a firm’s intrinsic value from analysts’ consensus forecasts with

Ohlson’s (1995) residual income model, and show that the intrinsic-to-market value predicts future

returns, especially in longer horizons up to three years. Piotroski (2000) applies security analysis

to value stocks. Piotroski finds that the average returns for value investors can be raised by over

7.5% per annum by selecting financially strong value stocks based on fundamental signals, such as

profitability, leverage, the current ratio, equity issuance, gross margin, and asset turnover.

    Penman and Zhang (2002) show that conservative accounting for items such as inventories,

R&D expenses, and advertising creates temporary changes in earnings, which in turn predict fu-

ture abnormal returns. Applying security analysis to growth stocks, Mohanram (2005) forms a

composite score based on return on assets, cash flow, earnings variability, sales growth variability,

R&D, capital expenditure, and advertising. A long-short strategy formed on this composite score

earns significant abnormal returns. Finally, Soliman (2008) applies the DuPont analysis to decom-

pose return on net operating assets into profit margin and asset turnover, and shows that changes

in asset turnover predict future return on net operating assets and future abnormal returns.


3     The Investment CAPM: Implications for Security Analysis

Section 3.1 sets up an equilibrium framework that encompasses the investment CAPM. Section 3.2

discusses its implications. Finally, Section 3.3 tests the expected investment growth effect.

3.1   An Equilibrium Framework

Consider a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model with three defining features of neoclassi-

cal economics: Agents have rational expectations; consumers maximize utility, and firms maximize

market value of equity; and markets clear. Time is discrete and the horizon infinite. The economy


                                                  7
is populated by a representative consumer and heterogeneous firms, indexed by i = 1, 2, . . . , N .

                                                                                P∞        t U (C
   The representative consumer maximizes its expected life-time utility,          t=0 ρ            t ),   in which

ρ is the time discount coefficient, and Ct is consumption in period t. Let Pit be the ex-dividend

equity, and Dit the dividend of firm i at period t. The first principle of consumption says that:


                                                     S
                                           Et [Mt+1 rit+1 ] = 1,                                               (1)


          S
in which rit+1 ≡ (Pit+1 + Dit+1 )/Pit is firm i’s stock return, and Mt+1 ≡ ρU ′ (Ct+1 )/U ′ (Ct ) is the

consumer’s stochastic discount factor. Equation (1) can be rewritten as:


                                            S
                                       Et [rit+1 ] − rf t = β M
                                                              it λM t ,                                        (2)


in which rf t ≡ 1/Et [Mt+1 ] is the real interest rate, β M          S
                                                          it ≡ −Cov(rit+1 , Mt+1 )/Var(Mt+1 ) is the

consumption beta, and λM t ≡ Var(Mt+1 )/Et [Mt+1 ] is the price of the consumption risk. Equation

(1) is the consumption CAPM due to Rubinstein (1976), Lucas (1978), and Breeden (1979). The

classic Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965) CAPM is a special case of the consumption CAPM under

quadratic utility or exponential utility with normally distributed returns (Cochrane 2005).

   Firms produce a single commodity to be consumed or invested. Firms use capital and cost-

lessly adjustable inputs to produce a homogeneous output. These inputs are chosen each pe-

riod to maximize operating profits, which are defined as revenue minus the costs of these inputs.

Taking operating profits as given, firms choose investment to maximize the market equity. Let

Πit ≡ Π(Xit , Ait ) = Xit Ait denote the time-t operating profits of firm i, in which Ait is productive

assets, and Xit profitability. The next period profitability, Xit+1 , is stochastic, and is subject to a

vector of exogenous aggregate and firm-specific shocks. In addition, let Iit denote investment and δ

the depreciation rate of productive assets, then Ait+1 = Iit +(1−δ)Ait . Investment entails quadratic

adjustment costs, Φ(Iit , Ait ) = (a/2)(Iit /Ait )2 Ait , in which a > 0 is a constant parameter.

   Firms can finance investment with one-period debt. At the beginning of time t, firm i can


                                                      8
issue an amount of debt, Bit+1 , which must be repaid at the beginning of period t+1. The gross
                                B , can vary across firms and over time. Taxable corporate profits
corporate bond return on Bit , rit

equal operating profits less capital depreciation, adjustment costs, and interest expenses, Xit Ait −
                         B − 1)B , in which adjustment costs are expensed. Let τ be the corporate tax
δAit − Φ(Iit , Ait ) − (rit     it

rate. We ignore time-varying, and possibly stochastic, tax rates. The free cash flow of firm i equals


                                                                  B                     B
         Dit ≡ (1 − τ )[Xit Ait − Φ(Iit , Ait )] − Iit + Bit+1 − rit Bit + τ δAit + τ (rit − 1)Bit ,   (3)


                                                        B − 1)B is the interest tax shield. If D is
in which τ δAit is the depreciation tax shield, and τ (rit     it                               it

positive, the firm distributes it to the household. Otherwise, a negative Dit means external equity.

   Let Mt+1 be the stochastic discount factor, which is correlated with the aggregate component

of Xit+1 . The cum-dividend market equity can be formulated as

                                                                             ∞
                                                                         "                  #
                                                                             X
                        Vit   ≡                   max               Et             Mt+s Dit+s ,        (4)
                                  {Iit+s ,Ait+s+1 ,Bit+s+1 }∞
                                                            s=0              s=0


subject to a transversality condition that prevents the firm from borrowing an infinite amount to

distribute to shareholders, limT →∞ Et [Mt+T Bit+T +1 ] = 0.

3.1.1   The Investment CAPM

                                                    I
The first principle of investment implies Et [Mt+1 rit+1                  I
                                                         ] = 1, in which rit+1 is the investment return:
                                                       2              h                   i
                                                 Iit+1
                      (1 − τ ) Xit+1 +   a
                                         2       Ait+1    + τ δ + (1 − δ) 1 + (1 − τ )a AIit+1
                                                                                          it+1
             I
            rit+1 ≡                                                                             .    (5)
                                                     1 + (1 − τ )a AIitit

Intuitively, the investment return is the marginal benefit of investment at time t + 1 divided by the
                                                                 I
marginal cost of investment at t. The first principle, Et [Mt+1 rit+1 ] = 1, says that the marginal cost

equals the next period marginal benefit discounted to time t with the stochastic discount factor.

   The investment return is the ratio of the marginal benefit of investment at time t + 1 to the

marginal cost of investment at t. In its numerator, (1 − τ )Xit+1 is the marginal after-tax prof-



                                                                9
its produced by an additional unit of capital, (1 − τ )(a/2)(Iit+1 /Ait+1 )2 is the marginal after-tax

reduction in adjustment costs, τ δ is the marginal depreciation tax shield, and the last term in

the numerator is the marginal continuation value of the extra unit of capital net of depreciation.

Finally, the first term in brackets plus τ δ in the numerator divided by the denominator is analogous

to the dividend yield. The second term in brackets in the numerator divided by the denominator

is analogous to the capital gain because this ratio is the growth rate of marginal q.

                                               Ba ≡ r B
   Let the after-tax corporate bond return be rit+1           B                           Ba
                                                     it+1 − (rit+1 − 1)τ , then Et [Mt+1 rit+1 ] = 1.

                                                                S
As noted, Pit ≡ Vit − Dit is the ex-dividend equity value, and rit+1 ≡ (Pit+1 + Dit+1 )/Pit is the

stock return. Let wit ≡ Bit+1 /(Pit + Bit+1 ) be the market leverage, then the investment return is

the weighted average of the stock return and the after-tax corporate bond return (Appendix A):


                                         I           Ba                 S
                                        rit+1 = wit rit+1 + (1 − wit ) rit+1 ,                          (6)


which is exactly the weighted average cost of capital in Modigliani and Miller’s (1958) Proposition II.

   Together, equations (5) and (6) imply that the weighted average cost of capital equals the ratio

of the next period marginal benefit of investment divided by the current period marginal cost of

investment. As such, the first principle of investment provides an economic foundation for the

weighted average cost of capital approach to capital budgeting first introduced by Modigliani and

Miller (1958, Proposition III). Intuitively, firms will keep investing until the marginal cost of in-

vestment, which rises with investment, equals the present value of additional investment, which is

the next period marginal benefit of investment discounted by the weighted average cost of capital.
                                        S , from equation (6) yields the investment CAPM:
Finally, solving for the stock return, rit+1
                                            2            h                    i
                                      Iit+1
           (1 − τ ) Xit+1 +   a
                              2       Ait+1   + τ δ + (1 − δ) 1 + (1 − τ )a AIit+1
  S
                                                                              it+1        wit     Ba
 rit+1 =                                    h              i                        −          rit+1 . (7)
                                                            Iit
                                  (1 − wit ) 1 + (1 − τ )a Ait                          1 − w it


As an asset pricing model, equation (7) expresses the stock return in terms of characteristics.

   We focus on the cost of capital question in this paper, but note that the investment framework

                                                         10
also gives rise to two valuation equations (Appendix A). The first equation is:

                                                                      
                                                                  Iit
                                    Pit = 1 + (1 − τ )a                      Ait+1 − Bit+1 ,                      (8)
                                                                  Ait

which amounts to the equivalence between the marginal q and the average q under constant returns

to scale (Hayashi 1982). Intuitively, managers optimally adjust the supply of risky assets to changes

in their market value. In equilibrium, the market value of assets is equal to, can be inferred from,

the costs of supplying risky assets (Belo, Xue, and Zhang 2013).

   Another valuation equation resembles more the traditional valuation practice (Penman 2013):
                                         2                              h                    i
                                   Iit+1
        (1 − τ ) Xit+1 +   a
                           2       Ait+1          Ait+1 + τ δAit+1 + (1 − δ) 1 + (1 − τ )a AIit+1
                                                                                             it+1
                                                                                                     Ait+1
Pit =                                                  Ba + (1 − w ) r S
                                                                                                             − Bit+1 .
                                                  wit rit+1       it it+1
                                                                                                                  (9)

Intuitively, the market value is the discounted value of the total benefit of assets next period dis-

counted by the weighted average cost of capital. Unlike traditional valuation theories, only variables

dated t + 1 appear in the numerator. The reason is that forward-looking in nature, investment-

to-assets, Iit+1 /Ait+1 , summarizes all the necessary information contained in future cash flows

occurring in all subsequent periods. In fact, this forward-looking property of investment gives rise

to the first valuation equation (8), with right-hand side variables all known at time t.

3.2     Implications for Security Analaysis

The investment CAPM predicts cross-sectionally varying expected returns. Equation (7) says
                                                                        S ], varies with the cur-
that without leverage, the one-period-ahead expected stock return, Et [rit+1

rent investment-to-assets, Iit /Ait , the expected profitability, Et [Xit+1 ], and (approximately) the

expected investment-to-assets growth, Et [Iit+1 /Ait+1 ]/(Iit /Ait ). Strictly speaking, the third deter-

minant is the growth rate of marginal q, which equals the growth rate of the marginal cost of invest-

ment. However, since the marginal q involves the unobservable adjustment cost parameter, a, we

use the investment-to-assets growth as a convenient, albeit rough, proxy. Finally, with the market



                                                               11
                                                                                Ba ], also play a role.
leverage, wit , both wit and the expected after-tax corporate bond return, Et [rit+1

3.2.1   Investment and Profitability

Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015) work with a simplified two-period model without leverage, capital

depreciation, or corporate taxes. In the simple model, equation (7) collapses to:


                                            S           Et [Xit+1 ]
                                       Et [rit+1 ]=                     .                             (10)
                                                      1 + a (Iit /Ait )

All else equal, high investment stocks should earn lower expected returns than low investment

stocks, and stocks with high expected profitability should earn higher expected returns than stocks

with low expected profitability. Intuitively, investment predicts stock returns because given ex-

pected profitability, high costs of capital imply low net present values of new projects and low

investment. In addition, profitability predicts stock returns because high expected profitability rel-

ative to low investment implies high discount rates, which are necessary to offset the high expected

profitability to induce low net present values of new projects and low investment. Empirically,

Hou et al. use current profitability (quarterly return on equity, Roe) as the proxy for expected

profitability to form their Roe factor in their q-factor model.

3.2.2   The Expected Investment-to-assets Growth

More generally, equation (7) says that in addition to investment-to-assets and expected prof-

itability, the expected stock return is also linked to the expected investment-to-assets growth.

As noted, we can decompose the expected investment return from equation (5) into two compo-

nents, the expected “dividend yield” and the expected “capital gain.” The former is given by

(Et [Xit+1 ] + (a/2)Et [(Iit+1 /Ait+1 )2 ] + τ δ)/(1 + a(1 − τ )(Iit /Ait )), which largely conforms to the

two-period model in equation (10), as the squared term, (Iit+1 /Ait+1 )2 , and τ δ are economically

small. The expected “capital gain,” (1−δ)[1+a(1−τ )Et [Iit+1 /Ait+1 ]]/(1+a(1−τ )(Iit /Ait )), which

only appears in the multiperiod model, is roughly proportional to the expected investment-to-assets

growth, Et [Iit+1 /Ait+1 ]/(Iit /Ait ). As such, conceptually, the expected investment-to-assets growth


                                                      12
is the third determinant of expected returns in the multiperiod setting (Cochrane 1991).

3.2.3   Market Leverage

With debt financing, equation (7) implies that the expected stock return is also linked to the market

leverage, wit , although the relation is in general ambiguous. A higher wit implies a higher levered

investment return, which is the first term in the right-hand side of equation (7). However, a higher

wit also implies a higher wit /(1 − wit ), which multiplies with the after-tax corporate bond return,
 Ba . Because r Ba is small in magnitude relative to the investment return, and w /(1 − w )
rit+1          it+1                                                              it      it

is likely less than one in the data, we expect the first term to dominate the second term in the

right-hand side of equation (7). As such, the overall relation between the market leverage and the

expected stock return is more likely to be positive, as in Modigliani and Miller (1958).

3.2.4   Security Analysis in Corporate Bonds

Security analysis can also be applied to corporate bonds. In particular, Graham and Dodd (1934)

devote Parts II and III of their book, accounting for in total 235 pages, to the security analysis of

fixed income securities and senior securities with speculative features. For comparison, their Parts

IV, V, and VI that are devoted to common stocks have 243 pages.

   The investment CAPM also provides an economic foundation for security analysis of corporate

bonds. Equation (6) implies that the after-tax corporate bond return is given by:
                                            2                 h                           i
                              a       Iit+1                                            Iit+1
           (1 − τ ) Xit+1 +   2       Ait+1        + τ δ + (1 − δ) 1 + (1 − τ )a       Ait+1
  Ba                                                                                                    1 − wit S
 rit+1 =                                                                                            −          r   . (11)
                                                                                                          wit it+1
                                            h                 i
                                      wit       1 + (1 − τ )a AIitit

As such, the comparative statics for the expected stock return by varying investment-to-assets, prof-
                                                                           Ba ] in the same direction.
itability, and the expected investment-to-assets growth also apply to Et [rit+1

However, these relations subsist only after holding the expected stock return constant.

   The relation between the market leverage and the expected after-tax corporate bond return is

ambiguous. A higher leverage, wit , implies a lower first term in the right-hand side of equation


                                                             13
(11). However, a higher wit also implies a lower (1 − wit )/wit , which multiplies with the expected

stock return with a larger magnitude than the expected bond return. Future empirical work on

corporate bonds can help sort out these ambiguous theoretical predictions.

3.2.5   Complementarity with the Consumption CAPM

The consumption CAPM and the investment CAPM are the two sides of the same coin in

equilibrium, and both deliver identical expected returns. Combining the beta-pricing form of

the consumption CAPM in equation (2) and the investment CAPM shows that the expected stock

return can be obtained from the consumption beta, β M
                                                    it , as well as from the expectation of the

right-hand side of equation (7). Intuitively, the consumption CAPM, which is derived from the

first principle of consumption, connects expected returns to consumption betas. The consumption

CAPM predicts that consumption betas are sufficient statistics for expected returns.           Once

consumption betas are controlled for, characteristics should not affect the cross section of expected

returns. In contrast, derived from the first principle of investment, the investment CAPM connects

expected returns to characteristics. Characteristics are sufficient statistics of expected returns.

Once characteristics are controlled for, consumption betas should not affect expected returns.

   The relation between the investment CAPM and the consumption CAPM is complementary

(Zhang 2017). In equilibrium, the first principle of consumption and the first principle of invest-

ment are two key optimality conditions. Consumption betas, characteristics, and expected returns

are all endogenous variables that are determined simultaneously in equilibrium. No causality runs

across these endogenous variables. Neither consumption betas nor characteristics “cause” expected

returns to move. Like any other prices in economic theory and in reality, asset prices are determined

jointly by supply and demand of risky assets in equilibrium. While the consumption CAPM focuses

on demand, the investment CAPM on supply. As such, the investment CAPM is as fundamental

as the consumption CAPM in “explaining” expected returns.

   Although equivalent in theory, the investment CAPM might be better equipped empirically to


                                                 14
explain cross-sectional predictability than the consumption CAPM. Zhang (2017) invokes the ag-

gregation problem. Most consumption CAPM studies assume a representative investor, and ignore

aggregation by examining aggregate consumption data. Alas, the Sonnenschein-Mantel-Debreu the-

orem in general equilibrium theory says that the aggregate excess demand function is not restricted

by the rationality of individual demands (Sonnenschein 1973, Debreu 1974, Mantel 1974). In par-

ticular, individual optimality does not imply aggregate rationality, and aggregate optimality does

not imply individual rationality (Kirman 1992). In contrast, derived from the first principle of in-

vestment for individual firms, the investment CAPM is largely immune to the aggregation problem.

3.3     Testing the Expected Investment Growth Effect

In this subsection we test the expected investment growth effect on the expected stock return.

Section 3.3.1 presents descriptive statistics of key variables. Section 3.3.2 documents predictive

regressions of future changes in investment-to-assets. Finally, Section 3.3.3 tests the expected

investment growth effect on the expected stock return in portfolio sorts.

3.3.1    Descriptive Statistics

Monthly returns are from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) and accounting infor-

mation from the Compustat Annual and Quarterly Fundamental Files. The sample is from January

1967 to December 2015. Financial firms and firms with negative book equity are excluded.

   We examine key anomaly variables, including classic ones such as standard unexpected earn-

ings (Sue), prior six-month returns (R6 ), idiosyncratic volatility (Ivff), return on equity (Roe), log

book-to-market (log(Bm)), investment-to-assets (I/A), log market equity (log(Me)), and earnings-

to-price (Ep). We also include prominent anomalies that the q-factor model cannot explain (Hou,

Xue, and Zhang 2017). These q-anomalies are operating accruals (Oa), R&D-to-market (Rdm),

cash-based operating profitability (Cop), abnormal returns around earnings announcements (Abr),

industry lead-lag effect in prior returns (Ilr), net payout yield (Nop), discretionary accruals (Dac),

and net stock issues (Nsi). Appendix B provides detailed variable definitions.

                                                  15
   Table 1 reports time series averages of cross-sectional statistics, including mean, standard de-

viation, percentiles, and pairwise correlations. We winsorize the cross section of each variable in

each month at the 1st and 99th percentiles. The descriptive statistics are calculated for both the

full sample and the all-but-micro sample. In the latter, we exclude microcaps that are smaller than

the 20th percentile of market equity for New York Stock Exchange stocks.

   Comparing Panels A and C of Table 1 shows that, in general, excluding microcaps increases the

averages but decreases the standard deviations of anomaly variables. For instance, prior six-month

returns are on average 6.8% with a standard deviation of 32.5% in the full sample, relative to an

average of 10.6% and a standard deviation of 27.4% in the all-but-micro sample. The quarterly Roe

is on average 0.56% with a standard deviation of 9% in the full sample, but on average 2.76% with a

standard deviation of 6.1% without microcaps. There are exceptions. Sue is on average 22.1% with

a standard deviation of 1.76. Excluding microcaps raises the average to 44.7% but also the standard

deviation slightly to 1.85. Idiosyncratic volatility is on average 2.9% with a standard deviation of 2%

in the full sample. Excluding microcaps decreases the mean to 2% as well as the standard deviation

to 1.1%. Finally, microcaps do not materially affect pairwise correlations (Panels B and D).

3.3.2   Forecasting Future Changes in Quarterly Investment-to-assets

We turn our attention to predictive regressions of future investment-to-assets growth. A challenge is

that investment-to-assets, measured as changes in assets scaled by lagged assets, can be frequently

negative, making the investment growth rate ill-defined. As such, we forecast future changes in

quarterly investment-to-assets, △I/Aqτ . For each month t, △I/Aqτ is the quarterly investment-to-

assets from τ quarters ahead minus that for the fiscal quarter ending at least four months ago.

   We perform monthly Fama-MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions of △I/Aqτ , for τ varying

from one to 12 quarters in the future. To guard against p-hacking via specification search per

Leamer and Leonard (1983), we conduct univariate regressions on each of the 16 anomaly variables

describe in Table 1. To alleviate the impact of microcaps, we estimate the cross-sectional regressions


                                                  16
in two ways. In the full sample with microcaps included, we use weighted least squares with the

market equity as weights. In addition, in the all-but-micro sample with microcaps excluded, we

use ordinary least squares. Finally, to ease economic interpretation, we scale the slope of a given

variable by multiplying the slope with the variable’s average standard deviation reported in Table 1.

   Panel A of Table 2 shows that Sue and R6 exhibit some predictive power for future changes of

quarterly investment-to-assets for horizons up to four quarters. In particular, for τ = 2, the slopes

are 0.17% (t = 2.84) and 0.91% (t = 6.35) for Sue and R6 , respectively. Despite the statistical

significance, the slopes seem economically small. The slopes imply that changes of one standard

deviation in Sue and R6 give rise to only 0.17% and 0.91% of △I/Aq2 , which has an average cross-

sectional standard deviation of 16.6% (untabulated). However, we caution that the small slopes do

not necessarily mean that the Sue and R6 effects on the expected return via the expected invest-

ment growth are necessarily small because equation (5) is nonlinear. The cross-sectional regression

results from the all-but-micro sample are largely similar (Panel A of Table 3).

   For the two key variables underlying the q-factor model, investment-to-assets shows no

forecasting power for future changes in investment-to-assets across all horizons, but Roe shows

some short-term forecasting power in the full sample (Table 2). In particular, for τ = 1, the Roe

slope is 0.26% (t = 2.07). This short-term power is relevant, as the Roe factor in the q-factor model

is rebalanced monthly. However, for longer horizons, the Roe slopes have mixed signs. Although the

slope is significantly positive at the 4-quarter, it is significantly negative at the 12-quarter horizon.

In addition, Table 3 shows that in the all-but-micro sample the short-term power of Roe vanishes,

with a slope close to zero. At longer horizons, the Roe slopes are even significantly negative.

Investment-to-assets continues to show no predictive power for future investment-to-assets changes.

   Several q-anomalies show reliable predictive power for future changes in investment-to-assets.

From Table 2, Rdm, Abr, Ilr, and Nsi have significant slopes in most horizons, in the same direc-

tion in which these variables forecast future returns. In particular, for τ = 4, the Rdm, Abr, Ilr,



                                                   17
and Nsi slopes are 0.65%, 0.31%, 0.21%, and −0.39% (t = 3.08, 4.99, 2.54, and −2.9), respectively.

Table 3 reports similar evidence in the all-but-micro sample, with slopes of 0.42%, 0.26%, 0.23%,

and −0.53% (t = 4.66, 8.01, 4.06, and −4.15), respectively. As such, the q-factor model’s failure in

explaining these anomalies might be due to Roe’s ineffectiveness as an expected growth proxy.

   Several other q-anomalies also indicate predictive power for future changes in investment-to-

assets, but the results are sensitive to different samples. Oa, Cop, Nop, and Dac do not show

predictive power in the full sample with weighted least squares, and their slopes are mostly

insignificant (Table 2). However, their slopes are mostly significant, with the same signs with which

these variables forecast returns, in the all-but-micro sample with ordinary least squares (Table 3).

In particular, for τ = 4, their slopes are −0.15%, 0.17%, 0.41%, and −0.14% (t = −3.17, 1.78, 6.29,

and −2.9), respectively. Finally, log(Bm) and log(Me) show some predictive power for future

investment-to-assets changes at the 8- and 12-quarters, but Ivff and Ep show little predictive power.

   Tables 2 and 3 also report cross-sectional regressions of future quarterly Roe and future cumula-

tive stock returns. Sue and R6 reliably forecast future Roe, as well as for future returns, especially

within four quarters in the future. Rdm reliably predicts future Roe with a negative slope. Intu-

itively, R&D expenses reduce current Roe, and through its persistence, future Roe as well. As such,

the Roe factor loading in the q-factor model goes in the wrong way in explaining the Rdm anomaly.

Oa, and to a less extent, Dac, are positively correlated with future Roe, as accruals are counted

as part of earnings. As such, their Roe factor loadings also go in the wrong way in explaining the

accruals anomaly. Ivff is negatively correlated with future Roe, but the predictive power of Ivff

for future returns is mixed. It is insignificant in the full sample but significant in the all-but-micro

sample. To summarize, most q-anomalies predict future changes in investment-to-assets, in the

same direction in which these variables predict future stock returns.




                                                  18
3.3.3   The Expected Investment Growth Effect in Portfolio Sorts

In view of the predictability of future investment growth documented in Tables 2 and 3, albeit small,

we evaluate to what extent this predictability can be exploited in the form of trading strategies. We

proceed in two steps. First, we form cross-sectional forecasts of future changes in investment-to-

assets each month. Second, we sort stocks into deciles based on the expected investment-to-assets

changes. The average return spreads across the deciles then provide a quantitative metric for the

economic impact of the expected investment growth on the expected stock return.

   To guard against p-hacking via specification search, we use all 16 anomaly variables jointly

to form cross-sectional forecasts. At the beginning of each month t, we perform multiple cross-

sectional regressions of future changes in quarterly investment-to-assets on the 16 variables. The

cross-sectional regressions are estimated in the full sample with weighted least squares with the

market equity as weights, as well as in the all-but-micro sample with ordinary least squares. Table

4 reports the detailed results from July 1976 to December 2015. The starting date is July 1976 due

to the data limitation of R&D. Because of potential multicollinearity, we refrain from interpreting

individual slopes. The important message from Table 4 is that even with all 16 variables included,

the amount of predictability measured by R2 is small in the full sample, ranging from only 13.2%

to 15.6%, across the horizons. The amount of predictability is even smaller in the all-but-micro

sample, with the R2 varying from 6.7% to 8.8%. As such, the cross-sectional forecasts are noisy.

   To form the expected investment growth deciles, at the beginning of each month t, we calculate

the expected changes in quarterly investment-to-assets, Et [△I/Aqτ ], with τ from 1 to 12 quarters.

We compute Et [△I/Aqτ ] with the latest predictor values known as of month t and the average cross-

sectional regression slopes estimated from month t − 120 − τ × 3 to month t − 1 − τ × 3. We require

a minimum of 36 months. In the full sample, the cross-sectional regressions are estimated with

weighted least squares with the market equity as weights. We sort all stocks into deciles based on

the NYSE breakpoints of the Et [△I/Aqτ ] values, and calculate value-weighted returns for month t.



                                                 19
The deciles are rebalanced at the beginning of month t + 1. In the all-but-micro sample, the cross-

sectional regressions are estimated with ordinary least squares. We split all stocks into deciles based

on the all-but-micro breakpoints of the Et [△I/Aqτ ] values, and calculate equal-weighted returns for

month t. The deciles are again rebalanced monthly. Microcaps are excluded in these deciles.

   Panel A of Table 5 shows weak evidence on the expected investment growth effect in the full

sample. The high-minus-low deciles on the expected investment-to-assets changes earn insignifi-

cant, albeit positive, average returns across all forecasting horizons. The largest average return

spread is 0.37% per month (t = 1.43) for τ = 4. In the all-but-micro sample, Panel A of Table 6

shows some mixed evidence that indicates an expected investment growth effect. For τ = 1, 3, 4,

and 8, the high-minus-low expected growth deciles earn significantly positive average returns. In

particular, the average return spread for τ = 1 is 0.96% (t = 3.52), and the estimate for τ = 4

is 0.95% (t = 3.92). However, the q-factor model reduces these average returns to insignificance,

although the alphas are still 0.63% and 0.51%, respectively. In addition, for τ = 2 and 12, the

average return spreads are only 0.35% and 0.25% (t = 1.27 and 0.93), respectively.

   The likely culprit for the weak expected investment growth effect in sorts is the noisy cross-

sectional forecasts of future changes in investment-to-assets. As such, we experiment with different

regression specifications to gauge robustness. Out of abundant sensitivity against p-hacking, we tie

our hands by using only anomaly variables that are significant in univariate regressions for each

forecasting horizon τ . We then combine these variables to form cross-sectional forecasts of future

investment-to-assets changes, and construct the expected investment growth deciles accordingly.

   Panel B of Table 5 shows that these alternative cross-sectional forecasts raise the average return

spreads across the expected investment growth deciles in the full sample, but the effect remains

weak. The spreads become significant, 0.7% per month (t = 2.93) for τ = 3, and 0.51% (t = 2.38)

for τ = 4, and their q-factor alphas are 0.23% (t = 0.76) and 0.27% (t = 1.2), respectively. In addi-

tion, the spreads are all insignificant for other τ values. The q-factor model produces economically



                                                  20
small and statistically insignificant alphas across all forecasting horizons. Panel B of Table 6 shows

further that the expected investment growth effect from the alternative cross-sectional forecasts in

the all-but-micro sample is even weaker than the effect from the original cross-sectional forecasts.

The average return spreads are significant for three τ values, as opposed to four in Panel A. Their

magnitudes are also generally smaller. Finally, the q-factor model again reduces all average return

spreads to insignificance, although some q-factor alphas remain large.

    To summarize, consistent with Chan, Karceski, and Lakonishok (2003) who work with earnings

growth, we show that cross-sectional forecasts of future investment growth are noisy. As a result, al-

though the expected investment growth is a potentially important determinant of the expected stock

return in the investment CAPM, detecting the expected growth effect is empirically challenging.


4    Comparison with the Residual Income Model

In this section, we compare the implications of the investment CAPM with the residual income

model. We start with the dividend discounting model:

                                                  ∞
                                                  X E[Dit+τ ]
                                          Pit =                       ,                          (12)
                                                  τ =1
                                                         (1 + ri )τ

in which Pit is the market equity, Dit is dividends, and ri is the long-term average expected stock

return or the internal rate of return (Williams 1938). The clean surplus relation implies that

dividends equal earnings minus the change in book equity, Dit+τ = Yit+τ − △Beit+τ , in which

△Beit+τ ≡ Beit+τ − Beit+τ −1 is the change in book equity. Miller and Modigliani (1961) and

Ohlson (1995) reformulate the dividend discounting model as the residual income model:

                                     P∞
                            Pit       τ =1 E[Yit+τ       − △Beit+τ ]/(1 + ri )τ
                                 =                                              .                (13)
                            Beit                          Beit

The residual income model is the dominant framework in capital markets research in accounting. In

particular, Richardson, Tuna, and Wysocki (2010) use the residual income model as the organizing

framework in their influential survey of the fundamental analysis literature.

                                                     21
   In asset pricing, Fama and French (2006, 2015) derive asset pricing implications from equation

(13). First, fixing everything except the market value and the expected stock return, a low market

value, or a high book-to-market equity implies a high expected return. Second, fixing everything

except the expected profitability and the expected stock return, high expected profitability implies

a high expected return. Third, fixing everything except the expected growth in book equity and

the expected return, high expected growth in book equity implies a low expected return.

   Fama and French (2006) construct proxies of the expected profitability and the expected in-

vestment (the growth rate in book equity or total assets) as the fitted components from first-stage

annual cross-sectional regressions of future profitability and future growth rate in book equity or

total assets on current variables. In second-stage cross-sectional regressions of future returns on

these proxies, Fama and French report some evidence on the expected profitability effect, but the

relation between the expected investment and expected returns is weakly positive.

   In this section, we show that the investment CAPM has more appealing theoretical properties

than the residual income model as an asset pricing framework. Section 4.1 shows although the

residual income model only characterizes the internal rate of return, its implementation often in-

volves the one-period-ahead realized return, which can deviate greatly from the internal rate of

return. In contrast, the investment CAPM explicitly characterizes the one-period-ahead expected

stock return. Section 4.2 clarifies the subtle relations between past investment, future investment,

and the expected return in the context of the two models.

4.1   Interpreting the Implied Cost of Capital

The residual income model in equation (13) connects book-to-market, investment, and profitability

to the internal rate of return. Initiated by Claus and Thomas (2001) and Gebhardt, Lee, and

Swaminathan (2001), a large accounting literature estimates the internal rate of return (IRR) from

equation (13), and compares its empirical properties with the one-period-ahead average stock re-

turn. The IRR is often referred to as the implied cost of capital (ICC) in the accounting literature.


                                                 22
In asset pricing, Fama and French (2015) also assume that the difference between the one-period-

ahead expected return and the internal rate of return is not important, and proceed with motivating

their investment and profitability factors from the residual income model.

   However, the IRR can differ greatly from the one-period ahead expected return. The difference

is perhaps most striking in the context of price and earnings momentum. Chan, Jegadeesh, and

Lakonishok (1996) show that momentum profits, measured with the one-month-ahead monthly av-

erage return, are short-lived. Momentum profits are large and positive within horizons up to 12

months, but turn negative afterward. In contrast, Tang, Wu, and Zhang (2014) report that price

and earnings momentum profits are significantly negative, once measured with the IRR estimates

from the Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan (2001) procedure.

   To quantify how the IRR deviates from the one-period-ahead average return, we estimate the

IRRs for the Fama-French (2015) size, value, profitability, and investment factors (SMB, HML,

RMW, and CMA, respectively) using four different accounting-based procedures from Claus and

Thomas (2001), Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan (2001), Easton (2004), and Ohlson and Juettner-

Nauroth (2005), as well as their arithmatic averages. Although differing in implementation details,

these procedures all share the basic idea of backing out the IRR from equation (13).

4.1.1   Estimating Procedures

We briefly describe the IRR estimation procedures (see Appendix C for a detailed description).

First, in the Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan (2001, GLS) model, at the end of June in each year

t, we estimate the ICC from the following nonlinear equation:

                      11
                      X  (Et [Roet+τ ] − ICC) × Bet+τ −1       (Et [Roet+12 ] − ICC) × Bet+11
         Pt = Bet +                                        +                                  ,   (14)
                                   (1 +   ICC)τ                      ICC × (1 + ICC)11
                      τ =1


in which Pt is the market equity in year t, Bet+τ is the book equity, and Et [Roet+τ ] is the expected

return on equity (Roe) for year t + τ based on information available in year t.




                                                  23
   Second, in the Easton (2004) model, at the end of June in each year t, we estimate the ICC from:

                                    Et [Yt+2 ] + ICC × Et [Dt+1 ] − Et [Yt+1 ]
                             Pt =                                              ,                      (15)
                                                     ICC2

in which Pt is the market equity in year t, Et [Yt+τ ] is the expected earnings for year t + τ based

on information available in year t, and Et [Dt+1 ] is the expected dividends for year t + 1.

   Third, in the Claus and Thomas (2001, CT) model, we estimate the ICC from:

                5
                X (Et [Roet+τ ] − ICC) × Bet+τ −1          (Et [Roet+5 ] − ICC) × Bet+4 × (1 + g)
   Pt = Bet +                                          +                                          ,   (16)
                              (1 + ICC)τ                          (ICC − g) × (1 + ICC)5
                τ =1


in which Pt is the market equity in year t, Bet+τ is the book equity, Et [Roet+τ ] is the expected Roe

for year t + τ based on information available in year t, and g is the long-term growth rate of abnor-

mal earnings defined as (Et [Roet+τ ]−ICC)×Bet+τ −1 . Finally, in the Ohlson and Juettner-Nauroth

(2005, OJ) model, at the end of June in each year t, we construct the ICC as:
                                          s
                                                    Et [Yt+1 ]
                             ICC = A +       A2 +              × (g − (γ − 1)),                       (17)
                                                        Pt

in which

                                                       
                              1              Et [Dt+1 ]
                       A ≡        (γ − 1) +               ,                                           (18)
                              2                  Pt
                                                                               
                              1 Et [Yt+3 ] − Et [Yt+2 ] Et [Yt+5 ] − Et [Yt+4 ]
                       g ≡                               +                        .                   (19)
                              2         Et [Yt+2 ]            Et [Yt+4 ]

Pt is the market equity in year t, Et [Yt+τ ] is the expected earnings for year t + τ based on infor-

mation available in t, Et [Dt+1 ] is the expected dividends for year t + 1, and γ − 1 is the perpetual

growth rate of abnormal earnings that is set to be the ten-year Treasury bond rate minus 3%.

   These accounting-based methods all use analysts’ earnings forecasts to predict future profitabil-

ity. Because analysts’ forecasts are limited to a relatively small sample and are likely even biased, we

also implement two modified procedures. The Hou-van Dijk-Zhang (2012) modification uses pooled

cross-sectional regressions to forecast future earnings, and the Tang-Wu-Zhang (2014) modification


                                                     24
uses annual cross-sectional regressions to forecast future profitability.

4.1.2      How the ICC Deviate from the One-period-ahead Expected Return

We estimate the ICCs for SMB, HML, RMW, and CMA in the Fama-French (2015) five-factor model

using the 12 different combinations from interacting the aforementioned four accounting models

with the three different earnings forecasts. For each combination, Table 8 reports the averages of

the ICCs estimated at the end of June of each year t to compare with the average realized annual

returns, with each observation covering the period from July of year t to June of year t + 1.

       Panel A reports that the ICCs of RMW differ drastically from its one-period-ahead average

returns. The differences are economically large and statistically significant in all 12 combinations.

The ICCs of RMW are even significantly negative in eight combinations, in contrast to the average

returns that are significantly positive in all combinations.1 In particular, in the sample for the

standard GLS procedure with analysts’ forecasts, the average RMW return is 3.75% per annum

(t = 2.59). However, its average ICC is −1.18% (t = 8.32), and the ICC-average return difference

is 4.93% (t = 3.49). Averaged across the accounting models with analysts’ forecasts, the average

RMW return is 4.47% (t = 2.76), in contrast to the average ICC of −1.59% (t − 9.74), and the

difference of 6.06% is more than 3.5 standard errors from zero.

       Estimating the ICCs with earnings or Roe forecasts from cross-sectional regressions yields largely

similar results. Panel B shows that with the Hou-van Dijk-Zhang (2012) cross-sectional earnings

forecasts, averaging across the accounting models yields an average RMW return of 3.47% per

annum (t = 2.52), an average ICC of −1.85% (t = 9.41), and a significant difference of 5.32%

(t = 3.88). With the Tang-Wu-Zhang (2014) cross-sectional ROE forecasts, Panel C shows that

averaging across the accounting models, we estimate an average RMW return of 2.01% (t = 3.01),

an average ICC of −2.46% (t = 20.72), and an ICC-average return difference of 5.46% (t = 4.28).
   1
    The average returns vary across different combinations because of their different sample criteria. We reconstruct
RMW and other common factors with the Fama-French (2015) procedure on the same sample on which a given com-
bination is implemented. Doing so ensures that we compare ICCs with average returns on the same sample of stocks.




                                                         25
   Table 8 also reports some ICC-average return differences for CMA, but not as drastic as for

RMW. The differences for CMA are significant for four out of 12 combinations. Except for one

combination, average CMA returns are larger in magnitude than the corresponding average ICCs.

Finally, without going through the details, we can report that, consistent with Tang, Wu, and

Zhang (2014), the ICC-average return differences for SMB and HML are mostly insignificant.

   The difference between the ICC and the one-period-ahead expected return, both conceptually

and empirically, has important implications. Many studies document that various ICCs have weak

predictive power for future returns. In particular, Easton and Monahan (2005) show that none

of the seven ICCs examined have a positive correlation with future realized returns, even after

controlling for potential biases of average returns as a proxy for expected returns. Guay, Kothari,

and Shu (2011) also report that ICCs have little explanatory power of subsequent realized returns

in the cross section, and attribute this difficulty to analysts being sluggish in updating their earn-

ings forecasts. Echoing Hughes, Liu, and Liu (2009), we suggest that there exists essentially no

theoretical reason why the IRR should be related to the one-period-ahead expected return.

4.2     The Subtle Relations Among Past Investment, Book-to-market, Expected
        Investment, and the Expected Return
4.2.1    The Relation between Investment and Book-to-market Equity

Fama and French (2015) argue that book-to-market, expected profitability, and expected invest-

ment give rise to three separate factors in the residual income model. However, empirically, once

RMW and CMA are added to their three-factor model, Fama and French document that HML

becomes redundant in describing average returns, inconsistent with their comparative statics.

   However, the evidence is consistent with the investment CAPM. The denominator of equation

(5) is the marginal cost of investment, which equals marginal q (the value of an extra unit of assets).

With constant returns to scale, marginal q equals average q, which is in turn highly correlated with

market-to-book equity. This tight economic relation between investment and market-to-book im-



                                                  26
plies that HML should be highly correlated with the investment factor. Empirically, from January

1967 to December 2015, the correlation between HML and CMA is 0.7, the correlation between

HML and the investment factor in the q-factor model is 0.68, and the correlation between the

investment factor and CMA is 0.91. The investment-value linkage also implies that CMA can be

motivated from the market-to-book term in the residual income model.

4.2.2   The Relation between the Expected Investment and the Expected Return

Fama and French (2015) argue that equation (13) predicts a negative relation between the expected

investment and the IRR. However, the negative sign does not carry over to the relation between

the expected investment and the one-period-ahead expected return, Et [rit+1 ].

   Using the definition of return, Pit = (Et [Dit+1 ]+Et[Pit+1 ])/(1+Et [rit+1 ]), and the clean surplus

relation, we rewrite the valuation equation (13) in terms of the one-period-ahead expected return as:

                                              Et [Yit+1 − △Beit+1 ] + Et [Pit+1 ]
                                  Pit =                                           .                                     (20)
                                                         1 + Et [rit+1 ]

Dividing both sides of equation (20) by Bit and rearranging, we obtain:
                                  h           i          h             i          h                           i
                                      Yit+1                  △Beit+1                  Pit+1          △Beit+1
                 Pit         Et       Beit        − Et        Beit         + Et       Beit+1    1+    Beit
                        =                                                                                           ,   (21)
                 Beit                          1 + Et [rit+1 ]
                               h       i  h                    i      h        i
                                 Yit+1      △Beit+1   Pit+1               Pit+1
                 Pit         Et Beit + Et    Beit     Beit+1 − 1   + Et   Beit+1
                        =                                                                                      .        (22)
                 Beit                                           1 + Et [rit+1 ]

Fixing everything except Et [△Beit+1 /Beit ] and Et [rit+1 ], high Et [△Beit+1 /Beit ] implies high

Et [rit+1 ], as market-to-book, Pit+1 /Beit+1 , is more likely to be higher than one in the data. More

generally, leading equation (22) by one period at a time and recursively substituting Pit+1 /Beit+1

in the same equation implies a positive Et [△Beit+τ /Beit ]-Et [rit+1 ] relation for all τ ≥ 1.

   In the investment CAPM, as noted, the relation between the expected investment growth and

the expected return is positive. As such, the model’s implications are consistent with those from

the (reformulated) residual income model on the one-period-ahead expected return. Empirically, at


                                                                 27
the aggregate level, Lettau and Ludvigson (2002) document that high risk premiums forecast high

future investment growth rates. Section 3.3 reports weakly positive relations between the expected

investment growth and the expected return. The evidence lends support to our theoretical analysis.

4.2.3      Past Investment Is a Poor Proxy for the Expected Investment

After motivating CMA from the expected investment effect, Fama and French (2015) use past

investment as a proxy for the expected investment. This proxy is problematic. Whereas past

profitability is a good proxy for the expected profitability, past investment is a poor proxy for the

expected investment. A large literature on lumpy investment emphasizes the lack of persistence of

micro-level investment data (Dixit and Pindyck 1994, Doms and Dunne 1998, Whited 1998).

       To evaluate the quality of past investment as a proxy for the expected investment, we per-

form annual cross-sectional regressions of future book equity growth rates, △Beit+τ /Beit+τ −1 ≡

(Beit+τ − Beit+τ −1 )/Beit+τ −1 , for τ = 1, 2, . . . , 10, on the current asset growth, △Ait /Ait−1 =

(Ait − Ait−1 )/Ait−1 , and, separately, on book equity growth, △Beit /Beit−1 . For comparison, we

also report annual cross-sectional regressions of future operating profitability, OP it+τ , on operating

profitability, OP it . As in Fama and French (2006), the sample contains all common stocks traded on

NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ from 1963 to 2015, including financial firms. Book equity is measured

per Davis, Fama, and French (2000), and operating profitability per Fama and French (2015).2

Variables dated t are from the fiscal year ending in calendar year t. Per Fama and French (2006),

firms with book assets (Compustat annual item AT) below $5 million or book equity below $2.5

million in year t are excluded in Panel A of Table 9. The cutoffs are $25 million and $12.5 million,

respectively, in Panel B. All the variables are winsorized each year at the 1st and 99th percentiles.
   2
     In particular, we measure annual book equity as stockholders’ book equity, plus balance sheet deferred taxes
and investment tax credit (Compustat annual item TXDITC) if available, minus the book value of preferred stock.
Stockholders’ equity is the value reported by Compustat (item SEQ), if available. Otherwise, we use the book
value of common equity (item CEQ) plus the par value of preferred stock (item PSTK), or the book value of assets
(item AT) minus total liabilities (item LT). Depending on availability, we use redemption value (item PSTKRV),
liquidating (item PSTKL), or par value (item PSTK) for the book value of preferred stock. Operating profitability
is revenues (item REVT) minus cost of goods sold (item COGS), minus selling, general, and administrative expenses
(item XSGA, zero if missing), minus interest expense (item XINT, zero if missing) all divided by the book equity.




                                                       28
    Past asset growth does not predict future book equity growth. In Panel A in Table 9, the slope

starts at 0.22 at the one-year forecast horizon, drops to 0.06 in year three and to 0.04 in year five.

The average R2 of the cross-sectional regressions starts at 5% in year one, drops to zero in year four,

and stays at zero for the remaining years. In addition, past book equity growth does not predict

future book equity growth. The slope starts at 0.21 at the one-year horizon, drops to 0.06 in year

three and to 0.03 in year five. The average R2 of the cross-sectional regressions starts at 6% in year

one, drops to zero in year four, and stays at zero for the remaining years. The results with the more

stringent sample criterion in Panel B are largely similar. The evidence contradicts the motivation

of the investment factor from the expected investment effect, but supports our reinterpretation via

the market-to-book term in the residual income model.

    The last five columns in Table 9 show that profitability forecasts future profitability. In Panel

A, the slope in the annual cross-sectional regressions starts with 0.79 in year one, drops to 0.58

in year three and 0.49 in year five, and remains at 0.38 even in year ten. The average R2 starts

at 54% in year one, drops to 27% in year three and 19% in year five, and remains above 10% in

year ten. The evidence in Panel B is largely similar. As such, profitability is a good proxy for the

expected profitability, but past investment is a poor proxy for the expected investment.


5     Comparison            with       the      Penman-Reggiani-Richardson-Tuna
      (2017, PRRT) Accounting-based Characteristic Model

Section 5.1 reviews the PRRT model. Section 5.2 compares it conceptually with the investment

CAPM. Finally, Section 5.3 presents some related empirical tests.

5.1   The PRRT Model

As noted, the clean surplus relation states that the book equity increases with earnings, and

decreases with net dividends to shareholders, Beit+1 = Beit + Yit+1 − Dit+1 , in which Beit is

the book equity, Yit earnings, and Dit dividends for firm i. Building on Easton, Harris, and Ohlson



                                                  29
                                                                                           S ], as:
(1992), PRRT use this relation to rewrite the one-period-ahead expected stock return, Et [rit+1

                                                                                                     
       S                   Pit+1 + Dit+1 − Pit     Et [Yit+1 ]        (Pit+1 − Beit+1 ) − (Pit − Beit )
  Et [rit+1 ]   = Et                             =             + Et                                       .   (23)
                                   Pit                 Pit                          Pit


   PRRT argue that the expected change in the market-minus-book equity (the market equity

deviation from the book equity), Et [(Pit+1 −Beit+1 )−(Pit −Beit )], is driven by the expected earnings

growth (Shroff 1995). Intuitively, an increase in the deviation means that price rises more than book

equity. Since earnings raise book equity via the clean-surplus relation, an expected increase in the

deviation means that price increases more than earnings. Finally, a lower earnings at t + 1 relative

to price, Pt , must mean higher earnings afterward, since price reflects life-long earnings for the firm.

As such, an expected increase in the deviation captures higher expected earnings growth after t + 1.

   PRRT consider four specific cases. First, in the mark-to-market accounting case, the market

equity equals the book equity, equation (23) implies that the expected return equals the expected

earnings yield, Et [Yit+1 ]/Pit . Second, in the no-earnings-growth case, the expected earnings are

constant, the expected return again equals Et [Yit+1 ]/Pit . Third, in the case with growth unrelated

to risk and return, Pit = Et [Yit+1 ]/(r − g), in which r is a constant expected return, and g a constant

earnings growth rate. Finally, with earnings growth, PRRT adopt the parametric Ohlson-Juettner

(2005) model to argue that the expected return is a weighted average of the forward earnings yield

and book-to-market equity, in which the latter is a proxy for the expected earnings growth.

   Motivated by the theoretical analysis, Penman and Zhu (2014) use annual Fama-MacBeth (1973)

cross-sectional regressions to forecast the forward earnings yield, Yit+1 /Pit , and the two-year-ahead

earnings growth rates with several anomaly variables, including accruals, growth in net operating

assets, return on assets, investment, net share issuance, external finance, and momentum. Many

of these variables forecast the forward earnings yield and earnings growth, in the same direction in

which these variables forecast returns. Penman and Zhu (2016) estimate costs of capital by pro-

jecting future returns on anomaly variables that are a priori connected to future earnings growth.



                                                           30
   Accounting principles also connect the expected earnings growth to risk. In Penman and Reg-

giani (2013), the deferral of earnings recognition raises the expected earnings growth, which might

deviate from subsequent realized earnings growth, and this risk might be embedded in expected

returns. Penman and Zhang (2015) emphasize accounting conservatism, which means that assets

are not booked when earnings from investments such as R&D and advertising are uncertain. These

investments are expensed against earnings immediately, reducing current earnings but inducing

higher subsequent earnings growth, which is in turn at risk because of the uncertainty.

5.2   Comparison with the Investment CAPM

The PRRT model and the investment CAPM share many commonalities. Both models focus on

the determinants of the one-period-ahead expected return. Most reassuringly, both models deliver

the same insight that the one-period-ahead expected earnings and the expected growth are the

two key drivers of the expected return. However, important differences exist both in terms of the

underlying logic and the specific determinants of the expected return in empirical implementation.

   In equation (23), the clean surplus relation decomposes the expected return into the expected

earnings yield and the expected change in the market-minus-book equity. PRRT then use powerful

accounting insights to connect the latter term to the expected earnings growth. By comparison,

the investment CAPM in equation (7) is an economic model derived from the first principle of real

investment. The first principle says that the marginal cost of investment, 1 + a(Iit /Ait ), equals

the marginal q, which in turn equals average q, Pit /Ait+1 . This investment-value linkage allows us

to substitute the market equity out of equation (5) both in the numerator and the denominator,

with (a function of) investment-to-assets, which is a fundamental variable. In contrast, the market

equity remains in the PRRT model. In this sense, the investment CAPM is perhaps even more

“fundamental” than the PRRT model. PRRT also use accounting principles to connect, intuitively,

the value-denominated expected change in the market-minus-book equity to the expected earn-

ings growth. In contrast, the investment-value linkage allows us to substitute, mathematically, the



                                                31
expected capital gain with the expected investment-to-assets growth.

    The two models also differ in the specific determinants for the expected return in empirical work.

PRRT pick earnings yield, Yit /Pit , which serves as a proxy for the expected earnings yield, as well

as book-to-market, which serves as a proxy for the expected earnings growth (see also Penman

and Zhu 2014). By comparison, the investment CAPM zeros in on investment-to-assets, Iit /Ait ,

which is in the denominator of equation (5), and profitability, Xit , which serves as a proxy for the

expected profitability, Et [Xit+1 ], in the numerator (Hou, Xue, and Zhang 2015). To the extent that

profitability forecasts short-term changes in investment-to-assets, it also partially captures the ex-

pected investment growth. Due to the lack of a reliable proxy, Hou et al. do not include a separate

expected growth factor in the q-factor model. Most important, earnings yield and book-to-market

highlighted in the PRRT model, because of the market equity in their denominators, are viewed as

equivalent to investment-to-assets in the investment CAPM.

5.3    Factor Spanning Tests

To evaluate the explanatory power of the specific determinants of returns, we perform factor span-

ning tests. As a standard method, the factor approach puts different models on the same empirical

footing. We construct a PRRT factor model, which consists of the market factor, a size factor, an

earnings yield factor, and a book-to-market factor. To make the factor models comparable, we use

a triple 2 × 3 × 3 sort similar to the q-factors when forming the PRRT factor model.

    In particular, at the end of June of each year t, we use the median NYSE size to split NYSE,

Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into two groups, small and big. Independently, we split stocks into

three earnings yield groups using the NYSE breakpoints for the low 30%, middle 40%, and high

30% of the ranking values for the fiscal year ending in calendar year t − 1. Also independently,

we break stocks into three book-to-market groups using the NYSE breakpoints for the low 30%,

middle 40%, and high 30% of the ranking values for the fiscal year ending in calendar year t − 1.3
   3
     Size is the market equity computed as stock price per share times shares outstanding from CRSP. Earnings yield
and book-to-market are income before extraordinary items (Compustat annual item IB) and the book equity for the


                                                        32
Taking the intersection of the two size, three earnings yield, and three book-to-market groups, we

obtain 18 benchmark portfolios. Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns are calculated from July

of year t to June of year t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced at the June of t + 1.

    The size factor is the difference (small-minus-big), each month, between the simple average of

the returns on the nine small portfolios and that of the nine big portfolios. The earnings yield factor

is the difference (high-minus-low), each month, between the simple average of the returns on the six

high earnings yield portfolios and that of the six low earnings yield portfolios. Finally, the book-

to-market factor is the difference (high-minus-low), each month, between the simple average of the

returns on the six high book-to-market portfolios and that of the six low book-to-market portfolios.

    Table 7 reports the factor spanning tests in the 1967–2015 sample. From Panel A, the earnings

yield factor premium is 0.25% per month (t = 1.97). With earnings yield in a joint sort, the book-to-

market factor loses its significance with an average premium of 0.16% (t = 1.43). The size premium

is 0.24% (t = 1.85). The q-factor model fully captures the earnings yield premium, with a tiny

alpha of −0.01% (t = −0.11). Both the investment and ROE factors contribute to this performance

with loadings of 0.4 and 0.34, respectively, both of which are more than four standard errors from

zero. The q-factor model also captures the book-to-market factor, with a small alpha of 0.06%

(t = 0.72). The investment factor is the main driving force with a loading of 0.74 (t = 12.38), even

though the Roe factor goes the wrong way with a loading of −0.31 (t = −4.81). Interestingly, the

size factor has a significant q-factor alpha of 0.09% (t = 2.11). The regression R2 is 91%, with a size

factor in the q-factor model. With such precision, even an economically small alpha is significant.

Finally, the Carhart model explains the size and book-to-market factors in the PRRT factor model

well, but leaves a marginally significant alpha of 0.18% (t = 1.96) for the earnings yield factor.
fiscal year ending in calendar year t − 1 divided by the market equity from CRSP at the end of December of year
t − 1, respectively. The book equity is stockholders’ book equity, plus balance sheet deferred taxes and investment
tax credit (item TXDITC) if available, minus the book value of preferred stock. Stockholders’ equity is the value
reported by Compustat (item SEQ), if it is available. If not, we measure stockholders’ equity as the book value of
common equity (item CEQ) plus the par value of preferred stock (item PSTK), or the book value of assets (item
AT) minus total liabilities (item LT). Depending on availability, we use redemption (item PSTKRV), liquidating
(item PSTKL), or par value (item PSTK) for the book value of preferred stock. For firms with more than one share
class, we merge the market equity for all share classes before computing earnings yield and book-to-market.


                                                        33
    Panel B regresses the Carhart factors and q-factors on the PRRT factor model. For the Carhart

factors, although the PRRT model explains the SMB and HML returns, it fails to capture the mo-

mentum factor, UMD. The average UMD return is 0.69% per month (t = 3.82), but the PRRT

alpha is even higher, 0.86% (t = 4.82). The culprit is the book-to-market factor with a negative

loading of −0.41 (t = −3.23), consistent with Fama and French (1996). The earnings yield factor

loading is basically zero. The PRRT factor model also fails to explain the investment and Roe

factors in the q-factor model, with alphas of 0.36% (t = 5.72) and 0.61% (t = 7.78), respectively.

The book-to-market factor helps explain the investment factor, but only weakly. The earnings yield

factor helps explain the Roe factor, but the book-to-market factor goes the wrong way, echoing its

effect on UMD. In all, the evidence suggests that earnings yield and book-to-market in the PRRT

factor model are insufficient to explain the cross section of expected stock returns.


6    Summary and Implications

This paper shows that the investment CAPM provides an economic foundation for Graham and

Dodd’s (1934) Security Analysis, without mispricing. Theoretically, the investment CAPM pre-

dicts that expected returns vary cross-sectionally, depending on firms’ investment, profitability,

and expected investment growth. Empirically, we show that many anomaly variables forecast fu-

ture changes in investment-to-assets, in the same direction in which these variables forecast future

returns. However, cross-sectional forecasts of future growth are noisy. As a result, the expected

investment growth effect in portfolio sorts is weak. We also show that the investment CAPM has

more appealing theoretical properties than the Miller-Modigliani (1961) and Ohlson (1995) residual

income model and the Penman-Reggiani-Richardson-Tuna (2017) characteristic model.

    The investment CAPM retains the efficient markets paradigm per Fama (1970). There has

been much confusion on efficient markets, and it is worthwhile to revisit Fama’s original definition:

“The assumptions that the conditions of market equilibrium can be stated in terms of expected

returns and that equilibrium expected returns are formed on the basis of (and thus ‘fully reflect’)


                                                 34
the information set Φt have a major empirical implication—they rule out the possibility of trad-

ing systems based only on information in Φt that have expected profits or returns in excess of

equilibrium expected profits or returns. Thus, let


                                    xjt+1 = pjt+1 − E[pjt+1 |Φt ].                                (24)


Then

                                           E[xjt+1 |Φt ] = 0                                      (25)

which, by definition, says that the sequence {xjt } is a ‘fair game’ with respect to the information

sequence {Φt }. Or, equivalently, let


                                     zjt+1 = rjt+1 − E[rjt+1 |Φt ],                               (26)


then

                                           E[zjt+1 |Φt ] = 0,                                     (27)

so that the sequence {zjt } is also a ‘fair game’ with respect to the information sequence {Φt } (p.

384–385, original emphasis).” As such, efficient markets mean that pricing errors, zjt+1 , are not

predictable. In particular, time-varying and cross-sectionally varying expected returns, E[rjt+1 |Φt ],

are consistent with efficient markets. The investment CAPM provides such a model for E[rjt+1 |Φt ].

   Alas, the efficient markets hypothesis is often misinterpreted as saying that future returns are

not predictable, causing much confusion in the existing fundamental analysis literature. In particu-

lar, in a widely adopted textbook on investments, Bodie, Kane, and Marcus (2014) write: “[I]f stock

price movements were predictable, that would be damning evidence of stock market inefficiency,

because the ability to predict prices would indicate that all available information was not already

reflected in stock prices (p. 350–351).” “[T]he efficient market hypothesis predicts that most fun-

damental analysis also is doomed to failure. if the analyst relies on publicly available earnings and

industry information, his or her evaluation of the firm’s prospects is not likely to be significantly


                                                  35
more accurate than those of rival analysts (p. 356, original emphasis).”

   The investment CAPM validates the practice of security analysis, without contradicting efficient

markets. With cross-sectionally varying expected returns, firms with low investment, high expected

profitability, and high expected investment growth should earn higher expected returns than firms

with high investment, low expected profitability, and low expected investment growth, respectively.

Consequently, forecasting future profitability and future growth rates per traditional security anal-

ysis is equivalent to forecasting future returns. In all, the investment CAPM provides a new con-

ceptual framework for value investing, and helps focus analysts’ attention on key determinants of

the expected return, including investment, expected profitability, and expected investment growth.



                                            References

 Abarbanell, Jeffery S., and Brian J. Bushee, 1997, Fundamental analysis, future earnings, and
     stock prices, Journal of Accounting Research 35, 1-24.

 Abarbanell, Jeffery S., and Brian J. Bushee, 1998, Abnormal returns to a fundamental analysis
     strategy, The Accounting Review 73, 19-45.

 Barberis, Nicholas, and Richard Thaler, 2003, A survey of behavioral finance, in George M.
     Constantinides, Milton Harris, and René M. Stulz eds., Handbook of the Economics of
     Finance, p. 1053–1123, Elsevier, North Holland.

 Belo, Frederico, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang, 2013, A supply approach to valuation, Review of
     Financial Studies 26, 3029–3067.

 Berk, Jonathan B., Richard C. Green, and Vasant Naik, 1999, Optimal investment, growth options,
     and security returns, Journal of Finance 54, 1153–1607.

 Bodie, Zvi, Alex Kane, and Alan J. Marcus, 2014, Investments, McGraw-Hill Education.

 Böhm-Bawerk, Eugen V., 1891, The Positive Theory of Capital, London: Macmillan. Translated
     by William Smart.

 Buffett, Warren E., 1984, The superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville, Hermes: The Columbia
     Business School Magazine 4–15.

 Carlson, Murray, Adlai Fisher, and Ron Giammarino, 2004, Corporate investment and asset price
     dynamics: Implications for the cross section of returns, Journal of Finance 59, 2577–2603.

 Chan, Louis K. C., Jason Karceski, and Josef Lakonishok, 2003, The level and persistence of
    growth rates, Journal of Finance 58, 643-684.


                                                 36
Chan, Louis K. C., Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Josef Lakonishok, 1996, Momentum strategies,
   Journal of Finance 51, 1681–1713.

Claus, James, and Jacob Thomas, 2001, Equity premia as low as three percent? Evidence from
    analysts’ earnings forecasts for domestic and international stock markets, Journal of Finance
    56, 1629–1666.

Cochrane, John H., 1991, Production-based asset pricing and the link between stock returns and
    economic fluctuations, Journal of Finance 46, 209–237.

Debreu, Gerard, 1974, Excess-demand functions, Journal of Mathematical Economics 1, 15–21.

Dixit, Avinash K., and Robert S. Pindyck, 1994, Investment Under Uncertainty, Princeton
    University Press: Princeton, New Jersey.

Doms, Mark, and Timothy Dunne, 1998, Capital adjustment patterns in manufacturing plants,
   Review of Economic Dynamics 1, 409–429.

Easton, Peter D., 2004, PE ratios, PEG ratios, and estimating the implied expected rate of return
    on equity capital, The Accounting Review 79, 73–95.

Easton, Peter D., Trevor S. Harris, and James A. Ohlson, 1992, Aggregate accounting earnings
    can explain most of security returns: The case of long return intervals, Journal of Accounting
    and Economics 15, 119–142.

Easton, Peter D., and Steven J. Monahan, 2005, An evaluation of accounting-based measures of
    expected returns, The Accounting Review 80, 501–538.

Fama, Eugene F., 1976, Foundations of Finance, New York: Basic Books, Publishers.

Fama, Eugene F., 1970, Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work, Journal
   of Finance 25, 383–417.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2006, Profitability, investment, and average returns,
   Journal of Financial Economics 82, 491–518.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2015, A five-factor asset pricing model, Journal of
   Financial Economics 116, 1–22.

Fama, Eugene F., and Merton H. Miller, 1972, The Theory of Finance, Illinois: Dryden Press.

Fisher, Irving, 1930, The Theory of Interest: As Determined by Impatience to Spend Income and
    Opportunity to Invest It, 1st ed., New York: Macmillan.

Frankel, Richard, and Charles M. C. Lee, 1998, Accounting valuation, market expectation, and
    cross-sectional stock returns, Journal of Accounting and Economics 25, 283-319.

Gebhardt, William R., Charles M. C. Lee, and Bhaskaram Swaminathan, 2001, Toward an implied
   cost of capital, Journal of Accounting Research 39, 135–176.

Gode, Dan, and Partha Mohanram, 2003, Inferring the cost of capital using the Ohlson-Juettner
   model, Review of Accounting Studies 8, 399–431.


                                               37
Gordon, Joseph R., and Myron J. Gordon, 1997, The finite horizon expected return model,
    Financial Analysts Journal 53, 52–61.

Graham, Benjamin, and David L. Dodd, 1934, Security Analysis, 1st ed., New York: Whittlesey
    House, McGraw-Hill Book Company.

Guay, Wayne, S. P. Kothari, Susan Shu, 2011, Properties of implied cost of capital using analysts’
   forecasts, Australian Journal of Management 36, 125–149.

Hayashi, Fumio, 1982, Tobin’s marginal q and average q:            A neoclassical interpretation,
    Econometrica 50, 213–224.

Hirshleifer, Jack, 1958, On the theory of optimal investment decision, Journal of Political Economy
    66, 329–352.

Hirshleifer, Jack, 1965, Investment decision under uncertainty: Choice-theoretic approaches,
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 79, 509–536.

Hirshleifer, Jack, 1970, Investment, Interest, and Capital, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.

Hou, Kewei, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang, 2015, Digesting anomalies: An investment approach,
    Review of Financial Studies 28, 650–705.

Hou, Kewei, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang, 2017, Replicating anomalies, working paper, The Ohio
    State University and University of Cincinnati.

Hou, Kewei, Mathijs A. van Dijk, and Yinglei Zhang, 2012, The implied cost of capital: A new
    approach, Journal of Accounting and Economics 53, 504–526.

Hughes, John, Jing Liu, and Jun Liu, 2009, On the relation between expected returns and implied
   cost of capital, Review of Accounting Studies 14, 246–259.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling losers:
    Implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65–91.

Kirman, Alan P., 1992, Whom or what does the representative individual represent? Journal of
    Economic Perspectives 6, 117–136.

Leamer, Edward E., and Herman B. Leonard, 1983, Reporting the fragility of regression estimates,
    Review of Economics and Statistics 65, 306-317.

Lee, Charles M. C., Eric C. So, and Charles C. Y. Wang, 2015, Evaluating firm-level expected-
     return proxies, working paper, Stanford University.

Lev, Baruch, and S. Ramu Thiagarajan, 1993, Fundamental information analysis, Journal of
    Accounting Research 31, 190-215.

Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 2002, Time-varying risk premia and the cost of capital:
    An alternative implication of the Q theory of investment, Journal of Monetary Economics
    49, 31-66.

Liu, Laura Xiaolei, Toni M. Whited, and Lu Zhang, 2009, Investment-based expected stock
    returns, Journal of Political Economy 117, 1105–1139.

                                               38
Mantel, Rolf R., 1974, On the characterization of aggregate excess-demand, Journal of Economic
   Theory 7, 348–353.

Marsh, Terry A., and Robert C. Merton, 1986, Dividend variability and variance bounds tests for
    the rationality of stock market prices, American Economic Review 76, 483–498.

Miller, Merton H., and Franco Modigliani, 1961, Dividend policy, growth, and the valuation of
     shares, Journal of Business 34, 411–433.

Modigliani, Franco, and Merton H. Miller, 1958, The cost of capital, corporation finance, and the
   theory of investment, American Economic Review 48, 261–297.

Mohanram, Partha S., 2005, Separating winners from losers among low book-to-market stocks
   using financial statement analysis, Review of Accounting Studies 10, 133–170.

Ohlson, James A., 1995, Earnings, book values, and dividends in security valuation, Contemporary
    Accounting Research 18, 109–131.

Ohlson, James A., and Beate E. Juettner-Nauroth, 2005, Expected EPS and EPS growth as
    determinants of value, Review of Accounting Studies 10, 349–365.

Ou, Jane A., and Stephen H. Penman, 1989, Financial statement analysis and the prediction of
    stock returns, Journal of Accounting and Economics 11, 295-329.

Penman, Stephen H., 2013. Financial Statement Analysis and Security Valuation, 5th ed.,
   NewYork: McGraw-Hill Irwin.

Penman, Stephen H., and Francesco Reggiani, 2013, Returns to buying earnings and book value:
   Accounting for growth and risk, Review of Accounting Studies 18, 1021–1049.

Penman, Stephen H., Francesco Reggiani, Scott A. Richardson, and Irem Tuna, 2017, A framework
   for identifying accounting characteristics for asset pricing models, with an evaluation of book-
   to-price, working paper, Columbia University.

Penman, Stephen H., and Xiao-Jun Zhang, 2012, Accounting conservatism, the quality of earnings,
   and stock returns, The Accounting Review 77, 237–264.

Penman, Stephen H., and Xiao-Jun Zhang, 2015, Connecting book rate of return to risk and return:
   The information conveyed by conservative accounting, working paper, Columbia University.

Penman, Stephen H., and Julie Lei Zhu, 2014, Accounting anomalies, risk, and return, The
   Accounting Review 89, 1835–1866.

Penman, Stephen H., and Julie Lei Zhu, 2016, Accounting-based estimates of the cost of capital:
   A third way, working paper, Columbia University.

Piotroski, Joseph D., 2000, Value investing: The use of historical financial statement information
    to separate winners from losers, Journal of Accounting Research 38, Supplement: Studies on
    accounting information and the economics of the firm, 1-41.

Richardson, Scott A., Irem Tuna, and Peter Wysocki, 2010, Accounting anomalies and
    fundamental analysis: A review of recent research advances, Journal of Accounting and
    Economics 50, 410–454.

                                               39
Shiller, Robert J., 1981, Do stock prices move too much to be justified by subsequent changes in
     dividends? American Economic Review 71, 421–436.

Shroff, Pervin K., 1995, Determinants of the returns-earnings correlation, Contemporary
    Accounting Research 12, 41–55.

Soliman, Mark T., 2008, The use of DuPont analysis by market participants, The Accounting
    Review 83, 823–853.

Sonnenschein, Hugo, 1973, Do Walras’ identity and continuity characterize the class of community
    excess-demand function? Journal of Economic Theory 6, 345–354.

Tang, Yue, Jin (Ginger) Wu, and Lu Zhang, 2013, Do anomalies exist ex ante? Review of Finance
    18, 843–875.

Whited, Toni M., 1998, Why do investment Euler equations fail?        Journal of Business and
   Economic Statistics 16, 479–488.

Williams, John B., 1938, The Theory of Investment Value, Harvard University Press.

Xing, Yuhang, 2008, Interpreting the value effect through the Q-theory:           An empirical
    investigation, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1767–1795.

Zhang, Lu, 2017, The investment CAPM, forthcoming, European Financial Management.




                                              40
                      Table 1 : Descriptive Statistics, January 1967–December 2015

This table reports time series averages of cross-sectional statistics, including mean, standard deviation (std),
percentiles (5%, 25%, 50%, 75%, and 95%), as well as pairwise correlations. Statistics are computed
with the 1%–99% winsorization. Sue is standard unexpected earnings, R6 prior six-month returns, Ivff
idiosyncratic volatility, Roe return on equity, log(Bm) log book-to-market equity, I/A investment-to-assets,
Oa operating accruals, Rdm R&D expense-to-market equity, log(Me) logarithm of the market equity in
millions of dollars, Ep earnings-to-price, Cop cash-based operating profitability, Abr cumulative abnormal
returns around earnings announcement dates, Ilr industry lead-lag effect in prior returns, Nop net payout
yield, Dac discretionary accruals, and Nsi net stock issues. Appendix B provides detailed variable definitions.
All variables except for log(Bm) and log(Me) are in percent.

                        Panel A: Time series averages of cross-sectional statistics, the full sample
                       mean             std              5%                25%             50%           75%             95%
   Sue                22.11          175.55         −246.34          −47.79           18.75          97.18          301.99
   R6                  6.78           32.37          −38.46          −13.23            3.10          21.35           65.60
   Ivff                2.88            1.98            0.84            1.53            2.35           3.60            6.84
   Roe                 0.56            8.99          −13.69           −0.17            2.28           4.14            8.64
   log(Bm)            −0.46            0.77           −1.87           −0.94           −0.40           0.07            0.72
   I/A                15.84           34.67          −17.47           −0.34            8.07          20.41           76.81
   Oa                 −3.51           11.02          −20.13           −8.51           −3.78           1.00           14.19
   Rdm                 7.55            9.77            0.42            1.74            4.11           9.17           27.23
   Log(Me)             4.84            1.87            1.98            3.47            4.70           6.10            8.16
   Ep                  1.03           21.22          −32.68            0.43            6.22           9.77           16.85
   Cop                12.71           12.89           −9.26            6.22           13.07          19.95           33.08
   Abr                 0.25            8.00          −12.78           −3.84            0.03           4.09           13.92
   Ilr                 0.96            3.67           −5.06           −1.40            0.96           3.29            7.06
   Nop                 0.61            8.67          −14.53           −0.49            1.12           3.89           10.22
   Dac                −0.24            9.30          −15.50           −4.33           −0.16           3.91           14.75
   Nsi                 3.60           10.23           −4.38           −0.10            0.54           3.02           23.88
                      Panel B: Time series averages of cross-sectional correlations, the full sample
                 6
             R       Ivff   Roe log(Bm)       I/A   Oa Rdm log(Me)           Ep     Cop     Abr    Ilr    Nop     Dac      Nsi
 Sue     0.25 −0.11 0.38           −0.13 0.00 −0.04 −0.02           0.13   −0.05    0.07    0.18 0.01     0.01   −0.05   −0.02
 R6           −0.16 0.21            0.06 −0.06 −0.03 0.03           0.05    0.04    0.07    0.18 0.01     0.06   −0.03   −0.06
 Ivff              −0.30            0.05 0.01 −0.03 0.26           −0.46   −0.31   −0.24   −0.02 0.00    −0.21   −0.02    0.13
 Roe                               −0.14 0.06 0.10 −0.27            0.24    0.29    0.30    0.13 0.00     0.15    0.05   −0.11
 log(Bm)                                 −0.27 −0.07 0.31          −0.34   −0.02   −0.22    0.03 0.00     0.11   −0.01   −0.12
 I/A                                            0.25 −0.19          0.08    0.14   −0.15   −0.03 0.00    −0.31    0.20    0.44
 Oa                                                  −0.15         −0.01    0.26   −0.33   −0.02 0.00    −0.03    0.84    0.04
 Rdm                                                               −0.31   −0.46   −0.01    0.01 0.00    −0.12   −0.13    0.05
 log(Me)                                                                    0.21    0.29   −0.01 −0.01    0.13   −0.02   −0.03
 Ep                                                                                 0.24    0.00 0.00     0.19    0.23   −0.11
 Cop                                                                                        0.01 0.00     0.21   −0.31   −0.22
 Abr                                                                                              0.02    0.02   −0.01   −0.03
 Ilr                                                                                                      0.00    0.00    0.00
 Nop                                                                                                             −0.03   −0.69
 Dac                                                                                                                      0.03




                                                              41
           Panel C: Time series averages of cross-sectional statistics, the all-but-micro sample
                 mean            std             5%             25%        50%         75%               95%
 Sue             44.69        185.09         −228.62          −35.27      33.29      126.66         358.08
 R6              10.58         27.43          −26.09           −6.21       6.95       22.53          59.84
 Ivff             2.00          1.10            0.79            1.25       1.75        2.46           3.99
 Roe              2.76          6.07           −4.16            1.55       3.10        4.78           9.28
 log(Bm)         −0.68          0.72           −2.01           −1.12      −0.60      −0.17            0.36
 I/A             17.97         31.63           −8.15            2.87       9.92       21.36          73.52
 Oa              −3.65          8.99          −16.36           −7.68      −3.91      −0.10           10.04
 Rdm              4.63          5.61            0.34            1.30       2.87        5.77          14.80
 Log(Me)          6.48          1.22            4.91            5.52       6.25        7.26           8.86
 Ep               5.44         10.65           −6.49            3.81       6.73        9.42          14.61
 Cop             16.35         10.63            0.25           10.15      15.84       22.16          34.78
 Abr              0.48          6.50           −9.80           −2.91       0.31        3.78          11.24
 Ilr              0.97          3.69           −5.02           −1.45       0.95        3.35           7.07
 Nop              1.63          6.57           −8.55           −0.10       1.77        4.33           9.58
 Dac             −0.42          7.47          −12.03           −3.57      −0.29        2.84          10.73
 Nsi              3.09          9.05           −4.23           −0.36       0.58        2.98          20.10
        Panel D: Time series averages of cross-sectional correlations, the all-but-micro sample
         R6    Ivff   Roe log(Bm)      I/A   Oa Rdm log(Me)         Ep Cop    Abr    Ilr Nop       Dac     Nsi
Sue     0.22 −0.06 0.41     −0.17 0.03 −0.01 −0.06           0.06 −0.07 0.08 0.15 0.01 −0.02 −0.03 −0.02
R6            0.00 0.11      0.04 −0.03 −0.03 0.09          −0.12 −0.03 0.00 0.19 0.01 −0.01 −0.03 −0.02
Ivff              −0.13     −0.14 0.15 0.00 0.14            −0.31 −0.22 −0.11 0.00 0.01 −0.20 −0.02 0.13
Roe                         −0.24 0.05 0.09 −0.22            0.11 0.17 0.28 0.08 0.00 0.08 0.04 −0.08
log(Bm)                           −0.27 −0.07 0.26          −0.11 0.21 −0.33 0.01 0.00 0.12 0.02 −0.05
I/A                                      0.20 −0.12         −0.05 0.00 −0.16 −0.01 0.00 −0.35 0.15 0.48
Oa                                            −0.15         −0.06 0.19 −0.34 −0.01 0.00 −0.03 0.82 0.04
Rdm                                                         −0.12 −0.29 0.07 0.02 0.00 −0.06 −0.15 0.04
log(Me)                                                            0.07 0.19 −0.05 −0.01 0.14 −0.03 −0.06
Ep                                                                       0.12 −0.01 0.01 0.19 0.19 −0.13
Cop                                                                            0.00 0.01 0.16 −0.32 −0.22
Abr                                                                                 0.04 0.00 −0.01 −0.01
Ilr                                                                                      0.00 0.00 0.00
Nop                                                                                           −0.02 −0.65
Dac                                                                                                  0.02




                                                       42
     Table 2 : Univariate Cross-sectional Regressions of Future Quarterly Investment-to-assets Changes, Future Quarterly Roe, and
                                    Future Cumulative Stock Returns, January 1967–December 2015

     At the beginning of each month t, Panel A performs univariate Fama-MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions of future changes in quarterly
     investment-to-assets, △I/Aqτ , defined as quarterly investment-to-assets from τ quarters ahead minus quarterly investment-to-assets from at least
     four month ago, Panel B cross-sectional regressions of Roe from τ quarters ahead, and Panel C cross-sectional regressions of stock returns cumulated
     from month t to month t + τ × 3 − 1. All the cross-sectional regressions are estimated with weighted least squares with the market equity as weights.
     The table reports the Fama-MacBeth slopes (in percent), their t-statistics adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations, and goodness-of-fit
     coefficients (R2 , in percent). Among the regressors, Sue is standard unexpected earnings, R6 prior six-month returns, Ivff idiosyncratic volatility (in
     percent), Roe return on equity, log(Bm) log book-to-market equity, I/A investment-to-assets, Oa operating accruals, Rdm R&D expense-to-market
     equity, log(Me) logarithm of the market equity in millions of dollars, Ep earnings-to-price, Cop cash-based operating profitability, Abr cumulative
     abnormal returns around earnings announcement dates, Ilr industry lead-lag effect in prior returns, Nop net payout yield, Dac discretionary
     accruals, and Nsi net stock issues. Appendix B provides detailed variable definitions. To ease economic interpretation, the slope of a given regressor
     is rescaled by multiplying its time series average of cross-sectional standard deviations.

      τ               Sue      R6      Ivff    Roe    log(Bm)       I/A      Oa    Rdm     log(Me)             Ep    Cop    Abr     Ilr     Nop    Dac      Nsi
                            Panel A: Predicting future changes in quarterly investment-to-assets,   △I/Aqτ ,   January 1973–December 2015
43




      1    Slope    0.14     0.73     0.34     0.26      −0.10    0.11    −0.11     0.24       0.06      −0.50       0.15   0.17   0.02   −0.07   −0.20   −0.16
           t        2.33     3.70     0.58     2.07      −0.68    0.17    −0.90     1.56       0.56      −0.69       1.38   2.48   0.11   −0.12   −1.14   −1.20
           R2       0.76     0.69     0.51     0.83       0.99    1.08     1.43     0.70       0.42       0.44       3.15   0.42   1.12    1.20    1.41    0.60
      2    Slope    0.17     0.91     0.03    −0.29      −0.05    0.27    −0.15     0.48       0.17      −0.66       0.13   0.26   0.40   −0.14   −0.24   −0.21
           t        2.84     6.35     0.05    −1.74      −0.23    0.34    −1.19     2.41       1.56      −0.66       1.18   3.28   2.36   −0.24   −1.46   −1.63
           R2       0.59     0.89     0.64     0.68       0.93    1.17     1.46     0.83       0.45       0.43       2.73   0.45   1.17    1.27    1.59    0.70
      3    Slope    0.12     0.55    −0.25    −0.09       0.08    0.13    −0.02     0.57       0.23      −0.38       0.24   0.36   0.24    1.16    0.04   −0.30
           t        2.11     2.89    −0.46    −0.51       0.49    0.15    −0.11     2.78       2.41      −0.45       2.68   5.20   2.81    1.82    0.22   −2.24
           R2       0.58     0.76     0.65     0.71       1.12    1.47     1.55     0.72       0.44       0.57       2.93   0.46   0.98    1.35    1.67    0.75
      4    Slope    0.20     0.65    −0.21     0.32       0.18   −0.43    −0.12     0.65       0.20      −0.42       0.17   0.31   0.21    0.33   −0.16   −0.39
           t        3.46     5.05    −0.28     2.10       0.98   −0.56    −1.09     3.08       2.60      −0.45       1.57   4.99   2.54    0.84   −1.32   −2.90
           R2       0.70     0.85     0.96     0.63       1.09    1.55     1.63     0.75       0.56       0.56       3.04   0.49   1.15    1.40    2.01    0.75
      8    Slope    0.13     0.18    −0.82    −0.07       0.44   −0.30    −0.26     0.79       0.34      −0.17       0.12   0.14   0.10    0.02   −0.30   −0.43
           t        1.85     1.06    −1.36    −0.43       2.57   −0.34    −1.58     3.56       2.95      −0.19       1.12   1.99   1.17    0.02   −1.28   −2.93
           R2       0.72     0.83     1.01     0.70       1.46    2.06     1.72     0.87       0.68       0.64       3.33   0.45   1.46    1.55    1.66    0.95
      12   Slope   −0.02    −0.11    −0.77    −0.39       0.55   −0.64    −0.11     0.88       0.35      −0.11      −0.01   0.07   0.07    0.91   −0.08   −0.52
           t       −0.42    −0.56    −1.16    −2.18       3.29   −0.73    −0.93     3.39       3.07      −0.12      −0.08   0.97   0.88    2.41   −0.60   −3.43
           R2       0.67     0.88     1.08     0.80       1.61    2.50     2.03     0.89       0.69       0.80       3.32   0.54   1.64    1.81    1.74    0.89
     τ             Sue      R6       Ivff    Roe    log(Bm)     I/A      Oa     Rdm     log(Me)     Ep     Cop      Abr     Ilr    Nop     Dac       Nsi
                                            Panel B: Predicting future quarterly Roe, January 1967–December 2015
     1    Slope    0.98    1.23    −2.32     5.77     −1.96     0.14    0.51    −2.34      1.47    1.95    1.95     0.48   0.11    1.17    0.01    −0.74
          t       24.95   13.63   −17.77    71.78    −26.15     1.83    7.95   −12.68     19.64    5.64   26.08    13.47   4.17    8.94    0.29   −11.73
          R2       8.04    4.07     4.87    36.78     19.21     2.22    1.07     4.57      5.35    4.16   13.31     0.85   1.78    2.31    0.97     1.96
     2    Slope    0.93    1.25    −2.37     5.07     −1.88     0.05    0.48    −2.34      1.49    1.87    1.94     0.48   0.19    1.23    0.00    −0.77
          t       20.23   14.12   −17.64    52.89    −24.51     0.68    7.01   −11.78     19.91    5.36   24.95    12.75   6.68    8.92    0.01   −11.80
          R2       6.97    4.26     5.02    28.22     18.20     2.04    1.10     4.45      5.64    3.96   13.27     0.88   1.98    2.46    1.06     2.09
     3    Slope    0.91    1.25    −2.49     5.00     −1.83     0.11    0.44    −2.36      1.55    1.79    1.92     0.40   0.21    1.27    0.00    −0.80
          t       20.59   12.38   −15.16    55.67    −23.55     0.85    6.42   −10.30     17.71    4.95   22.71    10.37   5.30    9.02   −0.08   −11.78
          R2       6.69    3.95     4.85    26.23     16.79     1.86    0.97     4.17      5.64    3.79   12.48     0.69   2.00    2.37    1.02     2.01
     4    Slope    0.98    1.21    −2.43     5.88     −1.75    −0.03    0.38    −2.28      1.49    1.51    1.83     0.56   0.19    1.33   −0.05    −0.78
          t       23.89   12.08   −16.52    59.31    −23.96    −0.49    5.92   −11.65     19.97    4.36   26.89    11.78   6.06    8.54   −1.11   −12.01
          R2       8.04    3.84     4.72    37.28     16.01     1.59    0.87     4.47      5.61    3.64   12.08     0.95   2.03    2.63    0.97     2.02
     8    Slope    0.84    0.83    −2.35     4.99     −1.59    −0.17    0.22    −2.30      1.49    0.94    1.66     0.32   0.12    1.25   −0.20    −0.79
          t       21.27   10.30   −18.10    47.51    −21.68    −3.38    4.02    −9.18     20.39    3.23   28.18     7.43   3.99    9.82   −4.58   −15.04
          R2       5.88    2.61     4.31    24.63     12.88     1.08    0.73     4.43      5.47    3.34   10.32     0.75   1.83    2.20    1.09     1.89
     12   Slope    0.74    0.58    −2.28     4.32     −1.50    −0.28    0.20    −2.28      1.46    0.66    1.54     0.32   0.12    1.28   −0.20    −0.79
          t       18.03    7.38   −18.66    39.37    −21.63    −4.54    4.63    −8.37     20.03    2.70   26.23     6.86   3.41   10.76   −5.25   −15.94
          R2
44




                   4.59    1.89     3.91    17.84     10.88     1.16    0.61     4.16      5.25    2.58    9.50     0.69   1.84    2.11    1.03     1.75
                   Panel C: Predicting future cumulative stock returns from month t to month t + τ × 3 − 1, January 1967–December 2015
     1    Slope    0.28    0.59   −0.64      0.47       0.34   −0.59   −0.31     1.00    −0.33     1.25    0.32     0.33   0.23    0.68   −0.36    −0.51
          t        3.20    2.03   −1.51      1.41       1.92   −2.98   −2.00     2.50    −1.45     1.84    1.98     2.85   2.16    2.50   −2.53    −4.39
          R2       1.48    3.22    3.88      1.70       3.59    1.73    1.19     2.36     3.54     2.01    2.19     0.69   2.92    1.51    1.15     0.89
     2    Slope    0.43    1.80   −1.08      0.70       0.78   −1.18   −0.70     1.94    −0.62     2.35    0.59     0.73   0.28    1.37   −0.72    −1.01
          t        3.05    3.52   −1.50      1.29       2.59   −3.60   −2.65     2.93    −1.58     2.04    2.05     3.94   1.77    2.98   −2.83    −5.24
          R2       1.35    3.40    3.82      1.75       3.88    1.74    1.21     2.48     3.67     2.19    2.43     0.62   2.96    1.69    1.23     1.03
     3    Slope    0.46    2.70   −1.18      0.46       1.19   −1.65   −1.09     2.74    −0.89     3.16    0.91     1.01   0.51    2.02   −1.05    −1.48
          t        2.48    4.12   −1.28      0.66       3.04   −4.05   −3.33     3.19    −1.68     2.13    2.32     3.98   2.56    3.43   −3.19    −5.95
          R2       1.31    3.55    3.68      1.80       4.22    1.66    1.16     2.41     3.75     2.44    2.67     0.64   3.09    1.72    1.24     1.10
     4    Slope    0.42    2.76   −1.32      0.20       1.59   −2.06   −1.36     3.63    −1.20     3.80    1.18     1.18   0.89    2.53   −1.33    −1.91
          t        1.82    3.55   −1.20      0.22       3.33   −4.17   −3.60     3.41    −1.84     2.20    2.42     3.74   3.47    3.61   −3.46    −6.50
          R2       1.28    3.23    3.53      1.84       4.41    1.67    1.11     2.51     3.67     2.46    2.77     0.67   3.05    1.72    1.17     1.13
     8    Slope    0.40    1.66   −0.23     −1.32       2.85   −3.60   −1.97     5.25    −2.37     6.56    2.00     1.68   0.62    5.33   −2.62    −3.65
          t        1.08    1.52   −0.13     −0.81       3.25   −3.74   −3.50     3.36    −2.12     2.42    2.14     3.06   1.64    4.89   −3.96    −8.24
          R2       1.23    2.31    2.99      1.77       5.07    1.75    1.05     2.47     3.96     2.42    3.04     0.66   2.88    1.80    1.07     1.16
     12   Slope    0.14    1.75    1.10     −3.32       3.75   −3.99   −1.96     6.81    −3.48    11.35    2.98     1.62   0.09    8.02   −3.94    −5.93
          t        0.25    1.32    0.47     −1.42       2.84   −2.74   −2.85     3.71    −2.17     3.15    2.17     2.40   0.18    5.20   −4.46   −10.38
          R2       1.28    1.97    2.32      1.65       5.35    1.61    0.79     2.11     4.01     2.53    3.01     0.57   2.60    1.89    0.87     1.06
     Table 3 : Univariate Cross-sectional Regressions of Future Quarterly Investment-to-assets Changes, Future Quarterly Roe, and
                      Future Cumulative Stock Returns, the All-but-micro Sample, January 1967–December 2015

     At the beginning of each month t, Panel A performs univariate Fama-MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions of future changes in quarterly
     investment-to-assets, △I/Aqτ , defined as quarterly investment-to-assets from τ quarters ahead minus quarterly investment-to-assets from at least
     four month ago, Panel B cross-sectional regressions of Roe from τ quarters ahead, and Panel C cross-sectional regressions of stock returns cumulated
     from month t to month t + τ × 3 − 1. Cross-sectional regressions are estimated with ordinary least squares. The table reports the Fama-MacBeth
     slopes (in percent), their t-statistics adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations, and goodness-of-fit coefficients (R2 , in percent). Among
     the regressors, Sue is standard unexpected earnings, R6 prior six-month returns, Ivff idiosyncratic volatility (in percent), Roe return on equity,
     log(Bm) log book-to-market equity, I/A investment-to-assets, Oa operating accruals, Rdm R&D expense-to-market equity, log(Me) logarithm of
     the market equity in millions of dollars, Ep earnings-to-price, Cop cash-based operating profitability, Abr cumulative abnormal returns around
     earnings announcement dates, Ilr industry lead-lag effect in prior returns, Nop net payout yield, Dac discretionary accruals, and Nsi net stock
     issues. Appendix B provides detailed variable definitions. To ease economic interpretation, the slope of a given regressor is rescaled by multiplying
     its time series average of cross-sectional standard deviations.

       τ              Sue       R6      Ivff    Roe    log(Bm)       I/A      Oa    Rdm     log(Me)            Ep   Cop    Abr       Ilr    Nop     Dac      Nsi
                            Panel A: Predicting future changes in quarterly investment-to-assets,   △I/Aqτ ,   January 1973–December 2015
45




       1    Slope    0.17     0.67    0.00     −0.01       0.00   −0.19    −0.15     0.28     −0.22       −0.15     0.12   0.16   −0.05     0.24   −0.06   −0.10
            t        4.98     3.56    0.02     −0.12       0.00   −0.79    −1.28     4.55     −1.91       −0.52     1.04   5.28   −0.43     1.52   −1.01   −0.73
            R2       0.27     0.71    0.32      0.48       0.35    0.74     1.34     0.27      0.19        0.24     3.74   0.15    0.37     0.50    0.68    0.39
       2    Slope    0.10     0.97    0.07     −0.63       0.11   −0.12    −0.15     0.41     −0.21       −0.37     0.15   0.31    0.21     0.06   −0.15   −0.23
            t        2.59     5.89    0.29     −6.78       0.50   −0.30    −2.62     4.98     −2.20       −1.01     1.34   7.89    3.21     0.44   −2.42   −2.01
            R2       0.21     1.09    0.49      0.66       0.48    0.83     0.70     0.36      0.23        0.30     3.56   0.22    0.39     0.54    0.85    0.44
       3    Slope    0.09     0.63   −0.26     −0.35       0.34   −0.21    −0.09     0.43     −0.05       −0.31     0.17   0.35    0.24     0.59   −0.05   −0.39
            t        2.32     3.64   −1.36     −4.11       1.68   −0.48    −1.20     4.48     −0.63       −0.87     2.49   9.71    3.12     2.28   −0.57   −3.78
            R2       0.23     0.76    0.60      0.55       0.66    1.07     0.64     0.40      0.25        0.37     3.62   0.24    0.39     0.58    0.77    0.51
       4    Slope    0.09     0.56   −0.09     −0.02       0.32   −0.77    −0.15     0.42      0.04       −0.53     0.17   0.26    0.23     0.41   −0.14   −0.53
            t        2.80     4.61   −0.21     −0.32       0.94   −1.87    −3.17     4.66      0.46       −0.91     1.78   8.01    4.06     6.29   −2.90   −4.15
            R2       0.23     0.61    0.71      0.43       0.91    1.22     0.56     0.41      0.26        0.45     3.82   0.23    0.47     0.61    1.05    0.54
       8    Slope   −0.05     0.12   −0.74     −0.20       0.88   −0.74    −0.22     0.43      0.24       −0.13     0.29   0.18    0.09     0.62   −0.22   −0.72
            t       −1.45     0.87   −3.31     −2.67       3.99   −1.76    −3.95     5.18      2.53       −0.34     3.09   5.68    1.19     4.84   −4.11   −6.58
            R2       0.23     0.47    0.91      0.47       1.31    1.71     0.68     0.51      0.34        0.49     3.86   0.16    0.52     0.83    0.86    0.75
       12   Slope   −0.24    −0.17   −0.78     −0.43       1.02   −0.86    −0.33     0.47      0.30       −0.13     0.15   0.07    0.09     0.77   −0.25   −0.77
            t       −7.34    −1.03   −3.27     −5.05       4.44   −2.05    −3.54     5.45      2.99       −0.31     1.72   2.23    1.17     8.59   −4.77   −6.76
            R2       0.24     0.55    1.04      0.56       1.55    1.87     2.13     0.54      0.42        0.54     3.95   0.16    0.65     0.96    0.80    0.78
     τ             Sue      R6       Ivff    Roe    log(Bm)     I/A     Oa      Rdm    log(Me)     Ep     Cop       Abr     Ilr    Nop     Dac       Nsi
                                            Panel B: Predicting future quarterly Roe, January 1967–December 2015
     1    Slope    1.18    0.81    −0.99     3.73     −1.01    0.08    0.49    −1.84      0.70    1.39    1.46      0.46   0.04    0.77    0.28    −0.61
          t       33.39   14.62   −15.75    76.16    −19.96    1.46   11.87   −12.82     14.75   10.42   25.49     22.27   1.97   10.43    7.16   −10.73
          R2       6.04    3.59     3.16    32.75      8.02    1.61    1.05     5.30      1.48    4.21    7.30      0.85   0.68    1.79    0.62     1.55
     2    Slope    1.06    0.81    −1.02     3.07     −0.93   −0.01    0.46    −1.80      0.72    1.35    1.42      0.39   0.13    0.80    0.25    −0.63
          t       28.44   16.56   −15.81    48.03    −17.22   −0.21    8.03   −11.65     15.36    9.75   25.56     21.26   6.07   10.14    6.10   −10.91
          R2       4.97    3.53     3.24    21.87      7.08    1.39    0.99     4.98      1.60    3.95    7.15      0.71   0.78    1.84    0.72     1.59
     3    Slope    0.94    0.91    −1.11     3.00     −0.87    0.02    0.41    −0.77      0.74    1.32    1.42      0.33   0.06    0.80    0.25    −0.68
          t       15.03    7.10   −14.54    56.51    −14.43    0.15    7.97    −0.83     13.97    9.45   21.37      9.30   0.71   10.56    5.72   −11.31
          R2       4.32    3.24     3.27    20.38      6.07    1.33    0.78     4.60      1.69    3.43    6.53      0.59   0.87    1.82    0.57     1.61
     4    Slope    0.96    0.78    −1.08     3.62     −0.79   −0.14    0.52    −1.73      0.74    1.19    1.26      0.46   0.05    0.83    0.24    −0.74
          t        7.04   15.06   −15.86    54.19    −14.12   −2.78    2.96   −11.58     15.96    9.15   12.60     17.06   0.63   10.77    4.54    −8.19
          R2       5.56    3.05     3.33    30.21      5.57    1.23    0.85     4.85      1.81    3.11    6.45      1.05   0.94    1.95    0.66     1.87
     8    Slope    0.89    0.44    −1.14     2.93     −0.64   −0.31    0.27    −1.59      0.84    1.06    1.28      0.33   0.07    0.91    0.14    −0.76
          t       25.58    8.78   −16.80    47.72    −11.13   −7.18    5.29   −10.93     17.05    9.34   25.83     11.18   2.79   12.96    4.36   −14.72
          R2       3.22    1.63     3.20    17.40      3.59    1.05    0.59     3.54      1.96    2.40    5.34      0.58   0.66    1.93    0.50     1.82
     12   Slope    0.72    0.29    −1.09     2.44     −0.55   −0.43    0.19    −1.42      0.84    0.93    1.20      0.20   0.06    0.83    0.52    −0.64
          t       24.03    5.87   −18.21    40.39    −11.85   −5.18    4.13   −10.10     17.11    8.74   20.15      7.17   2.33   12.88    1.23    −7.02
          R2
46




                   2.05    1.17     2.70    11.38      2.74    1.04    0.44     3.02      1.87    1.73    4.71      0.31   0.67    1.51    0.59     1.52
                  Panel C: Predicting future cumulative stock returns from month t to month t + τ × 3 − 1, January 1967–December 2015
     1    Slope    0.53    0.72   −0.58      0.79      0.49   −0.59   −0.25     0.64     −0.29    0.58    0.47      0.50   0.50    0.33   −0.25    −0.60
          t        6.12    3.60   −2.86      4.61      2.82   −4.41   −2.70     3.09     −2.02    2.25    4.75      7.54   4.80    2.50   −3.61    −6.73
          R2       0.76    2.19    2.85      1.11      2.14    1.22    0.70     1.29      1.62    1.33    0.81      0.37   1.49    0.98    0.40     0.77
     2    Slope    0.76    1.64   −1.07      1.30      1.06   −1.18   −0.50     1.10     −0.49    1.28    0.89      0.83   0.67    0.68   −0.45    −1.21
          t        5.32    4.61   −3.09      4.45      3.69   −5.34   −3.30     3.36     −2.05    3.01    5.10      8.11   4.10    3.14   −3.77    −8.35
          R2       0.75    2.39    2.85      1.14      2.36    1.24    0.73     1.24      1.63    1.53    0.96      0.35   1.53    1.06    0.44     0.90
     3    Slope    0.81    2.30   −1.49      1.27      1.58   −1.69   −0.81     1.46     −0.65    1.87    1.37      1.12   0.93    1.07   −0.71    −1.80
          t        4.46    4.87   −3.40      3.37      4.32   −5.92   −4.21     3.39     −2.02    3.28    5.60      7.96   4.76    3.75   −4.40    −9.89
          R2       0.67    2.61    2.85      1.12      2.52    1.32    0.72     1.23      1.63    1.65    1.12      0.36   1.61    1.11    0.48     1.00
     4    Slope    0.81    2.38   −1.82      1.21      2.02   −2.14   −1.08     1.88     −0.77    2.29    1.82      1.23   1.31    1.40   −0.97    −2.33
          t        3.90    4.27   −3.52      2.56      4.55   −6.07   −4.76     3.61     −1.94    3.27    5.99      7.09   5.36    4.02   −4.90   −10.70
          R2       0.56    2.38    2.82      1.05      2.54    1.33    0.72     1.34      1.63    1.65    1.20      0.35   1.62    1.14    0.49     1.05
     8    Slope    1.07    1.69   −2.72      1.23      3.70   −3.85   −2.04     3.08     −1.08    3.82    3.38      1.65   1.05    3.12   −2.04    −4.57
          t        3.44    2.23   −3.16      1.61      4.73   −6.13   −5.73     3.70     −1.75    3.33    6.00      5.77   2.80    5.68   −5.68   −14.13
          R2       0.47    1.58    2.40      0.85      2.61    1.25    0.75     1.45      1.64    1.35    1.38      0.29   1.47    1.18    0.56     1.07
     12   Slope    0.86    1.79   −3.26      0.16      5.40   −4.59   −3.01     5.60     −1.98    6.31    5.03      1.74   0.77    4.38   −3.30    −6.31
          t        1.64    1.94   −2.74      0.14      5.24   −4.48   −5.92     4.67     −2.14    5.39    6.19      4.66   1.67    5.71   −6.31   −11.94
          R2       0.52    1.33    2.02      0.81      2.56    1.31    0.74     1.43      1.68    1.16    1.56      0.26   1.31    1.19    0.53     1.02
      Table 4 : Multiple Cross-sectional Regressions of Future Quarterly Investment-to-assets Changes, July 1976–December 2015

     At the beginning of each month t, we perform multiple Fama-MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions of future changes in quarterly investment-
     to-assets, △I/Aqτ , defined as quarterly investment-to-assets from τ quarters ahead minus quarterly investment-to-assets from at least four month ago.
     The cross-sectional regressions are estimated with weighted least squares with the market equity as weights in the full sample in Panel A, and with
     ordinary least squares in the all-but-micro sample in Panel B. We report the slopes (in percent), their t-statistics adjusted for heteroscedasticity and
     autocorrelations, and goodness-of-fit coefficients (R2 , in percent). Among the regressors, Sue is standard unexpected earnings, R6 prior six-month
     returns, Ivff idiosyncratic volatility (in percent), Roe return on equity, log(Bm) log book-to-market equity, I/A investment-to-assets, Oa operating
     accruals, Rdm R&D expense-to-market equity, log(Me) logarithm of the market equity in millions of dollars, Ep earnings-to-price, Cop cash-based
     operating profitability, Abr cumulative abnormal returns around earnings announcement dates, Ilr industry lead-lag effect in prior returns, Nop
     net payout yield, Dac discretionary accruals, and Nsi net stock issues. Appendix B provides detailed variable definitions. Multiple regressions use
     all these variables simultaneously. The slope of a given regressor is rescaled by multiplying its average cross-sectional standard deviation.

      τ              Sue     R6      Ivff    Roe    log(Bm)      I/A      Oa    Rdm     log(Me)     Ep      Cop     Abr      Ilr    Nop     Dac      Nsi     R2
                                                        Panel A: The full sample, weighted least squares
      1    Slope    0.05    0.80   −0.03     0.96       0.17    −0.46   −0.14    0.04    −0.10    −0.03    −0.10   −0.02   −0.17   −0.01   −0.02   −0.02   13.40
           t        0.58    6.90   −0.26     4.17       1.25    −3.59   −0.61    0.23    −1.26    −0.18    −0.82   −0.15   −2.47   −0.10   −0.09   −0.14
      2    Slope    0.28    0.97   −0.17    −0.50      −0.08    −0.58   −0.06    0.04    −0.04     0.27    −0.03    0.16    0.07    0.08   −0.07   −0.03   13.19
           t        3.01    7.88   −1.18    −2.24      −0.50    −4.25   −0.25    0.17    −0.36     1.26    −0.18    1.73    1.05    0.58   −0.30   −0.20
      3    Slope    0.23    0.52   −0.38    −0.39       0.00    −0.64   −0.14    0.05    −0.04    −0.09     0.01    0.35    0.14    0.03    0.04   −0.10   13.25
           t        2.75    4.51   −2.65    −1.70       0.01    −4.71   −0.61    0.26    −0.41    −0.43     0.08    4.29    2.03    0.23    0.18   −0.62
47




      4    Slope    0.22    0.35   −0.49     0.35       0.29    −0.73   −0.32    0.16    −0.03    −0.71     0.02    0.22   −0.07   −0.08    0.13   −0.26   13.71
           t        2.71    2.66   −3.64     1.76       1.91    −5.79   −1.55    0.71    −0.27    −2.99     0.11    2.52   −1.09   −0.55    0.74   −1.81
      8    Slope    0.29    0.28   −0.56    −0.12       0.63    −0.93    0.09   −0.07     0.17    −1.21     0.31   −0.02   −0.03    0.23    0.09   −0.18   15.58
           t        2.87    2.30   −3.59    −0.55       3.83    −6.40    0.37   −0.33     1.47    −5.43     2.12   −0.22   −0.44    1.50    0.40   −1.20
      12   Slope    0.07    0.19   −0.51    −0.14       0.60    −1.08   −0.14    0.19     0.26    −1.32     0.22   −0.01   −0.03    0.72    0.25   −0.06   15.58
           t        1.02    1.39   −3.24    −0.64       3.11    −6.85   −0.56    0.86     1.78    −4.04     1.23   −0.07   −0.28    4.19    1.15   −0.37
                                                    Panel B: The all-but-micro sample, ordinary least squares
      1    Slope    0.03    0.71   −0.03     0.40        0.07   −0.27   −0.02    0.08    −0.04    −0.04    −0.07    0.06   −0.04   −0.04   −0.07    0.00    6.73
           t        0.58   10.23   −0.67     3.81        0.73   −3.30   −0.15    1.20    −1.00    −0.53    −0.98    1.37   −1.16   −0.53   −0.83   −0.02
      2    Slope    0.23    1.02   −0.15    −0.72        0.06   −0.28    0.04   −0.01    −0.01    −0.01     0.12    0.18    0.09   −0.02   −0.04   −0.08    7.06
           t        4.29   14.58   −2.80    −6.19        0.57   −3.22    0.31   −0.10    −0.31    −0.09     1.47    3.83    2.39   −0.29   −0.40   −0.86
      3    Slope    0.18    0.74   −0.21    −0.53        0.29   −0.37    0.09    0.03     0.05    −0.16     0.22    0.29    0.20   −0.03   −0.05   −0.10    7.33
           t        3.38   10.36   −3.36    −4.65        2.49   −4.13    0.70    0.37     0.91    −1.90     2.38    7.26    5.08   −0.31   −0.54   −1.01
      4    Slope    0.09    0.59   −0.35    −0.09        0.49   −0.40   −0.08    0.08     0.03    −0.34     0.19    0.20    0.13   −0.07    0.05   −0.22    7.17
           t        1.82    8.90   −6.51    −1.11        4.13   −4.48   −0.65    1.14     0.55    −3.88     2.11    4.72    3.29   −0.91    0.49   −2.43
      8    Slope    0.04    0.18   −0.44    −0.35        0.87   −0.49   −0.07   −0.03     0.14    −0.44     0.41    0.14    0.00    0.06    0.14   −0.34    8.06
           t        0.81    2.38   −7.85    −3.48        6.48   −5.88   −0.50   −0.39     2.76    −4.97     4.34    3.63    0.08    0.73    1.22   −3.87
      12   Slope   −0.14    0.03   −0.47    −0.45        0.91   −0.46   −0.26    0.03     0.21    −0.30     0.31    0.11    0.00    0.14    0.25   −0.38    8.83
           t       −2.61    0.36   −7.46    −4.08        6.30   −4.46   −1.87    0.37     3.60    −3.24     3.10    2.53    0.06    1.70    2.14   −4.24
     Table 5 : Deciles Formed on Expected Changes in Quarterly Investment-to-assets, July
                                    1976–December 2015
Panel A uses all 16 predictors described in Table 1 to form expected changes in quarterly investment-to-
assets, Et [△I/Aqτ ], with the forecasting horizon, τ , ranging from 1 to 12 quarters. At the beginning of each
month t, we calculate Et [△I/Aqτ ] with the latest predictor values known and the average cross-sectional
regression slopes estimated with the data from month t − 120 − τ × 3 to month t − 1 − τ × 3. We require
a minimum of 36 months. Cross-sectional regressions are estimated with weighted least squares with the
                                                              q
market equity as weights. With the calculated Et [△I/Aτ ] values at the beginning of month t, we sort all
stocks into deciles based on NYSE breakpoints, and compute value-weighted decile returns for month t. The
deciles are rebalanced at the beginning of month t + 1. For each decile and the high-minus-low decile (H−L),
we report the average excess return, m, its t-value, tm , the q-factor alpha, αq , and its t-statistic, tq . The
t-values are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. In Panel B, we only use anomaly variables
                                                                        q                                     q
that are significant in univariate cross-sectional regressions of △I/Aτ for each τ horizon to form Et [△I/Aτ ].
For τ = 1, the set of significant predictors includes Sue, R6 , Roe, and Abr; for τ = 2, Sue, R6 , Rdm, Abr,
and Ilr; for τ = 3, Sue, R6 , Rdm, log(Me), Cop, Abr, Ilr, and Nsi; for τ = 4, Sue, R6 , Roe, Rdm, log(Me),
Abr, Ilr, and Nsi; for τ = 8, log(Bm), Rdm, log(Me), and Nsi; and for τ = 12, Roe, log(Bm), Rdm, log(Me),
Nop, and Nsi. All other aspects of the test design in Panel B are identical to those in Panel A.

               Panel A: Using all 16 anomaly variables to form expected changes in quarterly I/A
 τ            Low        2       3       4       5         6         7         8         9     High     H−L
 1      m     0.66    0.59    0.56    0.68    0.74      0.92     0.56      0.65      0.56      1.00     0.35
        tm    1.95    2.13    2.25    2.63    3.06      3.86     2.27      2.60      2.09      3.14     1.19
        αq    0.61    0.35    0.08    0.12    0.16      0.41    −0.14     −0.03     −0.20      0.31    −0.30
        tq    2.88    2.27    0.56    0.84    1.24      3.02    −1.14     −0.22     −1.33      1.51    −0.87
 2      m     0.73    0.64    0.81    0.54    0.83      0.75     0.79      0.58      0.79      0.83     0.10
        tm    2.12    2.18    2.80    1.91    3.42      3.19     3.18      2.46      3.02      2.83     0.40
        αq    0.46    0.31    0.34    0.14    0.11     −0.10     0.05     −0.36     −0.03      0.24    −0.22
        tq    2.59    1.70    2.02    0.80    0.73     −0.87     0.31     −2.45     −0.19      1.06    −0.69
 3      m     0.57    0.74    0.80    0.87    0.86      0.49     0.73      0.73      0.70      0.60     0.03
        tm    1.61    2.54    2.74    3.20    3.41      1.98     3.14      3.10      2.78      2.11     0.12
        αq    0.30    0.39    0.55    0.34    0.13     −0.23    −0.14     −0.14     −0.06     −0.03    −0.33
        tq    1.80    2.27    3.37    2.46    0.96     −1.59    −1.10     −0.97     −0.38     −0.16    −1.28
 4      m     0.56    0.63    0.82    0.82    0.87      0.63     0.65      0.75      0.88      0.93     0.37
        tm    1.65    2.02    2.96    3.11    3.61      2.45     2.86      3.00      3.48      3.22     1.43
        αq    0.27    0.30    0.42    0.38    0.21     −0.15    −0.10      0.01      0.00      0.30     0.02
        tq    1.71    1.67    2.75    2.71    1.25     −1.02    −0.73      0.05      0.01      1.44     0.08
 8      m     0.61    0.52    0.72    0.78    0.88      0.95     0.80      0.73      0.64      0.81     0.20
        tm    1.73    1.59    2.36    2.83    3.53      3.83     3.17      3.14      2.47      3.05     0.77
        αq    0.42    0.23    0.27    0.23    0.22      0.23     0.01      0.04     −0.08      0.23    −0.19
        tq    2.34    1.30    1.41    1.44    1.61      1.84     0.05      0.31     −0.42      1.41    −0.79
 12     m     0.78    0.86    0.85    0.74    0.84      0.92     0.71      0.79      0.78      0.91     0.13
        tm    2.15    2.64    2.83    2.64    3.47      3.57     2.78      3.25      2.96      3.56     0.42
        αq    0.54    0.27    0.26    0.12    0.20      0.19    −0.06     −0.04      0.15      0.42    −0.12
        tq    2.83    1.42    1.77    0.79    1.61      1.24    −0.39     −0.31      0.97      1.95    −0.39




                                                      48
Panel B: Using only significant predictors in univariate regressions to form expected changes in quarterly I/A
τ           Low         2       3         4       5         6         7         8         9    High      H−L
1     m     0.49     0.70    0.68     0.59     0.62     0.65      0.63      0.53      0.59      1.02     0.53
      tm    1.48     2.67    3.17     2.86     3.03     3.27      3.18      2.50      2.54      3.45     1.81
      αq    0.25     0.33    0.25     0.03     0.07    −0.02     −0.12     −0.23     −0.23      0.20    −0.06
      tq    1.12     2.08    1.90     0.30     0.67    −0.19     −1.52     −2.62     −2.14      1.01    −0.14
2     m     0.56     0.78    0.70     0.76     0.83     0.65      0.52      0.65      0.63      1.11     0.54
      tm    1.62     2.59    2.63     3.09     3.35     2.77      2.19      2.68      2.47      3.40     1.84
      αq    0.43     0.41    0.22     0.22     0.35    −0.02     −0.34     −0.15     −0.10      0.54     0.11
      tq    1.58     2.14    1.30     1.71     2.53    −0.16     −3.06     −1.15     −0.70      2.09     0.25
3     m     0.28     0.90    0.78     0.70     0.70     0.64      0.83      0.68      0.54      0.98     0.70
      tm    0.86     3.14    2.88     2.59     2.76     2.52      3.39      2.83      2.06      3.53     2.93
      αq    0.04     0.51    0.46     0.27     0.18     0.02      0.26     −0.01     −0.20      0.27     0.23
      tq    0.21     3.03    3.06     1.79     1.35     0.18      1.74     −0.04     −1.27      1.35     0.76
4     m     0.35     0.78    0.66     0.69     0.93     0.56      0.60      0.81      0.66      0.87     0.51
      tm    1.08     2.60    2.32     2.63     3.84     2.34      2.27      3.54      2.59      3.15     2.38
      αq    0.12     0.37    0.34     0.19     0.35    −0.07      0.05      0.14     −0.04      0.39     0.27
      tq    0.67     2.24    1.75     1.43     2.74    −0.65      0.42      1.04     −0.27      2.20     1.20
8     m     0.38     0.83    0.84     0.62     0.73     0.90      0.86      0.62      0.64      0.86     0.49
      tm    1.01     2.44    2.89     2.21     2.80     3.35      3.40      2.58      2.80      3.92     1.61
      αq    0.13     0.52    0.40    −0.18     0.14     0.48      0.28      0.01     −0.06      0.26     0.13
      tq    0.63     3.02    2.73    −1.07     0.80     2.67      1.71      0.07     −0.51      2.06     0.51
12    m     0.86     0.73    0.66     0.89     0.82     1.02      0.80      0.78      0.88      0.69    −0.17
      tm    2.49     2.16    2.21     3.18     3.18     3.77      3.14      3.12      3.71      2.96    −0.67
      αq    0.24     0.22    0.14     0.08     0.08     0.24      0.06      0.14      0.12      0.12    −0.12
      tq    1.26     1.22    0.85     0.52     0.42     1.24      0.40      0.91      0.90      0.95    −0.49




                                                      49
      Table 6 : Deciles Formed on Expected Changes in Quarterly Investment-to-assets, the
                         All-but-micro Sample, July 1976–December 2015

Panel A uses all 16 predictors in Table 1 to form expected changes in quarterly investment-to-assets,
          q
Et [△I/Aτ ], with the horizon, τ , ranging from 1 to 12 quarters. At the beginning of each month t, we
calculate Et [△I/Aqτ ] with the latest predictor values known and the average cross-sectional regression slopes
estimated with the data from month t−120−τ ×3 to month t−1−τ ×3. We require a minimum of 36 months.
                                                                                                       q
Cross-sectional regressions are estimated with ordinary least squares. With the calculated Et [△I/Aτ ] values
at the beginning of month t, we sort all-but-micro stocks into deciles, and compute equal-weighted returns
for month t. The deciles are rebalanced at the beginning of month t + 1. For each decile and the high-minus-
low decile (H−L), we report the average excess return, m, its t-value, tm , the q-factor alpha, αq , and its
t-statistic, tq . The t-values are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. In Panel B, we only use
                                                                                            q
anomaly variables that are significant in univariate cross-sectional regressions of △I/Aτ for each τ to form
          q
Et [△I/Aτ ]. For τ = 1, the set of significant predictors includes Sue, R6 , Rdm, and Abr; for τ = 2, Sue, R6 ,
Roe, Oa, Rdm, log(Me), Abr, Ilr, Dac, and Nsi; for τ = 3, Sue, R6 , Roe, Rdm, Cop, Abr, Ilr, Nop, and Nsi;
for τ = 4, Sue, R6 , Oa, Rdm, Abr, Ilr, Nop, Dac, and Nsi; for τ = 8, Ivff, Roe, log(Bm), Oa, Rdm, log(Me),
Cop, Abr, Nop, Dac, and Nsi; and for τ = 12, Sue, Ivff, Roe, log(Bm), I/A, Oa, Rdm, log(Me), Abr, Nop,
Dac, and Nsi. All other aspects of the test design in Panel B are identical to those in Panel A.

               Panel A: Using all 16 anomaly variables to form expected changes in quarterly I/A
  τ             Low         2       3        4       5        6       7        8        9     High     H−L
  1       m     0.46     0.72    0.69     0.74    0.75     0.93     0.80    0.83     1.14     1.43      0.96
          tm    1.15     2.13    2.33     2.69    2.82     3.51     2.97    2.90     3.67     3.78      3.52
          αq    0.24     0.34    0.17     0.15    0.01     0.22     0.08    0.14     0.48     0.87      0.63
          tq    1.10     1.57    1.04     1.40    0.09     2.38     0.91    1.28     2.82     3.67      1.64
  2       m     0.66     0.95    0.75     0.80    0.96     0.86     0.83    0.85     0.97     1.00      0.35
          tm    1.66     2.81    2.43     2.74    3.50     3.29     3.07    3.02     3.08     2.69      1.27
          αq    0.34     0.57    0.19     0.16    0.28     0.11     0.08    0.16     0.32     0.49      0.15
          tq    1.29     3.02    1.27     1.12    2.30     0.97     0.88    1.22     1.85     2.10      0.34
  3       m     0.54     0.82    0.81     0.90    0.74     0.95     0.88    0.84     0.98     1.08      0.53
          tm    1.36     2.38    2.57     3.13    2.67     3.44     3.26    2.97     3.23     2.94      2.05
          αq    0.28     0.41    0.36     0.27    0.07     0.19     0.16    0.13     0.32     0.54      0.26
          tq    1.16     2.21    2.23     2.09    0.59     1.58     1.78    1.05     1.91     2.30      0.65
  4       m     0.36     0.86    0.75     0.95    0.84     0.94     0.89    0.91     0.94     1.31      0.95
          tm    0.88     2.46    2.39     3.34    2.91     3.46     3.35    3.24     3.25     3.70      3.92
          αq    0.16     0.45    0.34     0.39    0.11     0.17     0.09    0.11     0.16     0.67      0.51
          tq    0.75     2.74    2.46     2.95    1.08     1.69     0.89    1.10     1.10     3.13      1.57
  8       m     0.34     0.85    0.78     0.94    0.93     1.01     0.87    0.90     0.79     0.89      0.55
          tm    0.83     2.35    2.30     3.13    3.18     3.60     3.16    3.11     2.82     2.83      2.35
          αq    0.16     0.49    0.40     0.47    0.31     0.36     0.10    0.14     0.03     0.17      0.01
          tq    0.96     3.52    2.96     4.35    3.40     3.75     1.05    1.49     0.28     1.17      0.06
  12      m     0.62     0.96    0.84     0.99    1.16     0.95     1.02    0.97     0.97     0.87      0.25
          tm    1.51     2.66    2.52     3.19    3.82     3.35     3.60    3.52     3.37     2.63      0.93
          αq    0.24     0.44    0.33     0.42    0.47     0.24     0.23    0.13     0.15     0.07     −0.17
          tq    1.36     3.36    3.05     3.60    3.90     2.22     2.07    1.25     1.26     0.43     −0.70




                                                      50
    Panel B: Using only significant predictors in univariate regressions to form expected changes in quarterly I/A
τ                Low         2        3        4         5        6        7        8        9     High       H−L
1         m      0.58     0.69     0.72      0.80     0.86     0.80     0.77     0.93     1.18      1.38      0.80
          tm     1.44     2.09     2.46      2.80     3.11     2.89     2.70     2.97     3.40      3.38      2.52
          αq     0.49     0.32     0.27      0.26     0.26     0.13     0.10     0.30     0.59      0.90      0.41
          tq     1.80     1.65     1.63      1.96     3.00     1.25     0.82     1.56     2.64      3.07      0.85
2         m      0.65     0.81     0.85      0.91     0.86     0.88     0.83     0.92     0.94      1.09      0.44
          tm     1.62     2.35     2.73      3.16     3.09     3.35     2.86     3.06     2.80      2.66      1.45
          αq     0.34     0.37     0.37      0.29     0.24     0.23     0.23     0.32     0.39      0.72      0.38
          tq     1.22     1.93     2.41      1.99     2.35     2.52     1.75     1.87     1.62      2.57      0.79
3         m      0.53     0.86     0.82      0.88     0.82     0.89     0.80     0.86     1.01      1.10      0.57
          tm     1.36     2.64     2.73      3.09     2.99     3.28     2.98     2.87     3.10      2.95      2.14
          αq     0.14     0.33     0.17      0.32     0.17     0.21     0.10     0.23     0.41      0.67      0.53
          tq     0.54     1.71     1.19      2.08     1.65     2.22     0.98     1.60     2.45      2.83      1.28
4         m      0.46     0.59     0.89      0.81     0.85     0.85     0.92     0.95     1.13      1.27      0.80
          tm     1.17     1.73     2.96      2.71     3.12     3.19     3.38     3.28     3.53      3.37      3.34
          αq     0.11     0.05     0.40      0.20     0.17     0.11     0.18     0.30     0.49      0.80      0.70
          tq     0.51     0.32     2.65      1.52     1.48     1.09     1.83     2.70     2.50      3.33      1.93
8         m      0.31     0.80     0.84      0.82     0.86     0.96     0.99     0.86     0.80      0.83      0.52
          tm     0.73     2.07     2.47      2.58     2.99     3.40     3.57     2.96     2.88      2.76      1.92
          αq     0.18     0.49     0.47      0.38     0.26     0.26     0.29     0.11     0.01      0.08     −0.10
          tq     1.01     3.29     3.92      3.58     2.69     2.65     3.04     1.00     0.13      0.64     −0.44
12        m      0.57     1.00     0.95      1.02     0.97     1.03     1.11     0.86     0.92      0.90      0.33
          tm     1.35     2.72     2.67      3.12     3.20     3.54     3.94     3.14     3.22      2.92      1.12
          αq     0.26     0.50     0.54      0.45     0.37     0.32     0.36     0.03     0.02      0.07     −0.19
          tq     1.32     3.65     3.32      3.77     3.36     3.21     3.46     0.27     0.19      0.49     −0.74




                                                          51
             Table 7 : Factor Spanning Tests, The PRRT Factor Model, the q-factor Model, and the Carhart Model, January
                                                        1967–December 2015
     Panel A regresses the PRRT factors on the q-factor model and on the Carhart model. fME , fEP , and fBM are the size, earnings yield, and book-
     to-market factors from the PRRT model. m denotes average returns, αq is the q-factor alpha, αC the Carhart alpha, and the betas are factor
     loadings. Panel B regresses the Carhart factors and q-factors on the PRRT factor model, consisting of the market factor, fME , fEP , and fBM . αP is
     the PRRT alpha, and the betas are factor loadings. The Carhart factors data are from Kennenth French’s Web site, and the q-factors data are from
     Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015). To form the PRRT factors, at the end of June of each year t, we use the median NYSE size to split NYSE, Amex,
     and NASDAQ stocks into two groups, small and big. Independently, we split stocks into three earnings yield groups using the NYSE breakpoints
     for the low 30%, middle 40%, and high 30% of the ranking values for the fiscal year ending in calendar year t − 1. Also independently, we break
     stocks into three book-to-market groups using the NYSE breakpoints for the low 30%, middle 40%, and high 30% of the ranking values for the
     fiscal year ending in calendar year t − 1. Taking the intersection of the two size, three earnings yield, and three book-to-market groups, we obtain
     18 benchmark portfolios. Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1, and the portfolios are
     rebalanced at the June of t + 1. fME is the difference (small-minus-big), each month, between the simple average of the returns on the nine small
     portfolios and that of the nine big portfolios. fEP is the difference (high-minus-low), each month, between the simple average of the returns on
     the six high earnings yield portfolios and that of the six low earnings yield portfolios. Finally, fBM is the difference (high-minus-low), each month,
     between the simple average of the returns on the six high book-to-market portfolios and that of the six low book-to-market portfolios.
52




                      Panel A: Explaining the PRRT factors                                          Panel B: The PRRT four-factor regressions
                                                                            2
                 m        αq    β MKT      β ME      β I/A    β ROE     R                      m        αP     β MKT       β ME      β EP        β BM    R2
      fME      0.24     0.09     0.01      0.88     −0.19     −0.09    0.91        SMB       0.21      0.01    −0.02      0.97     −0.07        −0.01   0.92
               1.85     2.11     0.96     44.45     −4.77     −3.17                          1.59      0.16    −1.35     41.62     −2.37        −0.38
      fEP      0.25    −0.01    −0.12     −0.12      0.40      0.34    0.38        HML       0.34      0.05     0.06      0.06      0.43         0.89   0.82
               1.97    −0.11    −3.61     −1.74      4.60      4.33                          2.53      0.84     3.42      2.12      9.22        37.49
      fBM      0.16     0.06    −0.07      0.01      0.74     −0.31    0.47        UMD       0.69      0.86    −0.20     −0.02      0.00        −0.41   0.07
               1.43     0.72    −2.59      0.16     12.38     −4.81                          3.82      4.82    −2.47     −0.14      0.01        −3.23
                         αC     β MKT     β SMB     β HML     β UMD     R2
      fME               0.02     0.03      0.93      0.05     −0.02    0.92        rME       0.31      0.03     0.00      1.00       0.08        0.09   0.90
                        0.50     2.47     74.18      1.93     −1.14                          2.34      0.76     0.14     42.80       2.15        3.96
      fEP               0.18    −0.12     −0.25      0.41      0.05    0.46        rI/A      0.41      0.36    −0.06     −0.06       0.10        0.39   0.45
                        1.96    −4.83     −4.34      8.17      1.12                          4.88      5.72    −3.76     −1.96       1.86       12.93
      fBM              −0.06    −0.05      0.07      0.70     −0.02    0.71        rROE      0.57      0.61    −0.05     −0.17       0.39       −0.45   0.39
                       −0.93    −2.93      3.47     22.00     −1.21                          5.36      7.78    −1.68     −3.75       5.40       −9.04
                                Table 8 : Estimates of Implied Costs of Capital for the Fama-French (2015) Factors

     AR, IRR, and Diff (all in annual percent) are the average return, the internal rate of return, and AR minus IRR, respectively. SMB, HML, RMW,
     and CMA are the Fama-French (2015) size, value, profitability, and investment factors, respectively. Panel A uses the analysts’ earnings forecasts,
     Panel B uses the Hou-van Dijk-Zhang (2012) cross-sectional earnings forecasts, and Panel C uses the Tang-Wu-Zhang (2014) cross-sectional Roe
     forecasts in estimating the IRRs. GLS denotes the Gebhardt-Lee-Swaminathan model, Easton the Easton model, CT the Claus-Thomas model,
     OJ the Ohlson-Juettner-Nauroth model, and Average the averages across the models. Appendix C describes in detail the estimation methods.

                    Panel A: IBES earnings forecasts            Panel B: Cross-sectional earnings forecasts        Panel C: Cross-sectional ROE forecasts
                              (1979–2015)                                      (1967–2015)                                      (1967–2015)
              AR     IRR       Diff   AR      IRR       Diff   AR      IRR       Diff   AR       IRR     Diff   AR       IRR      Diff   AR       IRR       Diff
                     GLS                     Easton                    GLS                     Easton                   GLS                     Easton
     SMB     1.75    0.87      0.88   1.87    2.52     −0.65   2.85    1.53      1.32   2.85     5.05   −2.20   3.21    0.08      3.14   3.12     1.15    1.97
     [t]     0.87    4.56      0.44   0.97   14.63     −0.34   1.38    4.02      0.66   1.42     6.90   −1.17   1.63    0.33      1.62   1.58     4.86    1.00
     HML     3.26    3.50     −0.23   3.16    3.30     −0.14   3.49    5.55     −2.06   3.41     7.22   −3.81   3.80    5.20     −1.39   4.02     7.61   −3.59
     [t]     1.48   18.39     −0.11   1.37    7.31     −0.06   1.88   26.60     −1.14   1.81    14.99   −1.96   2.03   31.79     −0.77   2.08    15.88   −1.96
     RMW     3.75   −1.18      4.93   4.43   −3.29      7.72   3.37   −1.44      4.81   3.89    −3.67    7.57   3.00   −1.36      4.36   3.18    −6.41    9.59
     [t]     2.59   −8.32      3.49   2.70   −9.42      4.60   2.60   −6.58      3.86   2.60   −10.35    4.79   2.37   −7.94      3.56   2.50   −19.65    6.99
     CMA     3.34    0.64      2.70   3.46    2.45      1.00   3.59    1.61      1.99   4.28     4.06    0.22   3.37    1.11      2.26   3.32     4.58   −1.26
     [t]     2.69    4.69      2.26   2.95    7.80      0.94   3.01    9.13      1.72   4.10    11.39    0.20   3.03    5.76      2.08   2.81    10.32   −1.12
53




                      CT                       OJ                       CT                       OJ                      CT                       OJ
     SMB     1.79     1.10     0.69   1.94    0.67      1.27   2.92    2.73      0.19   3.90    3.21     0.69   3.46   −1.13      4.59   3.44   −1.39     4.82
     [t]     0.89     6.79     0.35   0.97    4.43      0.65   1.41    4.23      0.09   2.00    5.32     0.37   1.75   −3.54      2.35   1.68   −3.79     2.32
     HML     3.38     0.06     3.32   2.23    0.70      1.53   3.28    3.64     −0.36   2.97    4.72    −1.75   3.25    2.55      0.70   3.15    4.15    −1.00
     [t]     1.50     0.17     1.46   1.03    3.55      0.70   1.76   15.76     −0.19   1.72   17.96    −1.00   1.88    5.76      0.39   1.63    9.27    −0.51
     RMW     3.71     0.34     3.37   4.11   −0.03      4.14   3.17   −0.00      3.18   3.31   −1.59     4.90   2.55    0.00      2.54   2.11   −2.05     4.16
     [t]     2.64     2.20     2.42   3.36   −0.17      3.36   2.94   −0.01      2.95   3.30   −5.72     4.60   2.45    0.02      2.43   2.06   −9.07     3.76
     CMA     3.31     0.08     3.23   3.03    0.07      2.96   3.26    1.52      1.74   3.72    2.10     1.62   2.81    0.62      2.19   3.06    0.70     2.35
     [t]     2.71     0.58     2.65   2.59    0.42      2.53   2.82   11.24      1.46   3.07   10.62     1.35   2.55    4.25      1.93   2.53    3.30     1.86
                    Average                                           Average                                          Average
     SMB     1.73    1.72      0.01                            2.82    3.23     −0.41                           3.20    −0.22     3.42
     [t]     0.90   10.65      0.01                            1.36    5.59     −0.21                           1.63    −0.83     1.75
     HML     3.15    2.03      1.13                            3.65    5.30     −1.66                           3.77     5.09    −1.32
     [t]     1.36    8.64      0.50                            1.92   24.84     −0.88                           2.01    17.26    −0.72
     RMW     4.47   −1.59      6.06                            3.47   −1.85      5.32                           3.01    −2.46     5.46
     [t]     2.76   −9.74      3.76                            2.52   −9.41      3.88                           2.37   −20.72     4.28
     CMA     3.26    1.15      2.11                            3.69    2.64      1.05                           3.32     2.04     1.28
     [t]     2.72    7.01      1.86                            3.19   19.47      0.92                           3.02    13.60     1.19
          Table 9 : Annual Cross-sectional Regressions of Future Book Equity Growth Rates and Operating Profitability, 1963–2015

     The sample contains all common stocks on NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq. We do not exclude financial firms, because these stocks are included in the
     construction of the Fama-French (2015) five factors. All the regressions are annual cross-sectional regressions. Ait is total assets for firm i at year
     t, △Ait ≡ Ait − Ait−1 , Beit is book equity for firm i at year t, △Beit ≡ Beit − Beit−1 , and Opit is operating profitability for firm i at year t. Book
     equity is measured as in Davis, Fama, and French (2000), and operating profitability is measured as in Fama and French (2015). Variables dated t
     are measured at the end of the fiscal year ending in calendar year t. To avoid the excess influence of small firms, we follow Fama and French (2006)
     and exclude those with total assets below $5 million or book equity below $2.5 million in year t in Panel A. The cutoffs are $25 million and $12.5
     million in Panel B. We winsorize all regression variables at the 1st and 99th percentiles of the cross-sectional distribution each year.

                              △Beit+τ                                             △Beit+τ
                              Beit+τ −1
                                          = γ 0 + γ 1 A△A it
                                                        it−1
                                                             + ǫt+τ               Beit+τ −1
                                                                                                          △Beit
                                                                                              = γ 0 + γ 1 Be it−1
                                                                                                                  + ǫt+τ                  Opit+τ = γ 0 + γ 1 Opit + ǫt+τ
                                                                           2                                                   2
      τ       #firms     γ0       t(γ 0 )       γ1        t(γ 1 )      R         γ0    t(γ 0 )       γ1      t(γ 1 )       R        γ0       t(γ 0 )    γ1      t(γ 1 )     R2
                                                       Panel A: Firms with assets ≥ $5 million and book equity ≥ $2.5 million
      1        3,106   0.09       14.57        0.22      14.38        0.05     0.09    13.14       0.21       8.64     0.06        0.03       4.85     0.79    43.14       0.54
      2        2,844   0.10       14.57        0.10       7.58        0.01     0.10    14.65       0.10       5.23     0.02        0.06       6.67     0.66    28.82       0.36
      3        2,624   0.10       14.98        0.06       6.25        0.01     0.10    14.91       0.06       4.09     0.01        0.08       8.11     0.58    25.35       0.27
      4        2,429   0.10       16.19        0.05       5.47        0.00     0.10    16.20       0.05       3.73     0.00        0.09       9.47     0.52    22.93       0.22
54




      5        2,256   0.10       15.03        0.04       3.41        0.00     0.10    16.04       0.03       1.91     0.00        0.10      11.37     0.49    23.35       0.19
      6        2,099   0.10       15.26        0.05       4.57        0.00     0.10    15.01       0.03       2.24     0.00        0.11      13.05     0.45    23.72       0.16
      7        1,955   0.10       15.45        0.04       4.39        0.00     0.10    15.58       0.03       2.69     0.00        0.11      14.39     0.42    21.71       0.15
      8        1,821   0.09       15.36        0.03       3.98        0.00     0.10    15.65       0.01       1.60     0.00        0.12      15.82     0.40    19.09       0.13
      9        1,697   0.09       15.28        0.03       3.45        0.00     0.10    15.42       0.01       1.19     0.00        0.12      15.29     0.39    18.10       0.12
      10       1,584   0.09       14.57        0.04       4.50        0.00     0.09    14.77       0.02       2.17     0.00        0.13      14.61     0.38    17.48       0.11
                                                      Panel B: Firms with assets ≥ $25 million and book equity ≥ $12.5 million
      1        2,485   0.08       15.82        0.23      17.75        0.05     0.08    14.10       0.24     10.53      0.07        0.03       7.14     0.82    57.60       0.61
      2        2,278   0.09       15.67        0.13      10.23        0.02     0.09    16.03       0.13      7.10      0.02        0.06       9.13     0.69    35.39       0.42
      3        2,103   0.09       16.53        0.08       7.61        0.01     0.09    16.37       0.08      5.82      0.01        0.08      11.01     0.61    31.96       0.32
      4        1,949   0.09       17.04        0.07       6.70        0.01     0.09    16.96       0.07      4.44      0.01        0.09      13.31     0.56    30.26       0.26
      5        1,812   0.09       16.60        0.05       3.90        0.01     0.09    17.23       0.04      2.87      0.01        0.10      16.00     0.51    31.21       0.22
      6        1,689   0.09       16.57        0.05       5.51        0.00     0.09    16.39       0.04      3.37      0.00        0.11      17.71     0.48    32.30       0.19
      7        1,577   0.09       16.80        0.05       4.84        0.00     0.09    16.90       0.04      3.12      0.00        0.12      19.34     0.45    30.53       0.16
      8        1,473   0.09       16.07        0.03       3.92        0.00     0.09    16.08       0.02      2.58      0.00        0.13      19.90     0.43    26.50       0.15
      9        1,375   0.09       15.84        0.03       3.92        0.00     0.09    16.07       0.02      2.08      0.00        0.13      19.14     0.42    23.14       0.14
      10       1,286   0.09       14.58        0.05       5.35        0.00     0.09    14.84       0.03      3.01      0.00        0.14      18.07     0.40    22.38       0.13
     A      Derivations
     We derive the investment CAPM in equation (7), following Liu, Whited, and Zhang (2009). Let qit
     be the Lagrangian multiplier associated with Ait+1 = Iit + (1 − δ)Ait . The optimality conditions
     with respect to Iit , Ait+1 , and Bit+1 from maximizing equation (4) are, respectively,

                                       ∂Φ(Iit , Ait )
                    qit = 1 + (1 − τ )                                                                             (A1)
                                          ∂Iit
                                                                                                
                                                          ∂Φ(Iit+1 , Ait+1 )
                    qit = Et Mt+1 (1 − τ ) Xit+1 −                             + τ δ + (1 − δ)qit+1                (A2)
                                                               ∂Ait+1
                                    B          B
                                                               
                     1 = Et Mt+1 rit+1    − (rit+1    − 1)τ t+1 .                                                  (A3)

     Dividing both sides of equation (A2) by qit and substituting equation (A1), we obtain
               I
     Et [Mt+1 rit+1                     I
                    ] = 1, in which rit+1     is the investment return given by equation (5), after substi-
                                            2
     tuting Φ(Iit , Ait ) = (a/2)(Iit /Ait ) Ait .
                                             B ] = 1 + E [M
         Equation (A3) says that Et [Mt+1 rit+1                      B
                                                           t   t+1 (rit+1 − 1)τ ]. Intuitively, because of the
     tax benefit of debt, the unit price of the pre-tax bond return, Et [Mt+1 rit+1 B ], is higher than one.

     The difference is precisely the present value of the tax benefit. Because we define the after-tax
                               Ba ≡ r B
     corporate bond return, rit+1               B
                                       it+1 − (rit+1 − 1)τ , equation (A3) says that the unit price of the
                                                        Ba ] = 1.
     after-tax corporate bond return is one: Et [Mt+1 rit+1
       To prove equation (6), we first show that qit Ait+1 = Pit + Bit+1 under constant returns to scale.
     We start with Pit + Dit = Vit and expand Vit using equations (3) and (4):
                                                B
Pit + (1 − τ )[Π(Xit , Ait ) − Φ(Iit , Ait ) − rit Bit ] − τ Bit − Iit + Bit+1 + τ δAit =
                                                                                    
                                  ∂Φ(Iit , Ait )         ∂Φ(Iit , Ait )        B
        (1 − τ ) Π(Xit , Ait ) −                 Iit −                  Ait − rit Bit − τ Bit − Iit + Bit+1 + τ δAit
                                        ∂Iit                 ∂Ait
                                                                       
                                                                                            ∂Φ(Iit+1 , Ait+1 )
         − qit (Ait+1 − (1 − δ)Ait − Iit ) + Et [Mt+1 ((1 − τ t ) Π(Xit+1 , Ait+1 ) −                          Iit+1
                                                                                                 ∂Iit+1
                                                     
           ∂Φ(Iit+1 , Ait+1 )             B
         −                    Ait+1 − rit+1 Bit+1 − τ Bit+1 − Iit+1 + Bit+2
                 ∂Ait+1
         + τ δAit+1 − qit+1 (Ait+2 − (1 − δ)Ait+1 − Iit+1 ) + . . . )]                                               (A4)

         Recursively substituting equations (A1), (A2), and (A3), and simplifying, we obtain:
                                                          B
          Pit + (1 − τ )[Π(Xit , Ait ) − Φ(Iit , Ait ) − rit Bit ] − τ Bit − Iit + Bit+1 + τ δAit =
                                                                         
                                            ∂Φ(Iit , Ait )           B
                  (1 − τ ) Π(Xit , Ait ) −                 Ait − rit Bit − τ Bit + qit (1 − δ)Ait + τ δAit         (A5)
                                                 ∂Ait

     Simplifying further and using the linear homogeneity of Φ(Iit , Ait ), we obtain:

                                                 ∂Φ(Iit , Ait )
                        Pit + Bit+1 = (1 − τ )                  Iit + Iit + qit (1 − δ)Ait = qit Ait+1             (A6)
                                                    ∂Iit
     Equation (8) then follows.




                                                             55
    Finally, we are ready to prove equation (6):
                                                              B B
                                                                                                       
                                                    (1 − τ )rit+1     it+1 + τ Bit+1 + Pit+1
                                                                                             B B
                                      +(1 − τ )[Π(Xit+1 , Ait+1 ) − Φ(Iit+1 , Ait+1 ) − rit+1   it+1 ] 
          Ba                 S                      −τ Bit+1 − Iit+1 + Bit+2 + τ δAit+1
     wit rit+1  + (1 − wit )rit+1 =
                                                                    Pit + Bit+1
                                                                                     
                 1      qit+1 (Iit+1 + (1 − δ)Ait+1 ) + (1 − τ )[Π(Xit+1 , Ait+1 )
        =
            qit Ait+1              −Φ(Iit+1 , Ait+1 )] − Iit+1 + τ δAit+1
                                      h                            i
                                                 ∂Φ(Iit+1 ,Ait+1 )
             qit+1 (1 − δ) + (1 − τ ) Xit+1 −         ∂Ait+1         + τδ
                                                                                I
        =                                                                   = rit+1 .                     (A7)
                                         qit

Equation (9) then follows by rewriting equation (6) as the marginal cost of investment equals
the marginal benefit of investment discounted by the weighted average cost of capital, and then
multiplying both sides of the equation by Ait+1 .


B     Variable Definitions
Sue, standardized unexpected earnings. Per Foster, Olsen, and Shevlin (1984), Sue is calculated
as the change in split-adjusted quarterly earnings per share (Compustat quarterly item EPSPXQ
divided by item AJEXQ) from its value four quarters ago divided by the standard deviation of this
change in quarterly earnings over the prior eight quarters (six quarters minimum). Before 1972, we
use the most recent Sue computed with quarterly earnings from fiscal quarters ending at least four
months prior to the portfolio formation. Starting from 1972, we use Sue computed with quarterly
earnings from the most recent quarterly earnings announcement dates (Compustat quarterly item
RDQ). We require the end of the fiscal quarter that corresponds to its most recent Sue to be within
six months prior to the month when Sue is used in monthly cross-sectional regressions. We do so
to exclude stale information on earnings. To avoid potentially erroneous records, we also require
the earnings announcement date to be after the corresponding fiscal quarter end.
   R6 , prior six-month returns. For each month t, we measure R6 as the prior six-month return
from month t − 7 to t − 2, skipping month t − 1.
    Ivff, idiosyncratic volatility. Following Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006), we calculate Ivff
relative to the Fama-French (1993) three-factor model as the residual volatility from regressing a
stock’s excess returns on the Fama-French three factors. At the beginning of each month t, we
estimate Ivff with daily returns from month t − 1. We require a minimum of 15 daily returns.
    Roe, return on equity. Roe is income before extraordinary items (Compustat quarterly item
IBQ) divided by one-quarter-lagged book equity (Hou, Xue, and Zhang 2015). Book equity is
shareholders’ equity, plus balance sheet deferred taxes and investment tax credit (item TXDITCQ)
if available, minus the book value of preferred stock (item PSTKQ). Depending on availability,
we use stockholders’ equity (item SEQQ), or common equity (item CEQQ) plus the book value
of preferred stock, or total assets (item ATQ) minus total liabilities (item LTQ) in that order as
shareholders’ equity. Before 1972, the sample coverage is limited for quarterly book equity in Com-
pustat quarterly files. We expand the coverage by using book equity from Compustat annual files
as well as by imputing quarterly book equity with clean surplus accounting. Specifically, whenever
available we first use quarterly book equity from Compustat quarterly files. We then supplement


                                                     56
the coverage for fiscal quarter four with annual book equity from Compustat annual files. Follow-
ing Davis, Fama, and French (2000), we measure annual book equity as stockholders’ book equity,
plus balance sheet deferred taxes and investment tax credit (Compustat annual item TXDITC) if
available, minus the book value of preferred stock. Stockholders’ equity is the value reported by
Compustat (item SEQ), if available. If not, stockholders’ equity is the book value of common equity
(item CEQ) plus the par value of preferred stock (item PSTK), or the book value of assets (item AT)
minus total liabilities (item LT). Depending on availability, we use redemption (item PSTKRV),
liquidating (item PSTKL), or par value (item PSTK) for the book value of preferred stock.
    If both approaches are unavailable, we apply the clean surplus relation to impute the book
equity. First, if available, we backward impute the beginning-of-quarter book equity as the end-
of-quarter book equity minus quarterly earnings plus quarterly dividends. Quarterly earnings are
income before extraordinary items (Compustat quarterly item IBQ). Quarterly dividends are zero
if dividends per share (item DVPSXQ) are zero. Otherwise, total dividends are dividends per share
times beginning-of-quarter shares outstanding adjusted for stock splits during the quarter. Shares
outstanding are from Compustat (quarterly item CSHOQ supplemented with annual item CSHO
for fiscal quarter four) or CRSP (item SHROUT), and the share adjustment factor is from Com-
pustat (quarterly item AJEXQ supplemented with annual item AJEX for fiscal quarter four) or
CRSP (item CFACSHR). Because we impose a four-month lag between earnings and the holding
period month (and the book equity in the denominator of ROE is one-quarter-lagged relative to
earnings), all the Compustat data in the backward imputation are at least four-month lagged prior
to the portfolio formation. If data are unavailable for the backward imputation, we impute the
book equity for quarter t forward based on book equity from prior quarters. Let BEQt−j , 1 ≤ j ≤ 4
denote the latest available quarterly book equity as of quarter t, and IBQt−j+1,t and DVQt−j+1,t
be the sum of quarterly earnings and quarterly dividends from quarter t − j + 1 to t, respectively.
BEQt can then be imputed as BEQt−j + IBQt−j+1,t − DVQt−j+1,t . We do not use prior book equity
from more than four quarters ago (i.e., 1 ≤ j ≤ 4) to reduce imputation errors.
    Before 1972, for each month t we use the most recent Roe computed with quarterly earnings
from fiscal quarters ending at least four months prior to month t. Starting from 1972, we use Roe
computed with quarterly earnings from the most recent quarterly earnings announcement dates
(Compustat quarterly item RDQ). We require the end of the fiscal quarter that corresponds to its
most recent Roe to be within six months prior to month t. This restriction is imposed to exclude
stale earnings information. To avoid potentially erroneous records, we also require the earnings
announcement date to be after the corresponding fiscal quarter end.
    log(Bm), log book-to-market equity. At the end of June of each year t, we measure Bm as the
book equity for the fiscal year ending in calendar year t − 1 divided by the market equity (from
CRSP) at the end of December of t − 1. For firms with more than one share class, we merge
the market equity for all share classes before computing Bm. Following Davis, Fama, and French
(2000), we measure book equity as stockholders’ book equity, plus balance sheet deferred taxes
and investment tax credit (Compustat annual item TXDITC) if available, minus the book value
of preferred stock. Stockholders’ equity is the value reported by Compustat (item SEQ), if it is
available. If not, we measure stockholders’ equity as the book value of common equity (item CEQ)
plus the par value of preferred stock (item PSTK), or the book value of assets (item AT) minus to-
tal liabilities (item LT). Depending on availability, we use redemption (item PSTKRV), liquidating
(item PSTKL), or par value (item PSTK) for the book value of preferred stock.
   I/A, investment-to-assets. At the end of June of each year t, we measure I/A as total assets


                                                57
(Compustat annual item AT) for the fiscal year ending in calendar year t − 1 divided by total assets
for the fiscal year ending in t − 2 minus one.
    Oa, operating accruals. Prior to 1988, we use the balance sheet approach in Sloan (1996) to
measure Oa as changes in noncash working capital minus depreciation, in which the noncash work-
ing capital is changes in noncash current assets minus changes in current liabilities less short-term
debt and taxes payable. In particular, Oa equals (dCA − dCASH) − (dCL − dSTD − dTP) − DP, in
which dCA is the change in current assets (Compustat annual item ACT), dCASH is the change
in cash or cash equivalents (item CHE), dCL is the change in current liabilities (item LCT), dSTD
is the change in debt included in current liabilities (item DLC), dTP is the change in income taxes
payable (item TXP), and DP is depreciation and amortization (item DP). Missing changes in in-
come taxes payable are set to zero. Starting from 1988, we follow Hribar and Collins (2002) to
measure Oa using the statement of cash flows as net income (item NI) minus net cash flow from
operations (item OANCF). Doing so helps mitigate measurement errors that can arise from nonop-
erating activities such as acquisitions and divestitures. Data from the statement of cash flows are
only available since 1988. At the end of June of each year t, we scale Oa for the fiscal year ending
in calendar year t − 1 by total assets (item AT) for the fiscal year ending in t − 2.
   Rdm, R&D expense-to-market. At the end of June of each year t, we calculate Rdm as R&D
expenses (Compustat annual item XRD) for the fiscal year ending in calendar year t − 1 divided
by the market equity (from CRSP) at the end of December of t − 1. For firms with more than
one share class, we merge the market equity for all share classes before computing Rdm. We keep
only firms with positive R&D expenses. Because the accounting treatment of R&D expenses was
standardized in 1975, the Rdm sample starts in July 1976.
   log(Me), market equity. Me is price per share times shares outstanding from CRSP.
    Ep, earnings-to-price. At the end of June of each year t, we measure Ep as income before
extraordinary items (Compustat annual item IB) for the fiscal year ending in calendar year t − 1
divided by the market equity (from CRSP) at the end of December of t − 1. For firms with more
than one share class, we merge the market equity for all share classes before computing Ep. Firms
with non-positive earnings are excluded.
    Cop, cash-based operating profitability. Following Ball, Gerakos, Linnainmaa, and Nikolaev
(2016), we measure Cop as total revenue (Compustat annual item REVT) minus cost of goods
sold (item COGS), minus selling, general, and administrative expenses (item XSGA), plus research
and development expenditures (item XRD, zero if missing), minus change in accounts receivable
(item RECT), minus change in inventory (item INVT), minus change in prepaid expenses (item
XPP), plus change in deferred revenue (item DRC plus item DRLT), plus change in trade accounts
payable (item AP), and plus change in accrued expenses (item XACC), all scaled by book assets
(item AT, the denominator is current, not lagged, total assets). All changes are annual changes
in balance sheet items and we set missing changes to zero. At the end of June of each year t, we
calculate Cop for the fiscal year ending in calendar year t − 1.
   Abr, cumulative abnormal returns around earnings announcement dates. We calculate Abr
around the latest quarterly earnings announcement date (Compustat quarterly item RDQ) (Chan,
Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok 1996)) as:
                                                +1
                                                X
                                       Abri =          rid − rmd ,                              (B1)
                                                d=−2


                                                  58
in which rid is stock i’s return on day d (with the earnings announced on day 0) and rmd is the
market index return. We cumulate returns until one (trading) day after the announcement date
to account for the one-day-delayed reaction to earnings news. rmd is the value-weighted market
return for the Abr deciles with NYSE breakpoints and value-weighted returns.
    For a firm to enter our sample at the beginning of month t, we require the end of the fiscal quarter
that corresponds to its most recent Abr to be within six months prior to month t. We do so to ex-
clude stale information on earnings. To avoid potentially erroneous records, we also require the earn-
ings announcement date to be after the corresponding fiscal quarter end. Because quarterly earnings
announcement dates are largely unavailable before 1972, the Abr sample starts in January 1972.
    Ilr, industry lead-lag effect in prior returns. We start with the Fama-French (1997) 49-industry
classifications. Excluding financial firms from the sample leaves 45 industries. Following Hou
(2007), at the beginning of each month t, we calculate Ilr as the month t − 1 value-weighted return
of the portfolio consisting of the 30% biggest (market equity) firms within a given industry.
    Nop, net payout yield. Per Boudoukh, Michaely, Richardson, and Roberts (2007), total payouts
are dividends on common stock (Compustat annual item DVC) plus repurchases. Repurchases are
the total expenditure on the purchase of common and preferred stocks (item PRSTKC) plus any
reduction (negative change over the prior year) in the value of the net number of preferred stocks
outstanding (item PSTKRV). Net payouts equal total payouts minus equity issuances, which are
the sale of common and preferred stock (item SSTK) minus any increase (positive change over the
prior year) in the value of the net number of preferred stocks outstanding (item PSTKRV). At the
end of June of each year t, we measure Nop for the fiscal year ending in calendar year t − 1 divided
by the market equity (from CRSP) at the end of December of t − 1. For firms with more than
one share class, we merge the market equity for all share classes. Firms with zero net payouts are
excluded. Because the data on total expenditure and the sale of common and preferred stocks start
in 1971, the Nop sample starts in July 1972.
   Dac, discretionary accruals. We measure Dac using the modified Jones model from Dechow,
Sloan, and Sweeney (1995):

                   Oai,t         1         dSALEi,t − dRECi,t      PPEi,t
                          = α1        + α2                    + α3        + ei,t ,                 (B2)
                   Ai,t−1      Ai,t−1           Ai,t−1             Ai,t−1

in which Oai,t is operating accruals for firm i, At−1 is total assets (Compustat annual item AT)
at the end of year t − 1, dSALEi,t is the annual change in sales (item SALE) from year t − 1 to t,
dRECi,t is the annual change in net receivables (item RECT) from year t − 1 to t, and PPEi,t is
gross property, plant, and equipment (item PPEGT) at the end of year t. We estimate the cross-
sectional regression (B2) for each two-digit SIC industry and year combination, formed separately
for NYSE/AMEX firms and for NASDAQ firms. We require at least six firms for each regression.
The discretionary accrual for stock i is defined as the residual from the regression, ei,t . At the end
of June of each year t, we calculate Dac for the fiscal year ending in calendar year t − 1.
    Nsi, net stock issues. At the end of June of year t, we measure net stock issues, Nsi, as the
natural log of the ratio of the split-adjusted shares outstanding at the fiscal year ending in cal-
endar year t − 1 to the split-adjusted shares outstanding at the fiscal year ending in t − 2. The
split-adjusted shares outstanding is shares outstanding (Compustat annual item CSHO) times the
adjustment factor (item AJEX).
   △I/Aqτ , τ = 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 12, quarterly changes in investment-to-assets. For each month t, we

                                                  59
measure △I/Aqτ as the one-quarter asset growth for the τ th quarter in the future and the one-
quarter asset growth for the latest fiscal quarter ending at least four months ago. Quarterly asset
growth (investment-to-assets) quarterly total assets (Compustat quarterly item ATQ) divided by
one-quarter-lagged total assets minus one.


C     Estimating the Implied Cost of Capital
C.1    The Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan (2001) Procedure
We measure current book equity, Bet , using the latest accounting data from the fiscal year end-
ing between March of year t − 1 to February of t. This practice implies that for the IRR es-
timates at the end of June in t, we impose at least a four-month lag to ensure that the ac-
counting information is released to the public. The definition of book equity follows Davis,
Fama, and French (2000). We apply clean surplus accounting to construct future book equity
as Bet+τ = Bet+τ −1 + Bet+τ −1 Et [Roet+τ ](1 − k), 1 ≤ τ ≤ 11, in which k is the dividend payout
ratio in year t. Dividend payout ratio is dividends (Compustat annual item DVC) divided by earn-
ings (item IB) for profitable firms, or dividends divided by 6% of total assets (item AT) for firms
with zero or negative earnings. We drop a firm if its book equity is zero or negative in any year.
    We construct the expected Roe for the first three years ahead, using analyst earnings forecasts
from the Institutional Brokers’ Estimated System (IBES) or forecasts from cross-sectional regres-
sions. After year t + 3, we assume that the expected firm-level Roe mean-reverts linearly to the
historical industry median Roe by year t + 12, and becomes a perpetuity afterwards. We use the
Fama-French (1997) 48 industry classification. We use at least five and up to ten years of past Roe
data from non-loss firms to compute the industry median Roe.
     Following GLS (2001), we implement the GLS model on a per share basis with analysts’ earn-
ings forecasts. Pt is the June-end share price from CRSP. Bet is book equity per share calculated as
book equity divided by the number of shares outstanding reported in June from IBES (unadjusted
file, item SHOUT). When IBES shares are not available, we use shares from CRSP (daily item
SHROUT) on the IBES pricing date (item PRDAYS) that corresponds to the IBES report.
    At the end of June in each year t, we construct the expected ROE for year t + 1 to t + 3 as
Et [Roet+τ ] = FEPSt+τ /Bet+τ −1 , in which FEPSt+τ is the consensus mean forecast of earnings
per share from IBES (unadjusted file, item MEANEST) for year t + τ (fiscal period indicator
= τ ) reported in June of t. We require the availability of earnings forecast for years t + 1 and
t + 2. When the forecast for year t + 3 is not available, we use the long-term growth rate (item
LTG) to compute a three-year-ahead forecast: FEPSt+3 = FEPSt+2 × (1 + LTG). If the long-
term growth rate is missing, we replace it with the growth rate implied by the first two forecasts:
FEPSt+3 = FEPSt+2 × (FEPSt+2 /FEPSt+1 ), when FEPSt+1 and FEPSt+2 are both positive.
    As noted, we measure current book equity Bet based on the latest accounting data from the
fiscal year ending between March of year t − 1 and February of t. However, firms with fiscal years
ending between March of t and May of t can announce their latest earnings before the IBES report
in June of t. In response to earnings announcement for the current fiscal year, the analyst forecasts
would “roll forward” to the next year. As such, we also need to roll forward book equity by one
year for these firms to match with the updated analyst forecasts. In particular, we roll forward
their book equity using clean surplus accounting as: Bet−1 + Yt − Dt , in which Bet−1 is the lagged
book equity (relative to the announced earnings), Yt is the earnings announced after February of t
but before the IBES report in June of t, and Dt is dividends.

                                                 60
   In the first modified procedure, we follow Hou, van Dijk, and Zhang (2012) to estimate the
IRRs at the firm level (not the per share basis), whenever regression-based earnings forecasts (not
analysts’ earnings forecasts) are used. We use pooled cross-sectional regressions to forecast future
earnings for up to three years ahead:

               Yis+τ = a + b1 Ais + b2 Dis + b3 DDis + b4 Yis + b5 Yis− + b6 ACis + ǫis+τ ,       (C1)

for 1 ≤ τ ≤ 3, in which Yis is earnings (Compustat annual item IB) of firm i for fiscal year s, Ais
is total assets (item AT), Dis is dividends (item DVC), and DDis is a dummy variable that equals
one for dividend payers, and zero otherwise. Yis− is a dummy variable that equals one for negative
earnings, and zero otherwise, and ACis is operating accruals.
    Prior to 1988, we use the balance-sheet approach of Sloan (1996) to measure operating accruals
as changes in noncash working capital minus depreciation, in which the noncash working capital is
changes in noncash current assets minus changes in current liabilities less short-term debt and taxes
payable. In particular, AC = (△CA−△CASH)−(△CL−△ST D −△T P )−DP , in which △CA is
the change in current assets (Compustat annual item ACT), △CASH is the change in cash or cash
equivalents (item CHE), △CL is the change in current liabilities (item LCT), △ST D is the change
in debt included in current liabilities (item DLC, zero if missing), △T P is the change in income
taxes payable (item TXP, zero if missing), and DP is depreciation and amortization (item DP,
zero if missing). Starting from 1988, we follow Hribar and Collins (2002) to measure AC using the
statement of cash flows as net income (item NI) minus net cash flow from operations (item OANCF).
    In equation (C1), regressors with time subscript s are from the fiscal year ending between March
of year s and February of s + 1. Following Hou, van Dijk, and Zhang (2012), we winsorize all the
level variables in equation (C1) at the 1st and 99th percentiles of their cross-sectional distributions
each year. In June of each year t, we estimate the regressions using the pooled panel data from
the previous ten years. With a minimum four-month lag, the accounting data are from fiscal years
ending between March of t − 10 and February of t. Differing from the baseline GLS procedure, we
forecast the expected earnings as the estimated regression coefficients times the latest values of the
(unwinsorized) predictors from the fiscal year ending between March of t − 1 and February of t.
   In the second modified procedure, we use annual cross-sectional regressions per Tang, Wu, and
Zhang (2014) to forecast the future ROE for up to three years, Roeis+τ ≡ Yis+τ /Beis+τ −1 :
                               
                           Beis                                            Ais − Ais−1
    Roeis+τ = a + b1 log          + b2 log(Pis ) + b3 Yis− + b4 Roeis + b5             + ǫis+τ , (C2)
                           Pis                                                Ais−1

for 1 ≤ τ ≤ 3, in which Roeis is return on equity of firm i for fiscal year s, Yis is earnings (Com-
pustat annual item IB), Beis is the book equity, Pis is the market equity at the fiscal year end
from Compustat or CRSP, Yis− is a dummy variable that equals one for negative earnings and zero
otherwise, and Ais is total assets (item AT). Regression variables with time subscript s are from
the fiscal year ending between March of year s and February of s + 1. Extremely small firms tend
to have extreme regression variables which can affect the Roe regression estimates significantly. To
alleviate this problem, we exclude firm-years with total assets less than $5 million or book equity
less than $2.5 million. Fama and French (2006, p. 496) require firms to have at least $25 million
total assets and $12.5 million book equity, but state that their results are robust to using the $5
million total assets and $2.5 million book equity cutoff. We choose the less restrictive cutoff to
enlarge the sample coverage. We also winsorize each variable (except for Yit− ) at the 1st and 99th
percentiles of its cross-sectional distribution each year to further alleviate the impact of outliers.

                                                   61
    In June of each year t, we run the regression (C2) using the previous ten years of data. With
a minimum four-month information lag, the accounting data are from fiscal years ending between
March of t − 10 and February of t. Differing from the baseline GLS procedure, we directly forecast
the expected Roe, Et [Roet+τ ], as the average cross-sectional regression coefficients times the latest
values of the predictors from fiscal years ending between March of t − 1 and February of t. We
implement this modified GLS procedure at the firm level.

C.2    The Easton (2004) Procedure
Expected earnings are based on analyst forecasts from IBES or forecasts from regression models.
Expected dividends are expected earnings times the current dividend payout ratio, which is com-
puted as dividends (Compustat annual item DVC) divided by earnings (item IB) for profitable firms,
or dividends divided by 6% of total assets (item AT) for firms with zero or negative earnings. When
equation (15) has two positive roots (in very few cases), we use the average as the IRR estimate.
     Following Easton (2004), we implement the model on the per share basis with analysts’ earnings
forecasts. We measure Pt as the June-end share price from CRSP. At the end of June in year t, the
expected earnings per share for year t + τ is the consensus mean forecast from IBES (unadjusted
file, item MEANEST) for year t + τ (fiscal period indicator = τ ) reported in June of t.
    Instead of analysts’ earnings forecasts, we also use pooled cross-sectional regressions in equation
(C1) to forecast future earnings for up to two years ahead. In June of each year t, we estimate the
regression using the pooled panel data from the previous ten years. With a four-month information
lag, the accounting data are from fiscal years ending between March of t − 10 and February of t.
We construct the expected earnings as the estimated regression coefficients times the latest values
of the (unwinsorized) predictors from the fiscal year ending between March of t − 1 and February
of t. We implement the modified procedure at the firm level.
    Finally, we also use annual cross-sectional regressions in equation (C2) to forecast future ROE
for up to two years ahead. In June of each year t, we estimate the regression using the previous
ten years of data. With a four-month information lag, the accounting data are from fiscal years
ending between March of t − 10 and February of t. We forecast the expected Roe, Et [Roet+τ ],
as the average regression coefficients times the latest values of the predictors from fiscal years
ending between March of t − 1 and February of t. Expected earnings are then constructed as:
Et [Yt+τ ] = Et [Roet+τ ] × Bet+τ −1 , in which Bet+τ −1 is the book equity in year t + τ − 1. We
measure current book equity Bet based on the latest accounting data from the fiscal year ending in
March of t−1 to February of t, and impute future book equity by applying clean surplus accounting
recursively. We implement the modified procedure at the firm level.

C.3    The Claus and Thomas (2001) Procedure
We measure book equity, Bet , using the latest accounting data from the fiscal year ending between
March of year t−1 and February of t. The definition of book equity follows Davis, Fama, and French
(2000). We apply clean surplus accounting to construct future book equity as Bet+τ = Bet+τ −1 +
Bet+τ −1 Et [Roet+τ ](1 − k), 1 ≤ τ ≤ 4, in which k is the dividend payout ratio in year t. Dividend
payout ratio is dividends (Compustat annual item DVC) divided by earnings (item IB) for profitable
firms, or dividends divided by 6% of total assets (item AT) for firms with zero or negative earnings.
We drop a firm if its book equity is zero or negative in any year. We construct the expected Roe,
Et [Roet+τ ], for up to five years ahead, using analysts’ earnings forecasts from IBES or regression-
based forecasts. Following CT (2001), we set g to the ten-year Treasury bond rate minus 3%.

                                                  62
    Following CT (2001), we implement the CT model on the per share basis when using analysts’
earnings forecasts. We measure Pt as the June-end share price from CRSP. Book equity per
share, Bt , is book equity divided by the number of shares outstanding reported in June from IBES
(unadjusted file, item SHOUT). When IBES shares are not available, we use shares from CRSP
(daily item SHROUT) on the IBES pricing date (item PRDAYS) that corresponds to the IBES
report. As noted, current book equity Bt is based on the latest accounting data from the fiscal year
ending between March of t − 1 and February of t. However, firms with fiscal year ending in March
of t to May of t can announce their latest earnings before the IBES report in June of t. To match
the updated analyst forecasts, we roll forward their book equity using clean surplus accounting as:
Bt−1 +Yt −Dt , in which Bt−1 is the lagged book equity (relative to the announced earnings), Yt is the
earnings announced after February of t but before the IBES report in June of t, and Dt is dividends.
    At the end of June in each year t, we construct the expected Roe for year t + 1 to t + 5 as
Et [Roet+τ ] = FEPSt+τ /Bet+τ −1 , in which FEPSt+τ is the consensus mean forecast of earnings per
share from IBES (unadjusted file, item MEANEST) for year t + τ (fiscal period indicator = τ )
reported in June of t. We require the availability of earnings forecast for years t + 1 and t + 2.
When the forecast after year t + 2 is not available, we use the long-term growth rate (item LTG)
to construct it as FEPSt+τ = FEPSt+τ −1 × (1 + LTG). If the long-term growth rate is missing,
we replace it with the growth rate implied by the forecasts for the previous two years: FEPSt+τ =
FEPSt+τ −1 × (FEPSt+τ −1 /FEPSt+τ −2 ), when FEPSt+τ −2 and FEPSt+τ −1 are both positive.
    Instead of analysts’ earnings forecasts, we also use pooled cross-sectional regressions in equation
(C1) to forecast future earnings for up to five years ahead. In June of each year t, we estimate the
regression using the pooled panel data from the previous ten years. With a four-month information
lag, the accounting data are from fiscal years ending between March of t − 10 and February of t. We
forecast the expected earnings as the estimated regression coefficients times the latest values of the
(unwinsorized) predictors from the fiscal year ending between March of t − 1 and February of t. We
implement this modified CT procedure at the firm level. Finally, we also use annual cross-sectional
regressions in equation (C2) to forecast future Roe for up to five years ahead. In June of each year
t, we estimate the regression using the previous ten years of data. With a four-month information
lag, the accounting data are from fiscal years ending between March of t − 10 and February of t.
We directly forecast the expected Roe, Et [Roet+τ ], as the average cross-sectional regression coeffi-
cients times the latest values of the predictors from fiscal years ending between March of t − 1 and
February of t. We implement the modified CT procedure at the firm level.

C.4    The Ohlson and Juettner-Nauroth (2005) Procedure
Expected earnings are based on analyst forecasts from IBES or forecasts from regression models.
Expected dividends are expected earnings times the current dividend payout ratio, which is
computed as dividends (Compustat annual item DVC) divided by earnings (item IB) for profitable
firms, or dividends divided by 6% of total assets (item AT) for firms with zero or negative earnings.
We follow Gode and Mohanram (2003) and use the average of forecasted near-term growth rate
and five-year growth rate as an estimate of g. We require Et [Yt+2 ] and Et [Yt+4 ] to be positive so
that g is well defined. Following Gode and Mohanram (2003), we implement the OJ model on the
per share basis with analysts’ earnings forecasts. We measure Pt as the June-end share price from
CRSP. At the end of June in year t, the expected earnings per share for year t + τ is the consensus
mean forecast from IBES (unadjusted file, item MEANEST) for year t + τ (fiscal period indicator
= τ ) reported in June of t. We require the availability of earnings forecast for years t + 1 and t + 2.


                                                  63
When the forecast after year t + 2 is not available, we use the long-term growth rate (item LTG)
to construct it as: FEPSt+τ = FEPSt+τ −1 × (1 + LTG). If the long-term growth rate is missing,
we replace it with the growth rate implied by the forecasts for the previous two years: FEPSt+τ =
FEPSt+τ −1 × (FEPSt+τ −1 /FEPSt+τ −2 ), when FEPSt+τ −2 and FEPSt+τ −1 are both positive.
    Instead of analysts’ earnings forecasts, we also use pooled cross-sectional regressions in equation
(C1) to forecast future earnings for up to five years ahead. In June of each year t, we estimate the
regression using the pooled panel data from the previous ten years. With a four-month information
lag, the accounting data are from fiscal years ending between March of t − 10 and February of t.
We construct the expected earnings as the estimated regression coefficients times the latest values
of the (unwinsorized) predictors from the fiscal year ending between March of t − 1 and February
of t. We implement the modified OJ procedure at the firm level.
    We also use annual cross-sectional regressions in equation (C2) to forecast future Roe for up
to five years ahead. In June of each year t, we estimate the regression using the previous ten
years of data. With a four-month information lag, the accounting data are from fiscal years ending
between March of t − 10 and February of t. We forecast the expected Roe, Et [Roet+τ ], as the
average cross-sectional regression coefficients times the latest values of the predictors from fiscal
years ending between March of t − 1 and February of t. Expected earnings are then constructed
as: Et [Yt+τ ] = Et [Roet+τ ] × Bet+τ −1 , in which Bet+τ −1 is the book equity in year t + τ − 1. We
measure current book equity Bet based on the latest accounting data from the fiscal year ending in
March of t−1 to February of t, and impute future book equity by applying clean surplus accounting
recursively. We implement the modified OJ procedure at the firm level.




                                                  64
