                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




BALANCE-SHEET DIVERSIFICATION IN GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM: IDENTIFICATION
                       AND NETWORK EFFECTS

                                         Jonas Heipertz
                                         Amine Ouazad
                                        Romain Rancière
                                         Natacha Valla

                                       Working Paper 23572
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23572


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2017




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23572.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Jonas Heipertz, Amine Ouazad, Romain Rancière, and Natacha Valla. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Balance-Sheet Diversification in General Equilibrium: Identification and Network Effects
Jonas Heipertz, Amine Ouazad, Romain Rancière, and Natacha Valla
NBER Working Paper No. 23572
July 2017
JEL No. G11,G15,G23

                                          ABSTRACT

The paper uses disaggregated data on asset holdings and liabilities to estimate a general
equilibrium model where each institution determines the diversification and size of the asset and
liability sides of its balance-sheet. The model endogenously generates two types of financial
networks: (i) a network of institutions when two institutions share common asset or liability
holdings or when an institution holds an asset that is the liability of another. In both cases
demand/supply decisions by one institution affect the value of other institutions' holdings/
liabilities, (ii) a network of financial instruments implied by the distribution of assets and
liabilities within and across institutions. A change in the price of one asset induces change in
demand/supply for all other assets, thus generating price comovement. The general equilibrium
analysis predicts the propagation of real, financial and regulatory shocks as well as the change in
the network caused by the shock.

Jonas Heipertz                                   Romain Rancière
Paris School of Economics                        Department of Economics
jonpertz@gmail.com                               University of Southern California
                                                 Los Angeles, CA 90097
Amine Ouazad                                     and NBER
HEC Montreal                                     ranciere@usc.edu
3000, Chemin de la Cote Sainte Catherine
H3T 2A7, Montreal, QC                            Natacha Valla
Canada                                           European Investment Bank
aouazad@gmail.com                                Natacha.Valla@eui.eu
1        Introduction
The crisis of 2007-2008 has triggered considerable interest in the understanding of the role
of financial networks in the propagation of financial and real shocks, and in the emergence
of systemic risk in financial systems. When institutions share a common set of financial
assets and liabilities, price externalities make asset demand and supply decisions interde-
pendent across institutions. The resulting networks of institutions propagate shocks and
potentially generate financial fragility such as fire-sale spirals that weaken balance sheets.
Alternatively, the distribution of assets across and within institutions makes asset valua-
tion interdependent and the resulting network of financial instruments can trigger large
asset price comovement even between very different classes of assets. In contrast with net-
work propagation associated with bilateral exposure (i.e. counterparty risk) which could be
contained ex-post by targeted interventions, and prevented ex-ante by the development of
centrally-cleared markets, network propagation associated with price externalities is much
harder to contain.
        While there is a large literature that characterizes the topology of such networks and
their associated fragility (Greenwood, Landier & Thesmar 2015, Acemoglu, Ozdaglar &
Tahbaz-Salehi 2015), their endogenous formation through market interaction and trade in
financial assets is still poorly understood.1
        This paper puts forward and estimates a new framework which explains how both a
network of institutions and a network of financial instruments emerge out of a structural
general equilibrium model of trade in financial assets and liabilities among heterogeneous
institutions. The structural estimation of the model uses a dynamic factor structure for
the net demand of each asset of each institution (i.e. gross demand for the asset minus
liability of the same asset). This enables an identification of institutions’ key character-
istics: risk-aversion, cost of equity, and beliefs about future returns. The equilibrium net
asset positions jointly determine both a network of financial instruments and a network of
institutions. The structural estimation enables us to relate the shape of both networks and
the implied shock transmission to the characteristics and beliefs of the underlying institu-
tions. The structural approach also enables us to run counterfactual experiments. Such
experiments provide an understanding of the evolution of the financial networks’ structures
and of their shock transmission properties, in response to changes in capital requirements,
    1
    By contrast, there is an established literature that looks at the endogenous formation of social networks
(Jackson & Watts 2002, Goyal & Vega-Redondo 2005)



                                                     2
changes in the structure of shocks, and changes in institutions’ beliefs. This paper is to
the best of our knowledge the first to provide a direct structural link between net financial
asset trade in general equilibrium, network structure, and network effects.
       In this version of the paper, the model is estimated on detailed flows of funds infor-
mation available for seven sectors of the French economy including a “rest of the world”
sector. In such estimation, an institution represents a sector. A subsequent version will
include a finer estimation based on detailed balance-sheets of individual institutions.2 The
sectoral balance-sheets provide information on 20 classes of assets and liabilities, including
traded securities, non-traded financial assets (e.g. loans), and real assets.
       The estimation procedure follows two steps. In the first step, net asset demands by
institutional sector are estimated using a dynamic factor model. Both the factor struc-
ture and the loadings are allowed to vary across institutional sectors. The key finding is
that a small number of factors is able to explain the bulk of the variance in net demands.
Moreover, the factors exhibit a close correspondence with drivers of the Global cycle and
Eurozone cycle, as they respectively correlate with US and Euro policy rates, global GDP
growth and global trade growth, the VIX measure of implied global risk aversion, or inter-
est rates on government securities for the countries that were subject to the sovereign crisis
of 2011 (Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain). In the second step, the structural
parameters of the net asset demand model regarding institutions characteristics (risk aver-
sion and the cost of equity) and return beliefs, are obtained, through a mapping between
the factor structure of net demand and the factor structure of return beliefs. Finally, a
set of closed-form formulas enables then to fully characterize the network structure and to
obtain general equilibrium effects associated with a diffusion of a sector-specific shock in
the network.
       A first set of results regards the analysis of return beliefs across institutions and across
assets. The model for return beliefs indeed explains up to 39 percent of the variance of
ex-post returns depending on the sector and instrument. Moreover, the cases when the
belief model fails to predict return are almost all related to the 2007-2008 crisis when some
institutional sectors made counter-cyclical net asset purchases, i.e. buying assets whose
returns are declining, for liquidity reasons (banking sector) or bailout purposes (public
sector).
       A second set of results emerges from the analysis of the dual network of assets and
   2
    The clearance for these confidential data has been obtained too late so that this estimation could be
included on this graph.


                                                   3
institutions, and its implications for shock propagation. Network effects stemming from
the general equilibrium impact of a shock to the capital base of the banking sector on all
sectors including he banking sector itself reveal that: (i) such effects can be sizeable and,
in some sectors, of comparable – if not amplified - magnitude than those experienced by
the sector where the shock originated; (ii) they vary dramatically in size and scope across
sectors. This evidence vindicates the massive net asset demand shifts - out of banks into
the insurance sector - that could be observed in the aftermath of the 2007-2008 crisis as
a result of severe capital losses in the banking sector that preceded the euro sovereign
crisis.(Heipertz, Ranciere & Valla 2016).
   This paper builds a bridge between two literatures, the literature on asset demand
among heterogeneous institutions (Koijen & Yogo 2016, Miranda-Agrippino & Rey 2015)
and that on financial networks structure and associated network effects (Eisenberg & Noe
2001, Elliott, Golub & Jackson 2014, Greenwood et al. 2015). The paper develops a
novel methodology that uses balance sheet information on asset and liability positions
of all sectors of the economy to estimate structurally a general equilibrium model of net
asset demand allowing for large sectoral heterogeneity in risk-aversion, beliefs, and cost of
equity. The estimated model generates endogenously a time-varying network of financial
instrument and a network of institutional sectors.
   Another innovation of the paper is to use the full balance sheet of asset and liability for
all sectors of the French economy rather than focusing on asset allocation for just one sector,
such as the mutual fund sector. This approach turns out to be important as the 2007-2008
crisis generated considerable reshuffling in liability and asset positions across sectors. In
the case of France, the crisis of 2007-2008 led to a retrenchment of the banking sector
accompanied for an expansion of the insurance sector (Heipertz et al. 2016). While the use
of sector-level data allows to assess the general equilibrium effect of a sectoral shock on the
very same sector, it does not account for the role played by large net demand position of
individual institutions that net out at the sector level. Until the issue is addressed with the
use of individual institutional data, the network effects measured here could be considered
as conservative estimates of the importance of financial networks in the propagation of
shocks.
   The paper contributes to the literature on the role of belief heterogeneity in asset
pricing (Berrada 2006, Gandhi & Serrano-Padial 2015) by using net asset demands to
estimate a model with a large dimension of heterogeneity (risk-aversion, beliefs, cost of
equity). The paper shares with Koijen & Yogo (2016) the objective of a structural model

                                              4
that simultaneously matches asset demands and imposes market clearing but our approach
is very different. Rather than estimating a discrete choice model to understand the portfolio
choice of investors as a function of characteristics, we are using the factor structure of net
demands for assets to reveal the factor structure of the beliefs about asset returns and other
structural parameters. Price externalities are at the core of our network of institutions and
network of financial instruments as in Greenwood et al. (2015) but with the key difference
that the networks in our paper are derived from a general equilibrium model of net asset
trade rather than just assumed. In additon Greenwood et al. (2015) only deal common
asset holdings accross institutions when we also consider the role of assets and liabilities
holdings for the propagation of shocks. The factor structure of net demands emphasizes
the role of the global cycle as in Miranda-Agrippino & Rey (2015) but also stresses the
importance of Euro area specific factors in the dynamics of net demand.


2     Theoretical Framework
2.1    The Model
A finite number N of firms trade J financial instruments in each discrete time period
t = 1, 2, 3, . . . . In period t, each of the j = 1, 2, . . . , J financial instruments has a price pjt
and yields a stochastic return rf
                                jt at the end of the period.
    Each firm i has a level of equity Eit in period t and seeks to maximize the expected
return on its equity by raising funds on the market (through the emission of liabilities) and
investing these raised funds and the firm’s equity in financial and real assets. Thus, each
firm i chooses a level of gross demand Dijt and gross supply Sijt for each of the J financial
instruments. Each additional unit of total demand for assets beyond the initial level equity
Eijt requires raising a corresponding additional unit of liability. Indeed, the firm’s balance
sheet satisfies the usual equality of assets and liabilities, formally:

                                       D0it 1J = S0it 1J + Eit                                     (1)

where Dit = (Di1t , . . . , Di2t )0 is the column vector of demands for each of the J instruments,
and Sit is the column vector of supplies. 1J is the column vector of ones of size J. Such
demand and supply choices, together with firm i’s initial equity level, make up both total
balance sheet size and its asset and liability diversification.
    In order to maximize its return on equity, each firm i forms beliefs about the distribu-

                                                  5
tion of future returns rf
                        jt based on (i) a firm-specific and potentially sophisticated return
forecasting model, and (ii) on a firm-specific information set. Both model and information
are fundamentally unobservable to the econometrician. Such firm-specific forecasting exer-
cise yields a distribution of returns noted rf
                                             ijt . We will assume throughout that stochastic
beliefs about returns are not multicollinear and have strictly positive variances, which im-
plies that the variance-covariance of beliefs is symmetric, positive-definite. Noting rf   it the
                                                                                    0
firm-specific stochastic belief about returns, the firm’s net income is (Dit − Sit ) rf
                                                                                      it .
       Each firm trades off the expected return and the expected variance of such stochastic
net income. The relative importance of variance for firm i is noted ρi .3 Alternatively,
firms can also maximize expected returns under a value-at-risk (VAR) constraint, where
the lagrange multiplier corresponding to such constraint is equivalently noted ρi . Formally
firm i demands and supplies assets in order to maximize

                                             1
                          (Dit − Sit )0 µit − ρi (Dit − Sit )0 Σit (Dit − Sit )                        (2)
                                             2

where µit ≡ E [f     r it ] ≡ E [ret |Ωit ] is the J-vector of mean return beliefs and Σit ≡ V ar [f
                                                                                                   r it ] ≡
V ar [ret |Ωit ] is the J-square matrix of the variance-covariance of return beliefs. Both are
obtained by firm i given its information set and model, noted Ωit . The maximization
of (2) is performed under the funding constraint (1), as the total amount of outstanding
assets must equal the sum of initial equity and funds raised.

2.2      Net Demands and Cost of Equity
There exists a closed form solution for the balance sheet that maximizes the mean-variance
objective under the funding constraint as described in the following proposition.

Proposition 1. Each institution i’s net demand for assets depends on the first two mo-
ments of its return beliefs, its risk aversion, and its cost of capital. Formally, write
∆it = Dit − Sit the J-vector of net demands, then

                                                     1 −1
                               ∆it = Dit − Sit =       Σ (µit − ηit 1),                                (3)
                                                     ρi it
   3
    This mean-variance goal for a firm formally corresponds to the concept of absolute risk aversion in the
context of household choice under uncertainty with Constant Absolute Risk Aversion (CARA).




                                                    6
where ηit is the scalar Lagrange multiplier of the funding constraint,

                                                    10 Σ−1
                                                        it µit − ρi Eit
                                           ηit =                        .                              (4)
                                                         10 Σ−1
                                                             it 1

    The Lagrange multiplier ηit corresponding to constraint (1) is the cost of equity as the
marginal impact of an additional unit of equity in period t on the firm’s mean-variance
objective (2).

2.3    Market Equilibrium
The previous section has obtained the net demand of each financial instrument as a function
of (i) return beliefs, (ii) risk aversion and (iii) firm equity. While the beliefs about end-of-
period returns are institution-specific (each institution estimates a forecast of returns), the
asset price pjt is public information. In that sense, the uncertainty of a financial institution
is over future dividends and future asset values, not about the current price of the asset.
                                                   h                   i
                                                     jt+1 + djt+1 |Ωit
                                                  E p]      ]
                                        rf
                                         ijt =                                                         (5)
                                                                 pjt

where p]                                  ]
       jt+1 is the price in period t + 1, djt+1 the dividend in period t + 1 and Ωit the
information set of institution i in period t. Thus net demand (3) is a function of asset
prices, and defines demand and supply curves for all instruments and all institutions.
    To define an equilibrium, notice that the equity of firm i is a financial instrument
j(i) ∈ {1, 2, . . . , J} supplied by firm i and demanded by (potentially) all other firms i0 6= i,
so that equilibrium on the market for the equity j(i) of firm i is N
                                                                      P
                                                                        i0 =1 ∆i0 j(i)t = Eit . On
                                                    PN
all other markets, the equilibrium condition is: i0 =1 ∆i0 jt = 0. Stack all Eit in a J-vector
Et whose j-th element is Eit if j(i) = j and 0 otherwise, then:

Definition 1. An equilibrium in period t is a J-vector of prices for each financial instru-
ment p∗t such that all J markets clear:

                         N
                         X
                               ∆it (p∗1t , p∗2t , . . . , p∗Jt ) = Et (p∗1t , p∗2t , . . . , p∗Jt ),   (6)
                         i=1

where each ∆it (p∗t ) is a column vector of size J; the institution-specific equilibrium vectors
of net demands are ∆∗it ≡ ∆it (p∗1t , p∗2t , . . . , p∗Jt ); and Et (p∗t ) is a column vector of size J.

                                                             7
       The equilibrium in such an economy exists, as shown in the following proposition:

Proposition 2. (Existence of an Equilibrium) There exists a price vector p∗t ∈ RJ
such that N         ∗          ∗
         P
          i=1 ∆it (pt ) = Et (pt ).

       An extension of the framework where the net demand vector includes J exo exogenous
net demands (i.e. unaffected by prices), and J endo endogenous net demands (i.e. defined
as in equation (3)), yields a similar result on the existence of equilibrium prices and net
demands.

2.4      Shock Propagation with Comparative Statics
The general equilibrium setting enables an analysis of propagation of a shock on funda-
mentals or beliefs. Indeed shocks cause shifts in individual firm net demands, which affect
market prices, and thus potentially all net demands in the economy. The general equilib-
rium analysis with comparative statics provides two dual networks, as shocks propagate
through (i) the network of financial instruments’ prices, and through (ii) the network of
institutions’ balance sheets.

2.4.1      Comparative Statics

Consider a shock dθ on one of the economy’s structural exogenous parameters θ . Possible
shocks dθ include shifts in the equity of a financial institution, shifts in the beliefs about
future returns, shifts in exogenous net demands, shifts in risk aversion, or the introduction
of a liquidity or capital constraint. The shock dθ can affect one or more institutions.
       The total impact of a shock dθ on the net demand of each institution i = 1, 2, . . . , N
in year t is the sum of a partial equilibrium term, and a general equilibrium term. Indeed,
the total derivative of net demand w.r.t. the shock expands according to the chain rule
as:4
                                    d∆it   ∂∆it    ∂∆it d log pt
                                         =      +                ,                                           (7)
                                     dθ     ∂θ    ∂ log pt dθ
          ∂∆it                                               ∂∆it
where      ∂θ    is the partial equilibrium effect, and     ∂ log pt   the sensitivity of net demand to the
                                        d log pt
prices of financial instruments.           dθ      is the market-wide shift in the vector of log prices,
   4
     For the sake of clarity, we are considering a shock that does not affect equity directly, i.e. ∂Eit /∂θ = 0.
If the shock has a direct impact on equity, the total derivative of net demand with respect to the shock is
d∆it
  dθ
      = ∂∆∂θ
            it
               + ∂∂∆ it d log pt
                  log pt   dθ
                                 + ∂∆ it ∂Eit
                                   ∂Eit ∂θ
                                              . The following analysis can proceed in a similar fashion, adding
the term (∂∆it /∂Eit ) · (∂Eit /∂θ) to the right-hand side of equation 7.


                                                        8
common to all institutions.
   Starting from a market equilibrium (p∗ , (∆∗it , i = 1, 2, . . . , I, t = 1, 2, . . . , T )), the shock
dθ affects net demands in a way that violates the equilibrium condition (6). The shift in
prices d log pt /dθ is the vector of price changes that restores equilibrium in each market.
Then the equality of shifts in demand and shifts in equity values,

                       N                         
                       X   ∂∆kt     ∂∆kt d log pt       ∂Et d log pt
                                 +                  =                ,                                (8)
                              ∂θ   ∂ log pt dθ        ∂ log pt dθ
                       k=1

provides the general equilibrium price shift d log pt /dθ:
                                 "            N
                                                         #−1 " N     #
                      d log pt       ∂Et      X  ∂∆kt         X ∂∆kt
                               =            −                          ,                              (9)
                         dθ        ∂ log pt     ∂ log pt         ∂θ
                                                  k=1                k=1

In the short run, with a fixed number of shares in each firm i, equity is unit-elastic with
respect to log prices and ∂Et /∂ log pt is diagonal with entries Et .
   Using shifts in log prices d log pt is less convenient empirically than using shifts in log
returns d log rit . Indeed, the price of an asset can vary over time for reasons unrelated to
market demand or supply, such as because of a stock split. Here a given log change in
price pijt , at fixed information set Ωit , corresponds to the same magnitude of log change in
returns. Indeed, as only the payoff part of returns is institution-specific in the definition
of returns (5),
                                       −d log rijt = d log pjt ,                                     (10)

the change in log return is independent of the identity of institution i.
   The total impact of the shock (7) can be expressed in terms of shocks to log prices
instead of absolute prices, and thus can be expressed in terms of minus log returns. Finally,
the impact of the shock dθ on the J-vector of net demands of institution i is:
                                             "               N
                                                                            #−1   N
               d∆it   ∂∆it         ∂∆it            ∂Et      X ∂∆kt                X ∂∆kt
                    =          +                          −                                  ,       (11)
                dθ      ∂θ       ∂ log rit       ∂ log pt       ∂ log rit               ∂θ
                      | {z }                                k=1                   k=1
                      P artial   |                           {z                              }
                                                           General

where all terms can be derived from the closed-form expression for net demands presented
in equation (3).



                                                     9
2.4.2     Network of Financial Instruments

The general equilibrium effect described in equation (11) provides this paper’s microfoun-
dation of a network of assets. To see this, notice that the propagation of partial equilibrium
shocks in (11) crucially depends on the inverse of the price sensitivity of net demands to
log returns:
                      "                     N
                                                        #−1                  −1
                            ∂Et      X ∂∆kt                          ∂Et
                                   −                             ≡                  [1 − At ]−1 ,          (12)
                          ∂ log rt    ∂ log rt                     ∂ log rt
                                           k=1
                           h              i−1 hP                 i
                                 ∂Et             N    ∂∆kt
where noting5 At ≡             ∂ log rt          k=1 ∂ log rkt       enables a description of the inverse as the
sum of :
                                     (1 − At )−1 = 1 + At + A2t + A3t + . . . ,                            (13)

Consider (d∆it /dθ)S the effect of the shock dθ taking into account only the sum of the
powers of At up to order S:

                                                                             S
                                                                                          !" N     #
                                                    ∂Et −1
                         s                              
                   d∆it          ∂∆it    ∂∆it                                X              X ∂∆kt
                               =      +                                             Ast                ,   (14)
                    dθ            ∂θ    ∂ log rit ∂ log rt                                        ∂θ
                                                                              s=0           k=1


Then limS→∞ (d∆it /dθ)S = (d∆it /dθ)∞ is the general equilibrium impact of the shock dθ.
(d∆it /dθ)S is thus the impact of the shock dθ accounting for the S-th level propagation of
shocks across the financial network.

Definition 2. The network of financial instruments is a weighted and directed graph Gf i
whose vertices are financial instruments and:

   1. There is an edge from financial instrument j to financial instrument j 0 if a shift in
        the return of financial instrument j affects the economy’s net demand for financial
        instrument j 0 ,

   2. The weight of the edge (j, j 0 ) is the opposite of the semi-elasticity of economy-wide
        net demand for j 0 w.r.t. the log return of j, up to a constant.

The adjacency matrix of such a graph over financial instruments is At . The adjacency
matrix of the graph of S-level connections is Ast .
   with a fixed equity in the short-run, [∂Et /∂ log pt ]−1 is diagonal with entries diag(1/Et ) and At is the
   5

impact of log returns on net demand as a fraction of equity.


                                                            10
      The network of financial instruments captures two different types of linkages. First,
it captures linkages between assets and liabilities in the same institution. Two assets j, j 0
are indeed connected if one is the asset of an institution k and the other is the liability of
the same institution. In such a case ∆kjt and ∆kj 0 t are of opposite signs, ∆kjt ∆kj 0 t < 0.
Second, the network of assets also captures linkages due to the common holding of the two
assets (or the common supply of the two liabilities). Two assets are connected if both are
assets (or both are liabilities) of the same institution k. In such a case ∆kjt and ∆kj 0 t are
of the same sign, ∆kjt ∆kj 0 t > 0.
      The adjacency matrix At of the network of financial instruments can be broken down
into two networks that correspond to each of the two types of linkages, asset-liability
linkages and common-holding linkages. The matrix Aal
                                                  t of asset-liability linkages is:


                                   ∂Et −1
                                         
                           1                                X                      ∂∆kjt
                    Aal
                     t    ≡ 1−                                                              .    (15)
                           2     ∂ log rt                                         ∂ log rjt
                                                (k,j,j 0 ) s.t. ∆kjt ∆kj 0 t <0


Similarly, the corresponding matrix Ach
                                     t of common-holding linkages takes the sum of the
semi-elasticities over the set of triplets (k, j, j 0 ) for which ∆kjt ∆kj 0 t ≥ 0. Then the adjacency
matrix of financial instruments is the sum of the two networks:

                                         At = Aal   ch
                                               t + At .                                          (16)

2.4.3     Network of Institutions

A dual network of institutions corresponds to the network of assets described in the previous
subsection. To find the network of institutions, for clarity of exposition, we start by
considering a shock dθk that affects the net demand of only one institution k, and consider
the impact of that shock on any other institution’s equity. This yields an effect for any
pair of institutions, leading to an adjacency matrix for institutions.
      The impact of the institution-specific shock on any other institution k 0 ’s net demands
is:                                                                                 #−1
                                                                  N
                                               "
                 d∆k0 t   ∂∆k0 t    ∂∆k0 t           ∂Et      X ∂∆it                      ∂∆kt
                        =        +                          −                                    (17)
                  dθk      ∂θk     ∂ log rkt       ∂ log rt    ∂ log rit                   ∂θk
                                                                 i=1




                                                   11
The impact of the shock of k on institution k 0 ’s equity is thus:

                                                 "            N
                                                                              #−1
    dEk0 t            d∆k0 t             ∂∆  k 0t        ∂E t
                                                                  X  ∂∆  it       ∂∆kt
           = 10                    = 10                         −                      ≡ ωkk0   (18)
     dθk               dθk              ∂ log rk t0    ∂ log rt     ∂ log rit      ∂θk
                                                                i=1

which is the product of institution k 0 demand sensitivity to returns, and institution k’s
sensitivity to the shock. Interestingly, if there are no price effects across financial instru-
             PN ∂∆it
ments, i.e.     i=1 ∂ log rit is a diagonal matrix, then ωkk0 6= 0 only if the two institutions
hold or supply at least one common financial instrument. When there are impacts of the
price of instruments on the net demands of other instruments, firms can be connected even
when they do not hold the same financial instruments.
    The chain of causes and effects from the shock k to the equity of k 0 takes three steps:
first, a partial equilibrium effect. Institution k is affected by the shock dθk , measured by the
                   ∂∆kt
rightmost term      ∂θk   in equation (18). The response of institution k in partial equilibrium
is ∂∆kt /∂θk . Second, a price effect. Institution k’s changes in net demand cause a change
                              h         i−1                 h            PN ∂∆it i−1
                                                       −1
in asset prices, measured by ∂ ∂E   t
                                 log rt     (1 − A t )    =     ∂Et
                                                              ∂ log rt −  i=1 ∂ log r . This is the
middle term in equation (18). Third, institution   0
                                              k changes   its net demand in response
                                                0 ∂∆ k0 t
to the price change. The impact on equity is 1 ∂ log r 0 , which is the leftmost term in
                                                                 k t
equation (18).

Definition 3. The network of firms is a weighted and directed graph Gf , whose vertices
are firms, and

   1. There is an edge from firm k to firm k 0 if the shock on firm k affects the equity of
      firm k 0 in general equilibrium.

   2. The weight of the edge (k, k 0 ) is the impact in value of the shock on firm k on the
      equity of firm k 0 .

The adjacency matrix of such graph Gf is Ω = (ωkk0 )k,k0 ∈{1,2,...,I}

    As in the case of the network of financial instruments, the captures two types of con-
nections between institutions: first, asset-liability linkages, where firm k and firm k 0 are
connected if one asset of firm k is the liability of firm k 0 . Second, common-holding linkages,
where firm kand firm k 0 are connected if one asset (resp., liability) of firm k is also the
asset (resp., liability) of firm k 0 .


                                                      12
    Then the network of institutions Ω can be decomposed into two parts: a network Ωal
due to asset-liability linkages and a network Ωch due to the common holding of financial
instruments.
                                                     Ω = Ωal + Ωch ,                                    (19)

with
                                                                "            N
                                                                                           #−1
                                                   0 ∂∆k0 t           ∂Et         ∂∆it         ∂∆kt
                              X                                                X
          al
         ωkk 0   =                               1                           −                      .   (20)
                                                    ∂ log rk0 jt    ∂ log rt     ∂ log rit      ∂θk
                     (j,k,k0 ),∆kjt ∆k0 jt <0                                i=1


                   ch , where the sum is taken over (j, k, k 0 ) s.t. ∆
And similarly for ωkk 0                                                kjt ∆k0 jt ≥ 0. The
decomposition amounts, in product (18), to pick the pairs of assets and institution that fall
in the case of asset-liability linkage or in the case of common-holding linkages. Importantly,
the framework both pinpoints that there is a linkage, and microfounds the magnitude and
the sign of the linkage.


3      Identification
3.1    Belief Formation and Factor Structure in Net Demands
Agents use sophisticated models and private information to forecast returns. Such informa-
tion and modeling is fundamentally unobserved to the econometrician. However, following
the recent literature on empirical asset pricing (Koijen & Yogo 2016, Miranda-Agrippino
& Rey 2015) we can identify the unobservable factor structure that explains fluctuations
in returns. Indeed, this section shows that (i) assuming a factor structure in firm-specific
returns implies a factor structure in net demands, and (ii) the factor structure in net de-
mands can be estimated, and (iii) the relationship from returns to net demands can be
inverted to identify the factor structure in returns. Additionally, both factors and loadings
are specific to each financial institution i reflecting the fact that institutions have heteroge-
neous beliefs about both the factors that price assets and about the comovement of asset
prices with factors.
    The vector of ex-ante beliefs about returns is assumed to follow a factor structure:

                                  rf
                                   it = ϕi + Λi fit + it ,      V ar(it ) = σ2 1,                    (21)




                                                            13
where fit is a J × K matrix of factors, ϕi is a J vector of constants, Λi is a J × K matrix of
factor loadings and it is a J-vector of factors unobservable to the institution and therefore
capturing the uncertainty of institution i about future returns. Furthermore, we assume
that factors follow an autoregressive process of order one.

                                 fit = α0 + α1 fit−1 + uit , V ar(uit ) = σu2 1,

where α0 is a K ×1 vector of factor constants, α1 a K ×K diagonal matrix of autoregressive
coefficients and uit innovations to factors. Agents beliefs are thus based on a dynamic factor
model and obtained in two steps. First, agents forecast tomorrow’s value of the factors
and second, use loadings to price assets.

Proposition 3. The dynamic factor model outlined above implies that the first and second
moments of return beliefs (and therefore the full distribution) are parametrized. The optimal
net demand schedule of firm i can be written as

                                               ∆it = Ci + Li fit − ηit 1,                                                  (22)

where the constant vector Ci , the loadings Li , and the transformed cost of equity ηit are
functions of the unobserved factor structure of returns and the autoregressive dynamic of
factors:
                               −1                                                               −1
                  σ2                                                                σ2
                                                                            
  Ci =         I + u2 Λi Λ0i         [ϕi +   Λi α0 ] /(ρi σ2 ),     Li =        I + u2 Λi Λ0i         Λi α0 /(ρi σ2 ),   (23)
                  σε                                                                σε
                                                                   2
                                                                             −1
                                                                   σu
and the transformed cost of equity ηit = I +                          Λ Λ0
                                                                   σε2 i i
                                                                                   ηit /(ρi σ2 ).

    Proposition (3) shows that a factor structure of return beliefs implies a factor structure
of net demands.

3.2    Identification of ex-ante returns beliefs
Identifying the ex-ante beliefs is finding the structural parameters (ϕi , Λi , α0 , α1 , ηit ) of the
dynamics of returns rf
                     it that match observations (Ci , Li , A0 , A1 , ηit ) for each firm. Indeed,
equation (22) in proposition 3 provides a mapping from such structural parameters to
the observations. Identifying firms’ beliefs about returns and their cost of equity requires
inverting such relationship.

                                                              14
        We first show that, conditional on the overall mean µ and variance of all ex-ante returns
σε2 ,   the factor structure of each ex-ante return (constants and loadings), as well as the cost
of equity for each firm i, are identified.
        The first step is to estimate a augmented dynamic factor model on ∆it , which yields
the AR dynamic of factors (α0 , α1 , σu2 ), as well as the constant and loadings (Ci , Li ) of net
demands, and the transformed cost of equity ηit .
        The second step is to invert the mapping:

                                     1              σu2 1         σu2
                          g:    (        , Λ) −
                                              7 → (    ,     (1 +     ΛΛ0 )−1 Λ),               (24)
                                    ρσε2            σε2 ρσε2      σε2
                                                         |        {z          }
                                                                  Li


from R × RJK to itself, at σu2 constant. We find numerically that g is invertible. Then risk
                                                                                        2
aversion ρi and loadings of ex-ante returns Λi are identified as (ρi , Λi ) = g −1 ( σσu2 , Li ). The
                                                                                        ε
constant ϕi of the factor structure of ex-ante returns, and the cost of equity ηit then follow
from the relationships of proposition 3.
        From this, the ex-ante beliefs about returns of firm i’s are identified as:

                                           2           2            2
                                it = ϕ(µ, σε ) + Λ(µ, σε ) · fit + σε it ,
                               rf                                                               (25)

where it is a standardized residual and fit is the J × K matrix of factors. A convenient
identification restriction for (µ, σε2 ) is to take the overall mean and residual variance σε2
of all assets to be equal to the historic residual variance in a factor decomposition of the
ex-post rit . The model identifies how both cross-sectional and panel differences in net
demand reflect such variations in the ex-ante beliefs about returns.


4        Data and Estimation Procedure
The estimation of the model requires data on net demand in amount of currency units by
firm and financial instrument, and first and second moment of ex-post returns.
        We focus on the case of the French economy, and obtain sectoral accounts from Euro-
stat and Insee from 2000.1 to 2015.4. The Eurostat data provide information at quarterly
frequency on amounts in Euro of stocks and changes due to valuation, flows and reclassifica-
tions by institutional sector and category of financial instrument. Quarterly time series on
stocks and changes of the non-financial asset are imputed from annual data obtained from


                                                     15
Insee (see Appendix B.2 for details). Sectoral accounts provide full coverage of sectoral
balance-sheet and amounts outstanding by instrument, which is crucial to build funding
constraints and market clearing conditions. Summarizing, we obtain complete balance-
sheet for six domestic sectors and the rest of the world account. The six domestic sectors
are the following:

  1. Banking (including the central bank) sector

  2. Insurance sector

  3. Mutual funds (including to a small extent also other financial institutions)

  4. Corporate sector

  5. Household (including non-profit institutions serving households) sector

  6. and the Public sector.

Balance-sheets are broken down to one real asset and 19 categories of financial instruments
including currency, deposits, securities (stocks, debt, fundshares), loans (short-term, long-
term), entitlements (insurance, pension), and derivatives.
   In order to obtain the first and second moment of returns, we construct time series
of returns (i) due to valuation changes and (ii) due to payoffs. Returns due to valuation
changes can be derived from information on the amount in Euro of stocks outstanding
and valuation changes by financial instrument and sector. Returns due to payoffs on
financial instruments are constructed from information recorded in the income accounts
on different types of income received and paid by sector. Types of income are dividends,
interest payments, investment income attributable to mutual fund shareholders, insurance
policy holders, and investment income payable on pension entitlements. Since each type
of income (for example interest payments) can stem from several financial instruments (for
example interest payments on loans and coupons on debt securities), the attribution of
income recorded at the sectoral level to instruments bearing a common type of income is
not trivial. Appendix B.1 shows how the variation of balance-sheet positions and income
received or payed across sector can be used for the estimation of returns.
   We proceed as follows: First, we estimate a dynamic factor model for net demand
with an autoregressive process of order one for the unobserved factors. Second, we use the
inverse of the mapping between reduced form and structural parameter (see section 3.2) to


                                             16
find constant and loadings of the factor structure of ex-ante returns and the shadow value
of the equity.


5     Estimation Results, Financial Networks, and Propagation
5.1   Determinants of Net Asset Demands: Dynamic Factors and Macroe-
      conomic Variables
The estimation of the dynamic factor model enables both the factors and the factor load-
ings to vary across institutional sectors. The estimation results reveal however that the
factor are rather similar across sectors with some variation in their order of importance for
explaining the variance of net demand. In order to interpret the factors, we run a series of
bi-variate regressions in which each factor, estimated for each sector, is regressed against
a number of macroeconomic variables capturing global and Euro Area specific macroeco-
nomic conditions. The macroeconomic variables include financial variables such as interest
rates and VIX, and real variables such as GDP growth and trade growth, for either the
US, the World, or the Euro area. These variables are considered both in level and in first
difference. Table 1 provides the sources of each variable.
    Table 3 to Table 9 report, for each sector, the R-square explained by the four macroe-
conomic variables that have the highest explanatory power. The first line of each table
reports the percentage of variance explained by each factor. The fraction of the variance
of the net demand explained by the first five factors ranges between 56 and 62 percent
depending on the institutional sector. Figure 1 and Figure 2 plot for each sector the 2000-
2015 quarterly time series of the first four factors along with the macroeconomic variable
with the strongest explanatory power. Both factors and macro variables are normalized
and smoothed by taking a moving average of order 4 in order to focus on comovement.
    For the banking sector, the first factor captures elements of the global cycle (Miranda-
Agrippino & Rey 2015) with a positive correlation with the first difference in one-year and
two-year US interest rate, and a negative correlation with the VIX. As shown on Figure
1, panel (a), the change in the one-year US interest tracks extremely well the first factor,
especially so during 2007-2008 crisis, and up to the point where the US falls into zero lower
bound and the one-year interest rate becomes virtually unchanged. While the first factor
captures the US crisis of 2007-2008, the second factor captures well the Euro Sovereign
Debt crisis of 2011-2012. Indeed more than 70 percent of the variance of the second factor


                                             17
is explained by the change in the average interest rate of the GIIPS countries (Greece,
Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Spain). Figure 1, panel (a) shows that indeed the second factor
and the change in interest rate in GIIPS countries vary almost one to one throughout the
period. Given the exposure of the French banking sector the Euro Sovereign Debt crisis in
Southern Europe, it is very reassuring to see it captured by the second factor.
   The third factor captures the US and Europe Monetary Policy stances as measured by
the shadow rate computed by Wu & Xia (2016) and designed to capture macroeconomic
impact of monetary policy at the zero lower bound. The fourth factor is negatively corre-
lated with long-term interest rates in both the US and Euro area, and captures the secular
decline in the long run interest rate over the period, an obvious concern for the profitability
of banks.
   For the insurance sector (Table 1, panel b) the first factor explaining the net asset
demand is strongly correlated with long-term interest rate in the US and in Europe. This
feature is consistent with insurance funds being massively invested in long-term safe fixed-
income securities. The change in the VIX is negatively related with the second factor and
explains 36 percent of the variance of net asset demand. The change in the VIX tracks
indeed well the long swings in the second factor. The other three factors correlate mostly
with the ECB policy rate, the change in short-term US interest rate, and the change in the
GIPS interest rates.
   For the mutual funds sector (Table 1, panel c) the first factor displays its higher
correlation with the VIX, the second factor with the level of the short US interest rate
with, and the third fact with the change in short-run US interest rate. All three factors
are related to the global cycle which is consistent with many of the mutual funds allocating
asset globally, and thus being especially sensitive to global risk. The last two factors are
related to the Euro cycle with factor 4 being correlated with Euro area long-term interest
rate, and factor 5 with the Euro area policy rate.
   While real global and Euro area specific real variables (GDP growth, trade growth) do
not play a major role for the three financial sectors, they do matter for the corporate
sector (Table 2, panel a). The first factor displays a high correlation (0.58) with the change
in advanced economy interest rate but also a high correlation (ranging from 0.49 to 0.55)
with world trade growth and world GDP growth. The first factor captures therefore both
the financial and the real dimension of the Global Cycle. The second factor correlates highly
(0.5) with the Euro area growth rate, and the three others with interest rate conditions in
the US, the Euro Zone, and the GIIPS countries.

                                              18
   For the household sector (Table 2, panel b) the first two factors also correlate strongly
with the global financial and real cycle. The first factor displays a high correlation (0.49)
with the change in the US policy rate, and the second factor displays a strong correlation
with both the real GDP World growth (0.48), and with the VIX (0.61). To interpret those
result, one shall bear in mind that we are computing the determinant of the net asset
demand (assets minus liabilities) and so a fair share of these results do correspond with
the household credit crunch experienced by households in the wake of the 2007-2008 crisis.
The three other factors capture a mix of interest rate conditions in the US, the Euro area
and the GIIPS, global liquidity, and Euro area export growth.
   For the public sector (Table 2, panel c), the first factor correlates strongly positively
with the VIX index (0.49), and the second sector correlates strongly positively with real
word growth. The public sector asset positions are very small compare to its liability posi-
tion and therefore these factors explain mostly public sector debt, and its countercyclical
nature. Finally the rest of the world net demand is explained by factors reflecting
interest rate conditions in the US, the Euro area, and the GIIPS countries (Table 2, panel
c). The first factor, which captures well the 2007-2008 crisis, corresponds to the global
cycle, and correlates strongly with the US policy rate. The second factor and third factor
capture the Euro sovereign rate crisis and thus correlates strongly with interest rate in the
GIIPS countries. The last two factors capture the US medium to long run interest rate,
and the ECB and Fed policy rates, respectively.
   Overall it is very reassuring to observe that factors explaining net asset demand display
a time series profile which capture well either the 2007-2008 financial crisis or the 2011-2013
Eurozone sovereign crisis, and correlate well with the financial or real variables capturing
the global cycle, the Euro cycle, and sovereign stress in the GIIPS countries.

5.2   Structural Estimation Results
The procedure described in section 4 enables to estimate the structural parameters of the
model: risk-aversion, beliefs about future returns, and the shadow value of equity.

Risk-aversion

As discussed in section 3.2, the mapping between the factor structure of net demand and
that of the return beliefs identify ρσε2 , that is the degree of risk-aversion multiplied by the
residual variance of the belief return model. One way to recover the degree of risk-aversion


                                              19
is by matching the overall variance of return beliefs to the variance of ex-post returns.
Table 2, upper panel, report risk-aversion estimates, one by sector, obtained by matching
variances. This approach generates estimates, which tend to be on the high side, ranging
from 8.9 to 21.7, depending on the institutional sector, but which are not uncommon in
the finance literature.6 The ordering of risk-aversion between sectors is sensible with a
higher estimated risk-aversion in financial sectors subject to capital requirement (banks,
insurance) than for the mutual funds sector or the corporate sector.
      While imposing the matching of belief returns to ex-post returns is a way to discipline
belief formation, one cannot rule out that beliefs are substantially more volatile than
ex-post returns. Moreover by letting the variance of return beliefs to be a multiple of
the variance of ex-post returns (Table 2, bottom three panels), we estimate risk-aversion
parameters that are substantially smaller. The estimation of return beliefs presented in the
next section are obtained by matching the variance of return beliefs with that of ex-post
returns.7

Return Beliefs

The estimated factor model for return beliefs, described in Section 3.1, yields for each
sector and each instrument, a one-quarter-ahead return forecast. Figure 3 and Figure 5
plot alongside the time series of realized ex-post returns the time series of corresponding
return beliefs, the 95th percent confidence forecast interval band, for the financial sectors
and the real sectors, and for each of the following financial instruments: Bonds (Short-
Term and Long-Term), Stocks (Listed and Unlisted), Mutual Fund Shares (Money Market
and Non-Money Market). The R-square of an OLS regression of ex-post returns on ex-ante
return beliefs and a constant is reported on the right-hand upper corner of each plot.
      In many cases, the ex-ante return beliefs predict well ex-post returns. The corporate
sector ex-ante return beliefs explain 31 percent of the variance of ex-post stock returns. The
household sector ex-ante return beliefs explain 35 percent of the variance of the Non Money
Market Mutual Funds ex-post returns. In both cases, the time series of return belief tracks
very well the asset crash of 2007-2008, and the subsequent rebound. Other good predicting
performance include the prediction of unlisted stock returns by the banking sector and the
household sector, the prediction of short-term bonds return by the insurance sector, the
  6
      Ang (2014) and Ait Sahalia & Lo (2000)
  7
      Estimations based on alternative calibration of risk-aversion are available from the authors.



                                                      20
prediction of the return to mutual funds by the corporate sector, the household sector, and
the mutual fund sector itself.
   In several instances however, the model either does not predict ex-post return or more
puzzlingly its predictions negatively correlate with ex-post returns. We shall notice that
this feature is mostly driven by the 2007-2008 crisis. A potential explanation is that several
institutional sectors during that period had to increase their purchases of assets even if
their returns were declining. Since beliefs are implicitly derived from net demands, those
counter-cyclical purchases can drive the negative correlation between return beliefs and
ex-post returns. This is the case for the banking sector which hoarded short term liquid
assets during the crisis, for the public sector who bought large stock shares to recaptilize
the banking sector and the automobile sector during the crisis, and for the insurance sector
which increased considerably its asset holdings during the crisis (Heipertz et al. 2016).
   Figure 4 and 6 illustrate the dispersion of beliefs between the three financial sectors
(banking, insurance, mutual funds), and between the three real domestic sectors (corporate,
household, public). Overall, while there is substantial disagreement in beliefs at each point
in time, the return beliefs of the banking sector and the mutual fund sectors display a strong
comovement. The correlation between the return beliefs of the banking sector and those
of the mutual fund sectors are high for most financial instruments: listed stocks (0.54),
unlisted stocks (0.46), non money-market mutual fund share (0.34), short-term debt (0.40).
There are however episodes in which the return beliefs differ substantially. For example,
the mutual fund sector exhibited much more pessimistic beliefs during the 2007-2008 crisis
about the return to stocks and to debt securities, while the banking sector became more
pessimist on the returns to stocks and mutual fund shares during the sovereign crisis of
2011-2012. One interpretation is that the bank bailout of 2007-2008 avoided the need for
banks to engage in massive fire-sales (with deep discount prices), while the mutual fund
sector faced large withdrawals from customers and had to engage in such fire-sales. On
the opposite, banks were suffering from significant liquidity or solvency stress during the
sovereign debt crisis, due to their exposure to GIIPS debt, and therefore faced a pressure
to sell-off rapidly other assets that the mutual fund sector did not experience then.
   The comparison of beliefs among the three real sectors reveal a sharp contrast between
the belief returns of the corporate and household that typically comove, and that of the
public sector that often displays counter-cyclical beliefs, and especially so during the 2007-
2008 crisis. This is consistent with the role played by government in providing bailout and
in the debt financing of large public sector deficits during the crisis.

                                              21
Value of Equity

Figure 7 plots the shadow value of equity for each of the sector of the economy. For the
corporate and banking sector, the shadow value of issuing more equity declined during the
crisis and rebounded afterwards. The insurance sector value of equity increased sharply in
the aftermath of the crisis in line with its increase in net asset holdings. The public sector
value of equity declined sharply in the crisis and post-crisis period, a period during which
public debt increased strongly.

5.3   Networks, and Shock Propagation
Following section 2.4, the estimated net asset demand model yields both a network of
assets and a network of institutions. We focus here on the network formed by the tradable
instruments: Bonds (Short-Term and Long-Term), Stocks (Listed and Unlisted), Mutual
Fund Shares (Money Market and Non-Money Market). Figure 8 represents the network of
financial instruments for two dates: (i) the first quarter of 2008, that is before the financial
crisis; (2) the recent period (2015.Q1). In the pre-crisis era, the demand for equity and non
money-market mutual fund share were the most affected by changes in the returns to other
assets. By contrast, in the post-crisis era, the demand for long-term debt became the most
affected demand, reflecting both increased issuances of corporate debt in a low-interest
rate environment, and increased loading of government securities in balance-sheets, and
especially so in the banking and insurance sector.
   A convenient way to illustrate the importance of network propagation is to contrast the
partial equilibrium effect of a shock, which by construction abstracts from any networks
effects, to the general equilibrium effect which incorporates the full array of network effects
. In order to do this comparison, we fist derive the partial equilibrium effect of a shock to
the equity of sector k.

Proposition 4. The partial equilibrium effect of a shock to sector k’s equity Ekt on net
demands is given by

                 ∂∆kt                −1                 ∂∆k0 t
                      = Σ−1
                         k  10 Σ−1
                                k  1     1,        and          =0   ∀k 0 6= k,
                 ∂Ekt                                    ∂Ekt

where Σk is the J × J variance-covariance matrix of return beliefs of sector k. The partial
equilibrium effect of equity on net demand is time independent.



                                              22
   Note that while the partial equilibrium impact of a shock on equity is constant, the
general equilibrium effect varies over time along with the price sensitivity of net demands to
changes in log returns which characterize the time-varying network of financial instruments
(see section 2.4).
   Table 10 shows the partial and general equilibrium effect of a shock to the equity of
the banking sector. The shock corresponds to one unit increase in the capital base of the
banking sector. Table 10, panel (b) shows the effects for 2015.Q1, a period of tranquil times
and Table 10, panel (a) for 2008.Q4, a period of crisis time.
   By comparing the first and second column of table 10, panel (b), we can contrast the
partial and general equilibrium effects of the shock the banking sector itself. In the partial
equilibrium effect the one-unit increase in equity finance a one-unit increase in net assets
distributed more of less equally across the three asset classes (stocks, bonds, mutual funds).
In general equilibrium however price effects reduces the increase in net asset demand for
all asset classes and the total net demand for assets in the banking sector ends up being
30 percent smaller than in partial equilibrium.
   For the other sectors, only the general equilibrium effects arise and they appear to be
very heterogeneous across sectors. Following a one-unit shock to equity in the banking
sector, the corporate sector also increase its net asset demands (+0.58) but all the other
sectors experience a decrease in net asset demand. The reduction is small for the household
sector (-0.045) but with substantial rebalancing in net asset position away from listed
stocks, short-debt debt, and non money market mutual funds, and towards unlisted stocks,
long-term debt, and money market funds. The reduction in net asset demand is much larger
for the insurance sector with a reduction of -0.45 in total net asset demand and a reduction
in the net asset demand for all asset classes.
   The re-balancing of net demand between the banking sector and the insurance sector
is quiet remarkable as it is closely related with what happened in the aftermath 2007-2008,
that is a retrenchment of the banking sector net asset holdings following severe capital
losses, and an expansion of the insurance sector net asset holdings(Heipertz et al. 2016).
The last column displays the change in log returns and indicates a marked dispersion in
returns between assets with a decline in the returns of listed stocks, short-term debt, and
non money-market mutual fund shares while the returns of other instruments increased.
   Table 10, panel (a) explores network effects that unfolded in the midst of the 2007-2008
financial crisis (2008.Q4). The increase in net asset demand by the banking and corporate
sectors was, back then, considerably lower (0.5 and 0.215) than in “tranquil times”. By

                                             23
contrast, all other sectors experienced a decline in their net asset demand. That decline was
more marked than in “tranquil times” for households (-0.08), but less so for the insurance
sector (-0.26). Meanwhile, the Rest of the World increased net asset holdings relative to
“tranquil times”.
    Overall, it turns out that the network effects derived from the general equilibrium
analysis are (i) sizeable in some sectors, of a magnitude comparable to the sector where
the shock originated; (ii) very contrasted across sector, vindicating the phenomonon of
large net demand shifts across sectors such as between the banking and the insurance
sector.


6    Conclusion
This paper develops a novel methodology to estimate the key parameters of a general
equilibrium model of net asset trade by using the factor structure of net asset demand.
The structure of net asset demand is well explained by a number of factors that strongly
correlate with macro-variables capturing the global cycle or the Eurozone cycle. The
estimated model for return beliefs predicts well ex-post returns for many sectors and many
financial instruments. The cased of predictions failure can be related to special episodes
such as the 2007-2008 crisis during which some sectors (insurance, public sector) displayed
a counter-cyclical behavior increasing net holdings of assets whose return were declining.
The estimated model yields both a network of financial instrument and a networks of
institutions. The transmission of shocks in the networks, through price externalities, reveal
network effects which are large and strongly heterogeneous across sectors. Extending the
model to account for regulatory constraints in order to simulate regulatory changes, and
re-estimating the model on individual institutions are the next steps on the agenda.




                                             24
References
Acemoglu, D., Ozdaglar, A. & Tahbaz-Salehi, A. (2015), ‘Systemic risk and stability in
    financial networks’, American Economic Review 105.

Ait Sahalia, Y. & Lo, A. W. (2000), ‘Nonparametric risk management and implied risk
    aversion’, Journal of Econometrics 94.

Ang, A. (2014), ‘Asset management: A systematic approach to factor investing’, OUP
    Catalogue, Oxford University Press .

Berrada, T. (2006), ‘Incomplete information, heterogeneity and asset pricing’, Journal of
    Financial Econometrics 4.

Eisenberg, L. & Noe, T. H. (2001), ‘Systemic risk in financial systems’, Management Science
    47.

Elliott, M., Golub, B. & Jackson, M. O. (2014), ‘Financial networks and contagion’, Amer-
    ican Economic Review 104.

Gandhi, A. & Serrano-Padial, R. (2015), ‘Does belief heterogeneity explain asset prices:
    The case of the longshot bias’, Review of Economic Studies 82.

Goyal, S. & Vega-Redondo, F. (2005), ‘Network formation and social coordination’, Games
    and Economic Behavior 50.

Greenwood, R., Landier, A. & Thesmar, D. (2015), ‘Vulnerable banks’, Journal of Finan-
    cial Economics 115.

Heipertz, J., Ranciere, R. & Valla, N. (2016), ‘Domestic and international sectoral portfo-
    lios: Network structure and balance sheet effects’, mimeo .

Jackson, M. & Watts, A. (2002), ‘The evolution of social and economic networks’, Journal
    of Economic Theory 106.

Koijen, R. S. & Yogo, M. (2016), ‘An equilibrium model of institutional demand and asset
    prices’, NBER Working Paper No. 21749 .

Mas-Colell, A., Whinston, M. D., Green, J. R. et al. (1995), Microeconomic theory, Vol. 1,
    Oxford university press New York.

                                             25
Miranda-Agrippino, S. & Rey, H. (2015), ‘World asset markets and the global financial
    cycle’, NBER Working Paper No. 21722 .

Wu, J. C. & Xia, F. D. (2016), ‘Measuring the macroeconomic impact of monetary policy
    at the zero lower bound’, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 48.




                                         26
     Figure 1: Financial Sectors - Factors (black) and Macro-Variables (blue)
               (a) Banking             (b) Insurance         (c) Mutual Funds




Factor 1



              FD Yield 1y US          Yield 30y US               VIX




Factor 2



            FD Int. Rate GIIPS      Growth Rate VIX           Yield 1y US




Factor 3



             Shadow Rate ECB      FD Shadow Rate ECB      FD Shadow Rate FED




Factor 4



               Yield 30y US          FD Yield 1y US          Yield 30y Euro




                                     27
    Figure 2: Non-Financial Sectors and RoW - Factors (black) and Macro-Variables (blue)
             (a) Corporate           (b) Household             (c) Public                (d) RoW




Factor 1




             FD Int. Rate Adv.     FD Shadow Rate FED                VIX               Shadow Rate FED




Factor 2




           Real Growth Euro Area           VIX                       VIX              Interest Rate GIIPS




Factor 3




              FD Yield 1y US         Shadow Rate ECB        Real Growth Rate World   FD Interest Rate GIIPS




Factor 4




              FD Yield 1y US       FD Interest Rate GIIPS        Yield 30y US             Yield 2y US




                                               28
Figure 3: Financial Sectors - Mean Beliefs (blue) with 95% confidence bands versus Ex-Post
Returns (black)
                    Banking                   Insurance                  Other FI



  Listed
  Stocks




 Unlisted
 Stocks




   FS
   MM




   FS
  NMM




  Debt,
   ST




  Debt,
   LT




                                           29
Figure 4: Financial Sectors - Beliefs Heterogeneity (blue=Banking, green=Insurance,
red=Mutual Funds)




                (a) Stocks, listed                (b) Stocks, unlisted




          (c) Fundshares, Money Market         (d) Fundshares, Non-MM




                  (e) Debt, LT                       (f) Debt, ST
Figure 5: Non-Financial Sectors - Mean Beliefs (blue) with 95% confidence bands versus
Ex-Post Returns (black)
                  Corporate               Household                   Public



 Listed
 Stocks




 Unlisted
 Stocks




  FS
  MM




  FS
 NMM




  Debt,
   ST




  Debt,
   LT
                                         31
Figure 6:     Non-Financial      Sectors   -    Beliefs    Heterogeneity         (blue=Corporate,
green=Household, red=Public)




                (a) Stocks, listed                        (b) Stocks, unlisted




          (c) Fundshares, Money Market              (d) Fundshares, Non-MM




                  (e) Debt, LT                               (f) Debt, ST




                                           32
                Figure 7: Cost of Equity




(a) Banking                                (b) Corporate




(c) Insurance                              (d) Household




(e) Other FI                                (f) Public




                          33
Figure 8: Representation of the Network of Financial Instruments - Adjacency Matrix




                                   (a) 2008-Q1




                                   (b) 2015-Q1




                                        34
                           Table 1: Macro-Variables and Sources
Macro-Variable                      Source         Comments
ECB and FED Shadow Rate        Wu and Xia (2016)
Interest Rate Adv. Economies         IFS           Average of yields on government
                                                   securities of Belgium, France,
                                                   Netherlands, Germany, Italy, Japan and
                                                   the US
Interest Rate GIIPS                  IFS           Average of Yields on government
                                                   securities of Greece, Ireland, Italy,
                                                   Portugal and Spain (GIIPS)
Liquidity Growth World               IFS           Q-on-q growth rate of the sum of
                                                   monetary aggregates M2 of the Euro
                                                   area, Japan, the United Kingdom and
                                                   the US
S&P 500 VIX                         CBOE           Implied volatility of S&P 500 index
                                                   options
Real Export Growth Euro area         IFS
Real Export Growth World             IFS
Real GDP Growth Euro area            IFS
Real GDP Growth World                IFS
Real Import Growth World             IFS
Real Trade Growth World              IFS
Yield Cuve US                     JP Morgan        Mid yield curve
Yields Cuve Euro area             JP Morgan        Mid yield curve Germany




                                             35
           Table 2: Risk Aversion and Return Belief Uncertainty




                                                ds
                                              un




                                                                   ld
                                                        ate
                                     e


                                            lF
                                   nc




                                                                    o
                       g




                                                                 eh
                     in




                                                      or
                                            ua
                                ra




                                                                               c
                                                               us


                                                                           bli
                   nk




                                                                                       W
                                                    rp
                             su


                                          ut




                                                              Ho
                                                 Co
                 Ba




                                                                         Pu


                                                                                    Ro
                           In


                                         M
          ρ      21.69   23.97      8.94     12.02    13.94              9.053     12.046
δ=1
          σ     0.01    0.008     0.009 0.0111 0.0118                  0.0104     0.009
          ρ      14.18   16.96      7.56     8.42     12.12              6.36       9.22
δ=2
          σ 0.0183 0.0156 0.0130 0.0227 0.0160                         0.0211     0.0539
          ρ      8.73    11.99      5.52     6.01      8.66              4.76       8.74
δ=4
          σ 0.0357 0.0312 0.0272 0.0446 0.0326                         0.0376     0.0604
          ρ      4.67     7.58      3.45     3.86      5.57              2.99       6.78
δ=6
          σ 0.0898 0.0779 0.0721 0.1082 0.0817                         0.1055     0.1024
Note:   δ is the variance ratio of return beliefs over ex-post          returns.




                                           36
                                Table 3: Banking - Factors and Macro-Variables
                                       Factor 1       Factor 2       Factor 3        Factor 4        Factor 5
Explained Variance                    0.19           0.31           0.41           0.49            0.57
Observable                            beta    R2     beta    R2     beta    R2     beta     R2     beta     R2
first.diff.yield.1y.us                0.58*   0.29
first.diff.yield.2y.us                0.55*   0.22
growth.rate.vix                      -1.25*   0.21
interest.rate.advanced               -0.17*   0.18
first.diff.interest.rate.gips                        1.09*   0.72                                  -0.25*   0.15
real.growth.rate.world                               0.19*   0.21
first.diff.interest.rate.advanced                    1.88*   0.19
real.export.growth.world                             0.04*   0.18
yield.1y.us                                                         0.31*   0.61
shadow.rate.ecb                                                     0.3*    0.56
shadow.rate.fed                                                     0.2*    0.55
yield.2y.us                                                         0.31*   0.51
yield.30y.us                                                                       -0.52*   0.64
yield.10y.euro                                                                     -0.29*   0.5
yield.30y.euro                                                                     -0.33*   0.5
yield.10y.us                                                                       -0.35*   0.45
real.export.growth.ea                                                                              -0.02*   0.13
first.diff.yield.3y.us                                                                             0.39*    0.11
first.diff.yield.5y.us                                                                             0.44*    0.11
Note: ”*” denotes significance at the 1% level




                                                       37
                                Table 4: Insurance - Factors and Macro-Variables
                                       Factor 1        Factor 2         Factor 3         Factor 4        Factor 5
Explained Variance                    0.17           0.29             0.39             0.48             0.56
                                                 2                2                2                2
Observable                           beta    R       beta     R       beta     R       beta     R       beta    R2
yield.30y.us                         0.23*   0.41                                      0.31*    0.15
yield.30y.euro                       0.15*   0.34                                                       0.24*   0.18
yield.10y.euro                       0.13*   0.33                                                       0.22*   0.2
yield.10y.us                         0.16*   0.3                      -0.3*    0.32
growth.rate.vix                                      -2.24*   0.36                     -2.06*   0.16
first.diff.real.export.growth.ea                     0.08*    0.28
shadow.rate.ecb                                      -0.13*   0.23
first.diff.shadow.rate.ecb                           0.62*    0.19    -0.97*   0.36
yield.7y.us                                                           -0.26*   0.32
yield.5y.us                                                           -0.23*   0.31
first.diff.yield.1y.us                                                                 1.01*    0.26
first.diff.yield.2y.us                                                                 0.95*    0.19
first.diff.interest.rate.pigs                                                                           1.01*   0.64
yield.5y.euro                                                                                           0.18*   0.17
Note: ”*” denotes significance at the 1% level




                                                         38
                             Table 5: Mutual Funds - Factors and Macrovariables
                                      Factor 1         Factor 2         Factor 3        Factor 4         Factor 5
Explained Variance                   0.20            0.33             0.46             0.55            0.62
                                                 2                2                2               2
Observable                           beta    R       beta     R       beta     R       beta    R       beta     R2
vix                                 -0.05*   0.57                                      0.03*   0.34
first.diff.shadow.rate.ecb          1.11*    0.55
real.import.growth.world            0.06*    0.54
real.trade.growth                   0.06*    0.5
shadow.rate.fed                                      -0.12*   0.53
yield.1y.us                                          -0.18*   0.53
yield.2y.us                                          -0.19*   0.52
yield.3y.us                                          -0.2*    0.5
first.diff.shadow.rate.fed                                            -0.94*   0.54
first.diff.yield.1y.us                                                -0.96*   0.39                    0.93*    0.31
first.diff.interest.rate.advanced                                     -1.61*   0.26
first.diff.yield.2y.us                                                -0.86*   0.25
yield.30y.euro                                                                         0.23*   0.54
yield.10y.euro                                                                         0.19*   0.45
yield.5y.euro                                                                          0.15*   0.34
shadow.rate.ecb                                                                                        -0.18*   0.36
interest.rate.advanced                                                                                 -0.35*   0.31
yield.2y.euro                                                                                          -0.18*   0.28
Note: ”*” denotes significance at the 1% level




                                                       39
                                Table 6: Corporate - Factors and Macro-Variables
                                        Factor 1      Factor 2        Factor 3        Factor 4       Factor 5
Explained Variance                    0.17           0.30           0.41            0.50            0.58
Observable                            beta    R2     beta    R2     beta     R2     beta     R2     beta    R2
first.diff.interest.rate.advanced     1.79*   0.58                                                  2.32*   0.37
real.growth.rate.world                0.17*   0.55
real.export.growth.world              0.04*   0.5
real.trade.growth                     0.04*   0.49
real.growth.rate.ea                                  0.2*    0.5
yield.1y.us                                          0.19*   0.44                                   0.18*   0.28
yield.2y.us                                          0.2*    0.42
yield.3y.us                                          0.21*   0.4
first.diff.yield.1y.us                                              1.63*    0.5    -0.94*   0.4
first.diff.yield.2y.us                                              1.67*    0.44   -1.01*   0.38
first.diff.yield.3y.us                                              1.57*    0.35
interest.rate.advanced                                              -0.51*   0.35
first.diff.shadow.rate.fed                                                          -0.77*   0.39
shadow.rate.ecb                                                                     0.15*    0.36   0.17*   0.31
first.diff.interest.rate.pigs                                                                       0.73*   0.37
Note: ”*” denotes significance at the 1% level




                                                        40
                                Table 7: Household - Factors and Macro-Variables
                                        Factor 1        Factor 2         Factor 3         Factor 4        Factor 5
Explained Variance                    0.18            0.31             0.42             0.52             0.59
                                                  2                2                2                2
Observable                            beta    R       beta     R       beta     R       beta     R       beta    R2
first.diff.shadow.rate.fed            0.81*   0.49
first.diff.yield.1y.us                0.92*   0.44
real.growth.rate.world                0.17*   0.37    0.18*    0.48
first.diff.yield.2y.us                0.93*   0.37
vix                                                   -0.04*   0.61
first.diff.interest.rate.advanced                     1.91*    0.47
first.diff.yield.2y.euro                              1.13*    0.44
shadow.rate.ecb                                                        -0.22*   0.34    -0.16*   0.4     0.17*   0.32
first.diff.interest.rate.pigs                                          -0.73*   0.29    -0.6*    0.45
interest.rate.advanced                                                 -0.41*   0.26                     0.37*   0.36
shadow.rate.fed                                                        -0.14*   0.26
yield.1y.us                                                                             -0.15*   0.33
yield.2y.us                                                                             -0.15*   0.31
first.diff.real.export.growth.ea                                                                         -0.1*   0.31
liquidity.growth.world                                                                                   0.05*   0.31
Note: ”*” denotes significance at the 1% level




                                                         41
                              Table 8: Public - Factors and Macro-Variables
                                      Factor 1         Factor 2         Factor 3         Factor 4         Factor 5
Explained Variance                  0.21             0.34             0.44             0.53             0.61
                                                 2                2                2                2
Observable                          beta     R       beta     R       beta     R       beta     R       beta     R2
vix                                 0.03*    0.47    -0.07*   0.64
real.growth.rate.ea                 -0.09*   0.3
first.diff.yield.2y.euro            -0.61*   0.29
first.diff.interest.rate.advanced   -0.97*   0.27    3.29*    0.61    -1.77*   0.36
real.growth.rate.world                               0.32*    0.63    -0.17*   0.38
real.trade.growth.ea                                 0.08*    0.56
yield.1y.us                                                           -0.15*   0.33
first.diff.shadow.rate.fed                                            -0.68*   0.31
yield.30y.us                                                                           -0.18*   0.17
yield.10y.us                                                                           -0.13*   0.14
interest.rate.pigs                                                                     0.06*    0.13
yield.7y.us                                                                            -0.11*   0.13
yield.30y.euro                                                                                          -0.12*   0.24
yield.10y.euro                                                                                          -0.1*    0.22
interest.rate.advanced                                                                                  -0.14*   0.17
yield.5y.euro                                                                                           -0.08*   0.17
Note: ”*” denotes significance at the 1% level




                                                       42
                          Table 9: Rest of the World - Factors and Macro-Variables
                                     Factor 1         Factor 2         Factor 3         Factor 4         Factor 5
Explained Variance                  0.14            0.25             0.35             0.44             0.52
                                                2                2                2                2
Observable                          beta    R       beta     R       beta     R       beta     R       beta     R2
shadow.rate.fed                    -0.15*   0.51                                                       -0.15*   0.64
yield.1y.us                        -0.21*   0.5                                                        -0.2*    0.55
interest.rate.advanced             -0.44*   0.48
yield.2y.us                        -0.22*   0.44                                                       -0.21*   0.51
interest.rate.pigs                                  0.2*     0.58
first.diff.yield.7y.us                              -1.24*   0.29
first.diff.yield.5y.us                              -1.18*   0.28
first.diff.yield.10y.us                             -1.35*   0.27
first.diff.interest.rate.pigs                                        -0.54*   0.35
vix                                                                  -0.02*   0.14
yield.30y.euro                                                       -0.13    0.09
first.diff.real.export.growth.ea                                     -0.05    0.08
yield.2y.euro                                                                         -0.28*   0.56
yield.5y.us                                                                           -0.31*   0.53
yield.7y.us                                                                           -0.35*   0.53
yield.10y.us                                                                          -0.39*   0.51
shadow.rate.ecb                                                                                        -0.22*   0.71
Note: ”*” denotes significance at the 1% level




                                                       43
     Table 10: Partial and General Equilibrium Effect of a Shock to Banking Equity




                                                                    ds
                                                                  un




                                                                                                                         rn
                                                                                       ld
                                                                            ate
                                                       e


                                                                lF




                                                                                                                     etu
                                                     nc




                                                                                        o
                              g


                                        g




                                                                                     eh
                            in


                                      in




                                                                          or
                                                               ua
                                                  ra




                                                                                                   c




                                                                                                                   gR
                                                                                   us


                                                                                               bli
                          nk


                                    nk




                                                                                                           W
                                                                        rp
                                               su


                                                             ut




                                                                                  Ho
                                                                     Co
                         Ba


                                  Ba




                                                                                             Pu


                                                                                                        Ro


                                                                                                                 Lo
                                             In


                                                            M
                         PE       General Equilibrium

PANEL (a): 2008Q4
Stocks, listed          0.139     0.070     -0.085         -0.008   0.068     -0.038        -0.037     0.030    -0.092
Stocks, unlisted        0.198     0.102      0.009         -0.005   -0.012     0.023        -0.104     -0.012    0.139
Debt, ST                0.152     0.074     -0.070         -0.008   0.059     -0.034        -0.047     0.026    -0.075
Debt, LT                0.179     0.088     -0.001         -0.013   0.009      0.005        -0.091      0.003    0.065
Fundshares, MM          0.182     0.088     -0.039         -0.009   0.031     -0.011        -0.073     0.012     0.010
Fundshares, NMM         0.149     0.075     -0.077         -0.008   0.059     -0.033        -0.042     0.025    -0.072
Equity                  1.000     0.497     -0.262         -0.051   0.215     -0.088        -0.394     0.083       /

PANEL (b): 2015Q1
Stocks, listed          0.139     0.093     -0.163         -0.029   0.162     -0.047        0.020      -0.036   -0.129
Stocks, unlisted        0.198     0.146      0.028         -0.058   0.013      0.050        -0.158     -0.021    0.164
Debt, ST                0.152     0.102     -0.131         -0.036   0.144     -0.037        -0.009     -0.033   -0.105
Debt, LT                0.179     0.131      0.011         -0.046   0.039      0.023        -0.125     -0.033    0.100
Fundshares, MM          0.182     0.131     -0.026         -0.041   0.058      0.017        -0.109     -0.030    0.071
Fundshares, NMM         0.149     0.101     -0.170         -0.037   0.164     -0.051        0.023      -0.029   -0.135
Equity                  1.000     0.703     -0.451         -0.248   0.581     -0.045        -0.357     -0.183      /




                                               44
A      Theory – Proofs
Proposition 2. (Existence of an Equilibrium) There exists a price vector p∗t ∈ RJ such
that N          ∗          ∗
    P
      i=1 ∆it (pt ) = Et (pt ).

Proof. For clarity of exposition and without loss of generality, we omit the subscript t in the
notations for this proof. Write ∆(p) = N
                                        P
                                          i=1 ∆i (p1 , p2 , . . . , pJ ) − E(p1 , p2 , . . . , pJ ). Throughout
the paper and following the conventions of the asset portfolio allocation literature, ∆(p) is the
value of net demand. We thus write z(p) the net demand in units of financial instruments, and
thus ∆(p) = p       z(p) is the term by term product of the price vector and the net demand vector
in units.
    An equilibrium price vector is a J-vector p such that z(p) = 0.
    Following Mas-Colell, Whinston, Green et al. (1995), we need to show that the aggregate net
demand curve p ∈ RJ+∗ 7→ z(p) ∈ RJ satisfies the following properties:
    1. z(·) is continuous.

    2. z(·) is homogenous of degree zero.

    3. p · z(p) = 0 for all p, i.e. Walras law is satisfied.

    4. There is an s > 0 such that zj (p) > −s for all financial instruments j = 1, 2, . . . , J and for
       all price vectors p.

    5. If pn → p, where p 6= 0 and pj = 0 for some j, then

                                         max {z1 (pn ), . . . , zJ (pn )} → ∞


The continuity of z(·) over RJ+∗ is established as follows. First, the variance-covariance matrix Σ
is a continuous function of the price vector of RJ+∗ . Following the assumption of section 2.1, it
satisfies det Σ(p) 6= 0 for all p ∈ RJ as a positive definite symmetric matrix. Thus the inverse
Σ−1 (p) is a continuous function of prices. Second, the mean return µ is a continuous function of
p. Third, the cost of equity, a rational function of Σ−1 and µ with no root in the denominator, is
also a continuous function of p.
    The homogeneity of z(·) is established by writing the expression for z(p), where p includes the
price of shares pj(i) :
                                         N                                     
                                         X          1             1 −1
                                z(p) =         diag( )             Σ (µi − ηi 1) ,                        (26)
                                                    p             ρ i
                                         i=1


                                                         45
where      is the term by term vector multiplication. And ηi = (10 Σ−1 µ − ρpj(i) Ξi )/(10 Σ−1 1).
Multiplying all prices by a constant λ > 0 multiplies the mean returns µi by 1/λ, multiplies the
                                                                        2
inverse of the variance-covariance matrix Σ−1
                                           i by a constant λ , and the cost of equity by λ. Given
the lead factor diag( p1 ), the net demand z(λp) is unchanged, and z(λp) = z(p).
    Walras law follows from the sum of the funding constraints, as

                                        J X
                                        X N
                           p · z(p) =             (∆ij (p) − 1(j(i) = j)Ei (p)) = 0.                          (27)
                                        j=1 i=1


On point 4.: the existence of a lower bound for net demands z(p) follows from the funding
constraint (1). Indeed, assume that there is no s such that zj (p) > −s for all financial instru-
ments j = 1, 2, . . . , J and for all price vectors p. Then we can build a sequence (sk , pk ) such that
sk → ∞ as k → ∞, and for each k, there is a j 0 (k) in {1, 2, . . . , J} for which −sk > zj 0 (k) (pk ).
Given the funding constraint, this implies that there will be a similar sequence for which demand
will go to infinity. Formally, there is a sequence (σ k , π k ) such that σ k → ∞ as k → ∞, and for
each k, there is a j 00 (k) in {1, 2, . . . , J} for which zj 00 (k) (π k ) > σ k . This, however, implies that the
variance of the firm’s portfolio diverges to infinity as k → ∞, which cannot be a solution to the
optimization program (2).
    The last point follows from the fact that if asset j’s return diverges to infinity, µj → ∞ and
therefore according to equation (3), one of the components of net demand will diverge to infinity.
    Given that properties 1–5 are satisfied, an equilibrium price vector p∗ exists with z(p∗ ) = 0.


B     Data Appendix
B.1     Estimation of Returns from Sectoral Accounts
There are two challenges for deriving returns on financial instrument categories from sectoral
account data.

    1. Returns are specific to the sectoral investment position. The sectoral accounts provide
      information on aggregates of financial instruments of the same type. No information exists on
      sectoral portfolio allocations across financial instruments of the same type. Returns realized
      on financial instruments of the same type therefore vary across sector, due to differences in
      inter-type allocations.

    2. Pay-offs are recorded only at the sectoral level as income received or payed in the income

                                                        46
     accounts. Therefore dividends, interest payments and investment income cannot be directly
     attributed to financial instruments.

We use the variation of investment positions across sectors and financial instruments, the variation
of valuation changes across sectors and financial instruments and the variation of income received
or payed across sectors to estimate subsequently: (i) the return due to valuation changes and (ii)
the return due to payoffs. Financial instruments are indexed by j = 1, ..., J and sectors are indexed
by i = 1, ..., I. Furthermore, P D       S
                                 t and P t are matrices of size I × J that collect the demand and
supply by I sectors for J financial instruments, respectively. The rate of return due to valuation
changes is denoted by gjt+1 and the rate of return due to payoffs is denoted by πjt+1 .

Assumption 1. The return on asset j demanded or supplied by sector i have an asset-specific
component and a component specific to the financial position f ∈ {D, S} of sector i.

                                f
                               πijt+1 = πjt+1 + ufit+1 ,             f ∈ {D, S}                    (28)
                                f                f
                               gijt+1 = gjt+1 + vit+1 ,              f ∈ {D, S}                    (29)

where D denotes the demand/asset side of the balance-sheet and S the supply/liability side of the
balance-sheet. We assume that the component specific to the financial position f ∈ {D, S} of sector
i is iid distributed with mean zero.

   Collecting the pay-offs and valuation gains received or payed on J assets by I sectors in the
matricesΠft and Gft of dimension I × J, respectively, Assumption 1 implies that the return in
amount of currency units realized can be written in matrix notation as
                                                                        
                     Πft   =   P ft diag (π t+1 )   + diag       uft+1       P ft ,   f ∈ {D, S}   (30)
                                                                    
                     Gft   = P ft diag g t+1 + diag vt+1
                                                     f
                                                         P ft ,
                                               
                                                                                      f ∈ {D, S}   (31)

As argued above, not all returns realized by sectors on financial instruments are fully observable.
For example, only the sum of interest payments received by sector i is observable, but not interest
payments received on loans and coupon payments received on debt securities separately. Indeed,
there are matrices O Π and O G of dimension J × K that map unobservable return components to
observable functions of returns, such that we can transform equations 3031 to




                                                      47
                               h                                 i
                Πft O Π =     P ft diag (π t+1 ) + diag uft+1 P ft O Π ,    f ∈ {D, S}        (32)
                            h                                    i
                Gft O G   = P ft diag g t+1 + diag vt+1  f
                                                               P ft O G ,
                                              
                                                                            f ∈ {D, S}        (33)

   Note that if all returns were observable, O Π = O G = I. Finally, we estimate gjt+1 , πjt+1 such
as to minimize the sum of squared residuals. This method simplifies to weighted Ordinary Least
Squares when we assume additionally that the sector and financial position sepcific components
of returns are uncorrelated.

B.2    Imputation of the Real Asset
The estimation of the model requieres information on complete balance-sheets, i.e. stock and
change (valuation + flows + other changes) for both financial and non-financial assets. These
data are available in the following form:

  1. Financial asset stocks and changes: at quarterly frequency from quarterly sectoral accounts
      from EUROSTAT. The datasets are: nasq 10 f bs, nasq 10 f gl, nasq 10 f tr, nasq 10 f oc.

  2. Non-financial asset stocks: at annual frequency from both EUROSTAT (nasa 10 nfa) and
      INSEE.

  3. Non-financial asset changes to due flows: at quarterly frequency from EUROSTAT (nasq 10 nf tr),
      but strangely not from INSEE.

  4. Non-financial asset changes due to valuation, flows and other changes: at annual frequency
      from INSEE, but not from EUROSTAT.

Quarterly stocks and changes of the financial part of sectoral balance-sheet are directly obtained
from the sectoral financial accounts from EUROSTAT. The non-financial part of the balance-sheet
are obtained in three steps:

  1. We aggregate quarterly flows from EUROSTAT to annual flows and calculate the share of
      the annual flow that takes place in each quarter. For example we will find that in 2008.1
      30% of the 2008 annual flow took place, etc.

  2. We take annual changes (valuation + flows + other changes) from INSEE and apply the
      inter-annual breakdown for flows obtained in Step 1 to all types of changes.

                                                  48
3. We take the annual stocks from INSEE and build up the quarterly stocks from the quarterly
  series of changes obtained in Step 2.




                                           49
