NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE METHUSELAH EFFECT:
THE PERNICIOUS IMPACT OF UNREPORTED DEATHS ON OLD AGE MORTALITY ESTIMATES
Dan A. Black
Yu-Chieh Hsu
Seth G. Sanders
Lynne Steuerle Schofield
Lowell J. Taylor
Working Paper 23574
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23574

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2017

We thank the editors, three anonymous reviewers, David Card, Amitabh Chandra, James Saxon,
Douglas Staiger, Lydia Veliko, and seminar participants at UC Berkeley, Indiana University/
Purdue University of Indianapolis, and New York University for helpful comments. All errors are
our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Dan A. Black, Yu-Chieh Hsu, Seth G. Sanders, Lynne Steuerle Schofield, and Lowell
J. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Methuselah Effect: The Pernicious Impact of Unreported Deaths on Old Age Mortality
Estimates
Dan A. Black, Yu-Chieh Hsu, Seth G. Sanders, Lynne Steuerle Schofield, and Lowell J. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 23574
July 2017
JEL No. J1
ABSTRACT
We examine inferences about old age mortality that arise when researchers use survey data
matched to death records. We show that even small rates of failure to match respondents can lead
to substantial bias in the measurement of mortality rates at older ages. This type of measurement
error is consequential for three strands in the demographic literature: (1) the deceleration in
mortality rates at old ages, (2) the black-white mortality crossover, and (3) the relatively low rate
of old age mortality among Hispanics—often called the “Hispanic paradox.” Using the National
Longitudinal Survey of Older Men (NLS-OM) matched to death records in both the U.S. Vital
Statistics system and the Social Security Death Index, we demonstrate that even small rates of
missing mortality matching plausibly lead to an appearance of mortality deceleration when none
exists, and can generate a spurious black-white mortality crossover. We confirm these findings
using data from the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) matched to the U.S. Vital Statistics
system, a dataset known as the “gold standard” (Cowper et al., 2002) for estimating age-specific
mortality. Moreover, with these data we show that the Hispanic paradox is also plausibly
explained by a similar undercount.
Dan A. Black
1155 E. 60th Street
Harris School
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 606037
danblack@uchicago.edu
Yu-Chieh Hsu
University of Chicago and NORC
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
yh2263@caa.columbia.edu
Seth G. Sanders
Department of Economics
and Sanford School of Public Policy
Duke University, Durham, NC 27708
seth.sanders@duke.edu

Lynne Steuerle Schofield
Swarthmore College
500 College Ave.
Swarthmore, PA 19081
lschofi1@swarthmore.edu
Lowell J. Taylor
Carnegie Mellon University
H. John Heinz III College
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
lt20@andrew.cmu.edu

3

“By my troth, I care not. A man can die but once. We owe God a death … and let it go
which way it will, he that dies this year is quit for the next.”
William Shakespeare, Henry IV Part 2, Act 3 Scene 2
Introduction
Both the scientific community and the general public have a deep interest in the
processes that shape old age mortality. Many facets of old age mortality have elicited intense
evaluation by scholars, including the following three topics:
The first issue is perhaps the most compelling topic in the study of mortality—the
plasticity of longevity. Life expectancy has increased in a remarkably linear manner since the
1840s (Oeppen and Vaupel, 2002), naturally giving rise to a debate about the question: “Is
there some built-in age limit to human life?” Relevant to this debate are studies that indicate a
late-life mortality deceleration law—the empirical generalization that death rates level off at
advanced ages, forming a late life mortality plateau.1
A second widely studied phenomenon is the “black-white mortality crossover.” At
younger ages, blacks have higher mortality rates than corresponding whites—a result that is
unsurprising given racial differences in socioeconomic factors. But it appears that black
mortality rates become lower than white mortality rates at older ages (Manton et al. 1979;
Berkman et al. 1989; Dupre et al. 2006; Kestenbaum 1992; Lynch et al. 2003; Masters 2012).

1

This law was first quantified in 1939, when Greenwood and Irwin (1939) found that the one-year probability of
death at advanced age asymptotically approaches a limit of 0.44 for women and 0.54 for men. Such a law suggests
that there may be no fixed upper limit to human longevity, and thus no fixed maximal human lifespan (Thatcher et
al., 1998; Gavrilov and Gavrilova, 2006).

4

Third, there is substantial interest in the empirical generalization that Hispanic and
Latino Americans have mortality rates that are similar to, or lower than, their non-Hispanic
white counterparts. This finding has been entitled the “Hispanic paradox” (Markides and Coreil,
1986)—paradoxical given the socioeconomic differences between the two groups.
Findings about racial and ethnic differences in mortality are so anomalous that some
scholars have explored the possibility that the results are due primarily to “bad data” (e.g.,
Coale and Kisker, 1986; Preston et al., 1996; Preston et al., 1999; Preston and Elo, 2006; Lynch
et al., 2003, Swallen and Guend, 2003; Rosenberg et al., 1999). Despite decades of work to
identify and correct data issues, demographers have largely concluded that careful data
correction mitigates, but does not eliminate, the black-white crossover and Hispanic paradox.
These findings have motivated a host of theories on why Hispanic Americans generally, and
older blacks specifically, appear to die at lower rates than corresponding non-Hispanic whites
(e.g., Vaupel et al., 1979; Manton and Stallard, 1984; and Manton, et al., 1979; Wrigley-Field,
2014; Abraido-Lanza et al., 1999; Shai and Rosenwaike, 1987).
Our contribution to the study of old age mortality falls squarely in the “bad data”
domain. We show that even a small amount of a particular data problem—which we denote
the “Methuselah effect”—biases inferences about old age mortality in predictable ways. Our
theoretical analysis shows that the Methuselah effect can create the appearance of the three
phenomena we have just mentioned—mortality deceleration, the black-white crossover, and
the Hispanic paradox—even when none exist. Empirical evaluation, using data from the
National Longitudinal Survey of Older Men (NLS-OM) and National Health Interview Survey
(NHIS), demonstrates that the Methuselah effect indeed operates as predicted by theory.

5

To see the issue at hand, consider a research design that relies on data structure such as
the “gold standard” (Cowper et al., 2002) NHIS data matched to National Death Index (NDI). It is
easy to see why these data earned the “gold standard” imprimatur. After all, the NHIS dataset is
large and population-representative; it includes multiple birth cohorts; and it is constructed
using administrative records, which are generally viewed as accurate. Even so, it is inevitable
that for at least a few individuals who appear the base sample, there will be a failure to match
the death to administrative death records. This form of measurement error creates the
Methuselah effect, so named because it produces a set of respondents who appear to live
forever. The Methuselah effect will typically create small biases to the measurement of
mortality at relatively young ages, but the bias grows precipitously as the population ages.
The intuition of the Methuselah effect is straightforward. Suppose that a respondent
dies at age a, but the death is not matched to the base-sample respondent. This causes us to
underestimate the numerator in our age a death rate—an inconsequential problem if such an
occurrence is relatively rare. But then we will overestimate the denominator of the age specific
mortality rate for all ages greater than a. As a cohort ages, the fraction of missing deaths rises
relative to individuals who actually remain alive, and the Methuselah respondents inexorably
come to dominate.2 Mortality estimates thus become progressively more downward-biased,
leading mechanically to an inference of mortality rate deceleration. Moreover, if the failure-tomatch rate varies by some group characteristic, this form of measurement error will affect

2

One could imagine an error process operating predominantly in the other direction, if deaths are recorded that
do not occur. This could be called the “Twain effect” (per Mark Twain’s suggestion that “the report of my death
was an exaggeration”). The Twain effect would cause underestimation of the denominator in subsequent years.
Here again, consequent error would progressively worsen as the cohort ages. Below we argue that this effect is not
important in our application.

6

group comparisons of mortality. Methuselah error is thus potentially salient for studies of the
black-white mortality crossover and the Hispanic paradox, because of racial and ethnic
differences in failure-to-match rates (Lariscy, 2011; Hsu, 2012).
Our paper proceeds as follows: First, we briefly review relevant literature. To provide
motivation, we note several theories of aging and race-based differences in mortality selection
(e.g., physiological degeneration, vitality loss, and frailty). We also provide a brief overview of
previous work on measurement error as it pertains to the study of old age mortality.
Second, we provide a theoretical investigation of the biases introduced by the
Methuselah effect—demonstrating how the Methuselah effect generates spurious mortality
rate deceleration, and showing that even when mortality rates are higher for one subpopulation (e.g., black men) than a second sub-population (e.g., white men) at all ages, a
mortality crossover can spuriously appear if the failure-to-match rate is higher for the first
group than for the second.
Finally, we explore the empirical relevance of our argument using two data sources. The
first is the National Longitudinal Survey of Older Men (NLS-OM), a nationally representative
survey of men born in the U.S., 1906-1921, which has recently been matched to death records
in the U.S. Vital Statistics system and the Social Security Death Index. This is a remarkable
dataset in that the matched dataset gives us three potentially useful death reports—two
administrative reports on the date of death, and also the date of death reported in the survey
(for the more than half of respondents who died during survey years). The survey occurred long
enough ago that the sample can now be considered nearly an “extinct generation.” Our second

7

data source is the NHIS, match to administrative death records, primarily to the National Death
Index (NDI), but also to Social Security and Medicaid and Medicare records.
Our empirical work shows that the Methuselah effect falsely creates the inference of
mortality rate deceleration. Also, in both data sets we find that deaths are matched at higher
rates for non-Hispanic whites than for blacks or non-black Hispanics. Failure to account for the
resulting measurement error leads us to estimate a black-white mortality crossover at
approximately age 85, whereas once we account for measurement error we find little evidence
of a black-white crossover. Similarly, any evidence of a Hispanic mortality advantage disappears
once we account for the Methuselah effect.
The Current Literature on Old-age Mortality
Mortality Deceleration
Late-life mortality deceleration—a phenomenon in which mortality hazard rates tend to
stabilize at advanced ages—is an empirical prospect that stands in contrast to a hazard that
increases exponentially, as characterized by the Gompertz law. Mortality deceleration has been
observed in insects, but is controversial in mammals (Gavrilov and Gavrilova, 2011). Gompertz
(1825) first proposed late-life mortality deceleration in human aging and Greenwood and Irwin
(1939) observed it in humans. Others disagree. For instance, Gavrilov and Gavrilova (2011)
conclude that mortality deceleration is negligible up to the age of 106, and suggest that the
Gompertz law provides a good fit.
Gavrilov and Gavrilova (2011) suggest several factors that might contribute to a spurious
finding of mortality deceleration, and in each instance when they adjust for the factor, the fit
with the Gompertz law improves. First, old individuals may exaggerate their ages, which

8

reduces apparent mortality. Second, the use of discrete-time hazard estimation methods,
rather than instantaneous hazard rate analysis, can be a problem. Third, issues arise when
multiple birth cohorts are combined if those cohorts have differing age-specific mortality rates.
Finally, the use of cross-sectional data, rather than cohort data, can lead to estimated
deceleration. Gavrilov and Gavrilova (2011) show that there is no evidence of mortality
deceleration in analyses that follow individual birth-year cohorts through extinction.
Race-Based Mortality Crossovers
In the United States, a black-white mortality crossover has been found for both men and
women in a number of studies (Arias, 2006; Johnson, 2000; Kestenbaum 1992; Lynch et al.,
2003; Parnell and Owens, 1999). In this crossover literature, mortality rates are found to be
higher for blacks than for whites at younger ages, but are lower for blacks than whites at older
ages. The crossover appeared, for instance, in the 1910 United States Life Tables, with the
crossover occurring at age 79 for men and age 78 for women (Department of Commerce, 1921).
The age of the mortality crossover now appears to be closer to age 85, and evidence suggests
that the age of the crossover has been increasing across birth cohorts (Lynch, et al., 2003;
Masters, 2012). As we have noted, there is disagreement among demographers on whether the
crossover is the result of selection or bad data.
Beginning with the pioneering work of Vaupel et al. (1979), there has been widespread
appreciation that population heterogeneity in the susceptibility to mortality (i.e., “frailty”) can
lead to a surviving population being positively selected for survival (Manton and Stallard, 1981;
Manton et al., 1984; Vaupel and Yashin, 1985; Nam, 1995; Lynch et al. 2003). Under this theory,
individuals who survive to older ages are especially robust, as higher mortality across the life

9

course has culled those who are relatively frail. In the study of black-white differences, this
theory postulates that since blacks have higher mortality rates than whites earlier in life, older
blacks are more robust on average, potentially explaining why blacks have lower mortality rates
than whites at old ages.
An alternative explanation emphasizes how poor data quality biases estimates of older
age mortality rates (Coale and Kisker 1986; Preston and Elo, 2006; Preston et al., 1996; Preston
et al., 1999). To date, the principal data quality issue investigated has been the tendency for
individuals to overstate their age, especially at older ages. This phenomenon appears especially
pervasive among black Americans (Preston and Elo, 2006). For example, Preston et al. (2003)
match 2,990 death certificates for blacks aged 60+ in 1980-85 to corresponding census records
from childhood, finding that only 45 percent of women and 51 percent of men had an age at
death reported on the death certificate consistent with the recorded census age. An incomplete
Vital Statistics system, especially in the South in the early 20th century, left many older black
Americans without a birth certificate and hence a known age, likely contributing to the high
levels of age misreporting among older black Americans.
Proponents of the frailty view point to several findings. First, some studies find that
correcting for age misreporting changes the age of the mortality crossover but does not
eliminate it (Preston and Elo, 2006; Lynch et. al 2003). Second, scholars who use survey data,
like the NHIS matched to the NDI, argue that this mitigates the issue of age misreporting at old
ages, as age is taken from a survey administered years before death (Eberstein, Nam and
Heyman, 2008; Lynch et al. 2003). Third, there is evidence that the mortality crossover occurs in
some causes of death, but not others. For example, Eberstein, et al. (2008) report a notable

10

crossover for deaths by heart disease but no evidence of a crossover for deaths by malignant
neoplasms or by diabetes. This leads these authors to conclude, “Although age misreporting
probably contributes to some of the discrepancy in age trends of mortality rates for whites and
blacks (less so based on the NHIS-NDI dataset), it seems unlikely that it can be a major
contributor to mortality crossovers. That would necessitate an age-misreporting pattern that
varied by cause of death in a peculiar manner.” Finally, Masters (2012) suggests that adjusting
for cohort of birth can eliminate the mortality crossover. This is consistent with the frailty point
of view if differential mortality selection for blacks versus whites has been declining over the
course of the 20th century (perhaps because of declining racial economic inequality).
General Empirical Approaches to Estimating Mortality
There is a vast literature on the estimation of mortality. The classic approach to the
estimation of period age-specific mortality rates (ASMRs) entails estimation of two objects—
target population cell estimates (for the denominator) and corresponding estimates of deaths
(for the numerator)—from two different data sources. This procedure is used, for example, in
the construction of the United States Life Tables released by the National Vital Statistics
Reports (e.g., Arias 2006). At most ages, population estimates are formed using census data,
and mortality is estimated using data from the National Vital Statistics System, though at older
ages (ages 85 to 99) estimation relies also on data from the insured Medicare population.
There are well known concerns about the “two sample issue,” some of which are
relevant to the black-white crossover and the Hispanic paradox. For example, in the study of
mortality in the Hispanic population, a central concern is that individuals in household surveys
record their own ethnicity, while in Vital Statistics data a proxy reports ethnicity (Swallen and

11

Guend, 2003). If Hispanics are occasionally misreported as non-Hispanic white in Vital Statistics
data, this would elevate estimated ASMR for non-Hispanic whites while depressing them for
Hispanics. As for the black-white crossover, the reporting of age at death by a proxy, combined
with mortality rates that rise with age, can lead to an overstatement of age at death in Vital
Statistics records (Coale and Kisker, 1986; Myers, 1978). For example, Preston, Elo, and Stewart
(1999) show that even if age misreporting is symmetric, because mortality rises with age, a
relatively larger fraction of individuals recorded in any 5-year age interval in the Vital Statistics
will generally be younger than they appear.3
A potential solution to the “two sample issue” is to estimate mortality rates from a
single prospective study in which age is recorded when respondents are young, and
respondents are followed until death. If race and ethnicity are reported in the prospective
study, no reassessment is needed at death. A further potential advantage of prospective
studies is that the documentation of date of death can often be directly established from
respondents’ “contacts,” typically family members who help data collection agencies track the
respondents’ whereabouts.4
More generally, deaths of respondents in the base study are often recorded by linking
prospective survey data to subsequent mortality records, e.g., records in the National Death
Index (NDI), which are thought to be highly accurate. The NHIS-NDI data are an example. As we
have noted, researchers such as Cowper, et al. (2002) have highlighted the high quality of these

3

Preston, Elo, and Stewart (1999) show that when age is recorded in single years earlier in life (instead of 5-year
intervals) this virtually eliminates biases in ASMR from age misreporting.
4
Yet another advantage of this approach is that longitudinal surveys often collect data on family and other
contextual variables, which then allows researchers to assess relationships between early-life factors and
subsequent mortality.

12

data. Even so, concerns have been raised about the extent to which mortality estimates might
be affected by the match quality between the data sources (Patel, et al., 2004). Matching is
done on the basis of multiple factors, including Social Security number, first and last name,
middle initial, date of birth, and other factors. The best match is determined by a probabilistic
“match score” which sums a set of weights assigned to each of the items on which records are
matched; there is no guarantee of complete match accuracy.
Lariscy (2011) investigates how match quality between the NDI and the 1989-2006 NHIS
affects inference about mortality differences between Hispanics and non-Hispanic whites. He
has two central findings: First, the quality of matches is poorer for Hispanic Americans than for
non-Hispanic white Americans. Second, inferences about the Hispanic paradox depend on the
cut-off criteria used in the “match score” when determining the acceptability of a data match.
For example, for foreign-born Hispanics, relaxing and tightening the NCHS-recommended cutpoint for match acceptance results in substantial changes to mortality risk relative to U.S.-born
non-Hispanic whites. Lariscy (2011) also finds that among the oldest individuals, foreign-born
Hispanics are less likely to die during follow-up than U.S.-born non-Hispanic whites, regardless
of the matching standard he applies.
Our work is very much in the spirit of Lariscy (2011). We proceed, first of all, with a
theoretical investigation of measurement error induced by the failure to match death records.
We then turn to an empirical evaluation using NLS-OM data and NHIS data, in both cases
matched to administrative death records.
Estimation of Mortality in Longitudinal Studies—A Theoretical Analysis
A Single Population

13

Suppose we have an initial sample of 𝑁0 individuals. At any subsequent time 𝑡, the
sample is divided into the stock of survivors, 𝑁𝑡 , and the stock of accumulated deaths, 𝐷𝑡 ,
𝑁𝑡 + 𝐷𝑡 = 𝑁0 .

(1)

The stock of accumulated deaths evolves by
𝑑𝑡 = 𝐷𝑡 − 𝐷𝑡−1 ,

(2)

where 𝑑𝑡 denotes time 𝑡 deaths. The stock of survivors declines by
𝑁𝑡 = 𝑁𝑡−1 − 𝑑𝑡−1 .

(3)

Researchers often wish to estimate the hazard rate, which is simply
𝑑𝑡

ℎ𝑡 = 𝑁

𝑡−1

.

(4)

Assume that difficulties in matching sample respondents to administrative data result in
a probability 𝛼 of missing a death. We divide deaths into two groups, those that are observed,
𝑑𝑡𝑜 , and those that are unobserved, 𝑑𝑡𝑢 , while assuming that all matched deaths are indeed
deaths:
𝑑𝑡 = 𝑑𝑡𝑜 + 𝑑𝑡𝑢 .

(5)

The realized proportion of unobserved deaths is 𝛼𝑡𝑑 = 𝑑𝑡𝑢 ⁄𝑑𝑡 , with 𝐸(𝛼𝑡𝑑 ) = 𝛼. We can
similarly divide the stock of accumulated deaths between observed deaths, 𝐷𝑡𝑜 = ∑𝑡𝑠=1 𝑑𝑠𝑜 , and
unobserved deaths, 𝐷𝑡𝑢 = ∑𝑡𝑠=1 𝑑𝑠𝑢 , where of course
𝐷𝑡𝑜 + 𝐷𝑡𝑢 = 𝐷𝑡 .
The realized proportion of unobserved accumulated deaths is 𝛼𝑡𝐷 = 𝐷𝑡𝑢 ⁄𝐷𝑡 , again with
𝐸(𝛼𝑡𝐷 ) = 𝛼.
The observed hazard ℎ𝑡𝑜 , the ratio of time 𝑡 deaths and time 𝑡 − 1 observed survivors,
can be written

(6)

14

ℎ𝑡𝑜 =

(1−𝛼𝑡𝑑 )𝑑𝑡
𝑜
𝑁𝑡−1

=𝑁

(1−𝛼𝑡𝑑 )𝑑𝑡

𝐷
𝑡−1 +𝛼𝑡−1 𝐷𝑡−1

=𝑁

𝑑𝑡

𝐷
𝑡−1 +𝛼𝑡−1 𝐷𝑡−1

−𝑁

𝛼𝑡𝑑 𝑑𝑡

𝐷
𝑡−1 +𝛼𝑡−1 𝐷𝑡−1

.

(7)

The first term of the far right-hand side of equation (7) is smaller than ℎ𝑡 if there have been any
missing deaths matches prior to time 𝑡. The second term further reduces the observed hazard
rate if there is at least one missing death in the current period. Hence, as argued in Hsu (2012),
this type of measurement error results in an underestimation of the hazard rate, and it does so
in a way that grows over time. In particular, as a cohort becomes aged, the stock of
accumulated deaths, 𝐷𝑡−1 , grows, which means that the denominator in (7) increasingly
diverges from the true number of survivors, 𝑁𝑡−1 . As a mechanical matter, then, the observed
hazard shows spurious deceleration.
We have a final observation: The measurement error results in an underestimation of
the standard error. Because the hazard rate is the result of 𝑁𝑡−1 Bernoulli trials—the survivors
either die or they do not—the standard error of the hazard rate is
𝑆𝐸(ℎ𝑡 ) =

ℎ𝑡 (1−ℎ𝑡 )
√𝑁𝑡−1

.

(8)

This standard error is increasing in the hazard rate up to ℎ𝑡 = 0.5, and is decreasing in 𝑁𝑡−1 .
Thus, as long as the hazard rate is below 0.5, the measurement error will incorrectly reduce our
𝑜
estimate of the standard error of the hazard rate, because 𝑁𝑡−1
> 𝑁𝑡−1 and ℎ𝑡 > ℎ𝑡𝑜 . Our

measurement error, therefore, typically leads to an overstatement of the precision of our
hazard rate.
Comparing Mortality across Populations
Now suppose we have two populations, and we want to compare the probability of
death between these groups. Equation (7) helps us examine how our measurement error

15

affects inferences about differences in the probability of death. Below, we present evidence
that the rate of missing matches for black Americans, 𝛼𝑏 , is greater than for white Americans,
𝛼𝑤 , i.e., 𝛼𝑏 > 𝛼𝑤 . Researchers wish to estimate the difference in the hazard rates, ℎ𝑡,𝑏 − ℎ𝑡,𝑤 ,
𝑜
𝑜
but instead typically estimate the difference in observed rates, ℎ𝑡,𝑏
− ℎ𝑡,𝑤
, which, using (7), is

[𝑁

𝑑𝑡,𝑏
𝐷
𝑡−1,𝑏 +𝛼𝑡−1,𝑏 𝐷𝑡−1,𝑏

−𝑁

𝑑
𝛼𝑡,𝑏
𝑑𝑡,𝑏
𝐷
𝑡−1,𝑏 +𝛼𝑡−1,𝑏 𝐷𝑡−1,𝑏

] − [𝑁

𝑑𝑡,𝑤

𝐷
𝑡−1,𝑤 +𝛼𝑡−1,𝑤 𝐷𝑡−1,𝑤

−𝑁

𝑑
𝛼𝑡,𝑤
𝑑𝑡,𝑤

𝐷
𝑡−1,𝑤 +𝛼𝑡−1,𝑤 𝐷𝑡−1,𝑤

].

(9)

𝑑
𝐷
𝑑
𝐷
The observed difference understates the true difference when 𝛼𝑡,𝑏
> 𝛼𝑡,𝑤
and 𝛼𝑡,𝑏
> 𝛼𝑡,𝑤
,

which is likely, given 𝛼𝑏 > 𝛼𝑤 . Also, using logic from (8), the estimated standard error of the
differences will typically be understated.
Figure 1 illustrates via simulation. In Panel A we have two populations—one with a 40%
higher mortality rate at every age. We introduce Methuselah error to the high-mortality group,
at rates of 1%, 5%, 10%, and 15%, in each case generating a spurious crossover. The age of the
crossover is decreasing in the error rate. In Panel B we introduce a 4.2% match error rate in the
higher-mortality group and a 1.8% error rate in the low mortality group, choosing these rates
because they correspond to the lowest error rates we find, respectively, for blacks and whites
in the NLS-OM data discussed below. Again, we observe a spurious crossover.
Our results are potentially germane to both the black-white mortality crossover and to
the Hispanic paradox, given that death matching accuracy rates are higher for non-Hispanic
whites than Hispanics and blacks, as we show below.
Measuring Death in Two Datasets
Missing Deaths in the National Longitudinal Survey – Older Men Cohort
Our empirical analysis proceeds with the Older Men Cohort of the National Longitudinal
Survey (NLS-OM) data. This is a nationally representative survey of men, initiated in 1966,

16

largely of men in the 1906 to 1921 birth cohorts. As of 1990, the Census Bureau, which
conducted the interview for the Older Men’s Cohort, reported that 2,660 of the 5,020 men
were deceased, which we refer to as the “survey” report. Given concerns some deaths may
have been missed in the data collection process, in 1990 the Census attempted to match
respondents to their Vital Statistics death certificate records. The match was possible because
the Bureau had respondents’ names, date of birth, and Social Security numbers. This was a
painstaking undertaking; given resources available at the time, there was a “hand-match” in
which Bureau employees attempted to directly match respondents to their death records. This
gives researchers two possible reports of a death by 1990. As we discuss below, the Vital
Statistics 1990 match (the “VS90 match”) matched only 2,083 of the 2,660 deaths.
Our research team was interested in updating the mortality records in this cohort, and
so we contracted with the Census Bureau to match the respondents with their death
certificates through 2008, using Vital Statistics records, giving us deaths through the age of 102
years for the 1906 birth cohort (the oldest cohort) and through the age of 87 for the 1921 birth
cohort (the youngest cohort). This new match was done electronically, and we expect
computers to be better at matching than humans. Our match, the “VS08 match,” yielded 2,749
deaths as of 1990—666 more than the VS90 match and 89 more than the survey report.
In addition, the Census Bureau matched the Older Men cohort to the Social Security
Administration (SSA) Death Index file, which recorded deaths through the end of 2012.5

5

Readers may wonder why the Vital Statistics match used data through 2008 while the SSA Death Index is through
2012. While we informally refer to the Census Bureau as matching on the respondent’s Social Security number,
this is true only in an indirect sense. The Bureau matches on a Personal Identification Key (PIK), which is a number
that has a one-to-one match with the respondent’s Social Security number, to protect the confidentiality of
respondents. All files used for matching must, therefore, contain this unique PIK for matching, a process known as

17

Through 1990, the SSA report (“the SSA12 match”) produced 2,407 deaths. The SSA12 match
has 324 more deaths than the VS90 match, but it is 253 short of the survey report and 342
short of the VS08 match. These reports are broken out by the race and ethnicity of the
respondents in Table 1. We believe that this table represents compelling evidence that the
VS08 match and the survey report are the highest quality. The VS90 match clearly failed to
identify numerous deaths that appear in the other three sources, which is hardly surprising
given it was a hand match. The SSA12 match also caught fewer deaths than either the survey
report or VS08 match. As we wish to measure deaths up to 90 years of age, we focus on the
VS08 match.
Because survey houses are reluctant to accept a report of a death without
documentation,6 it is reasonable to believe that there is a very low rate of “false positives.” This
suggests we may evaluate the quality of the administrative data matches by comparing rates of
missing matches when there are death reports in the survey. We pursue this strategy in Table 2.
Here we see high rates of likely “false negatives”—a failure to match when in all likelihood a
death has occurred—for both the VS90 and SSA12 matches. The error rate for the VS08 match
is an order of magnitude smaller, but is still non-negligible, in the 2 to 4 percent range.
Moreover, there are racial and ethnic differential in errors from all matches. It appears that
black respondents are harder to match to death records than are non-black respondents in the
NLS-OM.

“being PIKed.” At the time of our match, the most recent PIKed file from Vital Statistics was through 2008, while
the files from SSA were through 2012.
6
For instance, in collecting data for the current NLS cohorts, the NLSY 1979 and NLSY 1997 cohorts, NORC requires
interviewers’ proxies to provide either an obituary or a death certificate before recording a death.

18

Finally, we are interested in understanding who is failing to be matched in each of the
respective reports. We examine the age of death as recorded in the survey. If there was no
death recorded in the VS08 match, individuals were on average 59.3 years of age at death, but
if there was a death recorded in the VS08 match, individuals were instead 67.3 years of age (ttest p-value < 0.01). We find similar results for the SSA12 matches: Those who were not
matched were on average 63.9 years old at death, but those who were matched averaged 67.7
years old at death (t-test p-value < 0.01). These results suggest that failures to match are
occurring disproportionately at earlier ages. Such failures to match make particular sense for
the SSA12 match, as most individuals did not start to receive Social Security benefits until age
65 (unless they take early retirement at 62).
Black-White Mortality Crossovers in the NLS-OM
Using our matched NLS data, we can compare age-specific hazard curves for blacks and
non-Hispanic whites for ages 60 and above. Because our NLS sample has few individuals who
identify as non-black Hispanic, for the remainder of our analysis of NLS data, we focus only on
blacks and non-Hispanic whites. We thus begin our analysis by eliminating all cases of
individuals who do not fall into these demographic groups. We next eliminate the 326
individuals who died before reaching the age of 59 (the oldest cohort in 1966). We also drop
three individuals who have a missing age of death in the VS08. We then estimate separate
hazard rates for non-blacks and blacks. We estimate the nonparametric probability of dying in
age (a) and race (r):
𝑑𝑖,𝑎,𝑟 = 𝜏𝑎,𝑟 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑎,𝑟
where 𝜏𝑎,𝑟 is the age/race specific hazard rate.

(10)

19

In the top panel of Figure 2 we plot the hazard curves using the SSA12 match. We
provide nonparametric estimates of the black-white gap in hazard rates in Panel A of Table 3.
Consistent with numerous previous studies, we find a black-white mortality crossover; it occurs
at age 76 and becomes statistically significantly at age 80. Of course, from our analysis above
we know the SSA12 match misses a substantial fraction of death reports, and we know also that
the fraction missed is relatively higher for black respondents. Given our theoretical arguments,
we have concerns that the observed crossover could be a consequence of measurement error.
In the bottom panel of Figure 2 we instead use the VS08 death reports to estimate the
hazard curves, and we again show the corresponding nonparametric estimates in Table 3. With
these data, which have fewer false negatives, the estimated black-white crossover occurs at age
83, and this gap is not statistically significant at any age above 83. The improvement in the data
quality has a significant effect not only on the absolute levels of estimated mortality, but also
on inferences about the black-white gap. As we have already seen (Figure 1), though, even the
low error rates of the VS08 matching (which are correlated with race/ethnicity) can generate a
spurious mortality crossover. We return to this issue in our model-based analysis below.
Missing Deaths in the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS)
We next study mortality using the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), accessed
through the Integrated Heath Interview Series at the University of Minnesota (MPC, 2016). We
have noted that these data have been referenced as the “gold standard” for the study of
mortality rates (Cowper et al., 2002). We select respondents from the 1986 to 1989 surveys
who were at least 85 years old at the time of the interview. As a part of the NHIS, the National
Center for Health Statistics matched participants who were at least 18 years old at the time of

20

the interview to death records, primarily to the National Death Index but also to the Social
Security and Medicaid and Medicare records. See NCHS (2013) for a description. The NCHS
matched respondents to their death records through 2011.
Our sample is comprised of 3,736 individuals. As expected from this sample of older
individuals, it is mostly female, nearly 68 percent. There are 80 Hispanics and 420 blacks. We
begin our analysis by estimating the nonparametric probability of death by age group for nonHispanic whites and blacks. Because there are only 80 Hispanics, we do not attempt to estimate
the probability of death for this group. In the 1980s the public use files of the NHIS top code age
at 99 so we drop the 44 cases with a reported age of 99 in 1986-1989. This results in an analysis
sample of 409 blacks and 3,203 non-Hispanic whites.
In Figure 3, we report surprising results. The mortality hazard rates of both blacks and
non-Hispanic whites increase until the age of 100, but then experience a decline from ages 101
to 105 (the oldest age we analyze). By way of comparison, we plot the probability of death by
age from the 2013 Social Security Life Tables for Females. Because 30 percent of our sample is
male and this group is from older cohorts, we expect the SSA estimates to be a lower bound for
our estimates, but they diverge after about age 94. Moreover, our estimated age profiles,
which feature clear mortality deceleration, look suspiciously like our simulations of the
Methuselah effect (Figure 1).
To ascertain whether the type of measurement error we document in the NLS Old Men
cohort also afflicts the NHIS study, we pursue a new strategy based on the “extinct generation”
argument (Kannisto, 1994), using the full sample of 3,736 individuals. Because our sample has a
minimum age of 85 in 1989, by 2011 the minimum-aged individual in our sample is 106. Almost

21

everyone in these cohorts should be deceased. To estimate the number of people who should
likely have survived through year 2011, we calculate the expected number of survivors from the
2013 Social Security Life Tables for Females. We expect 5.3 non-Hispanic whites to survive, 0.69
blacks to survive, and 0.13 non-black Hispanics to survive (see Table 4). These estimates are
optimistic for two reasons. First, 30 percent of our sample is male, and males have higher
mortality. Second, the 2013 Life Tables use data from younger cohorts and there has been a
secular decline in mortality.
We present results in Table 4. Rather than the 5.3 whites we expect from the Life
Tables, we have 216 non-Hispanic whites. Similarly, for blacks we have 45 respondents, rather
than the estimated 0.69. Finally, for non-black Hispanics, we have 15 “survivors” rather than
the expected 0.13. Clearly, many individuals died but had unreported deaths. Importantly, the
rates of this Methuselah effect vary by race/ethnicity. Among non-Hispanic whites the apparent
“survivor rate” to age 106 is 6.7 percent; among blacks it is 10.7 percent; and among non-black
Hispanics 18.8 percent survive.
Estimating Parametric Models of Mortality in the Presence of Matching Error
An Econometric Strategy
As our theory and simulations show, accounting for matching error is essential to the
accurate estimation of the hazard rate of mortality at older ages. We have also seen that in the
NLS-OM and NHIS-NDI data matches, these errors are consequential. We proceed with a simple
empirical model designed to allow for the type of matching error we have described. Here we
do not strive to find the best model of matching error; rather our intent is to demonstrate that

22

even simple models of matching error can profoundly affect estimated old-age mortality
profiles. Our model provides insight and demonstrates a potential empirical way forward.
Our basic approach, which estimates the age specific hazard rate using discrete time
methods, has a long track record in demography (Allison, 1982). Allison suggests reformatting
the data so that individuals have an observation for each time period in which they are at risk,
and then parameterizing the hazard as a logistic model. As Allison discusses, and demonstrates
empirically, this model is not the exact equivalent of a proportional hazard model, but in
practice the difference between the two models is likely to be trivial, and the logistic model
converges to the proportional hazard model as the time interval becomes small.
Suppose we have a sample of 𝑛 individuals, who enter the sample at age 𝐴0𝑖 and are last
observed at age 𝐴𝑇𝑖 . Some individuals exit due to death, in which case a death indicator variable
𝐷𝑖 is set to one. Others survive when last observed in the sample, in which case 𝐷𝑖 = 0. In the
absence of missing death records, the likelihood takes the familiar form,
𝐴𝑇 −1

𝑖
𝐿 = ∏𝑛𝑖=1 {ℎ𝐴𝑇 ∏𝑎=𝐴
0 (1 − ℎ𝑎 )}
𝑖

𝑖

𝐷𝑖

𝐴𝑇

𝑖
× ∏𝑛𝑖=1 {∏𝑎=𝐴
0 (1 − ℎ𝑎 ) }
𝑖

(1−𝐷𝑖 )

,

(13)

where ℎ𝑎 is the hazard rate.
Our innovation is to modify the likelihood function to account for missing death record
matches, i.e., Methuselah cases. We work with the case in which the probability of missing a
death is constant across ages; generalizations to more complex cases are possible. Suppose the
probability of missing a death is 𝛼. In this case “observed survivors” are a mixture of “true
survivors” and Methuselah cases. Similarly, “observed deaths” encompass only a fraction of
“true deaths.”

23

We begin by calculating the probability that an observed survivor is a Methuselah case.
First, let
𝐴𝑇

𝑖
𝑆𝐴𝑇 = ∏𝑎=𝐴
0 (1 − ℎ𝑎 )
𝑖

(14)

𝑖

be the probability of being a true survivor. Second, note that the expected value of being a
Methuselah case is just 𝛼 times the probability that an individual has actually died,
𝛼 (1 − 𝑆𝐴𝑇 ).

(15)

𝑖

Then the probability of being an observed survivor is given by the sum of (14) and (15),
𝑆𝐴0𝑇 = 𝑆𝐴𝑇 + 𝛼 (1 − 𝑆𝐴𝑇 ) = 𝛼 + (1 − 𝛼)𝑆𝐴𝑇 .
𝑖

𝑖

𝑖

(16)

𝑖

Next, we expect to observe (1 − 𝛼) of all deaths; the probability of being an observed
death is
(1 − 𝑆𝐴0𝑇 ) = (1 − 𝛼) (1 − 𝑆𝐴𝑇 ).

(17)

𝑖

𝑖

With all this in mind, we substitute (14) into (16) and (17), and use these in our likelihood
function, which gives
𝐴𝑇 −1

𝑖
𝐿 = ∏𝑛𝑖=1 {(1 − 𝛼)ℎ𝐴𝑇 ∏𝑎=𝐴
0 (1 − ℎ𝑎 )}
𝑖

𝑖

𝐷𝑖

𝐴𝑇

𝑖
× ∏𝑛𝑖=1 {𝛼 + (1 − 𝛼) ∏𝑎=𝐴
0 (1 − ℎ𝑎 ) }

(1−𝐷𝑖 )

𝑖

. (18)

When 𝛼 = 0, this expression of course simplifies to the standard likelihood function (13).
To implement our estimator, we use Allison’s (1982) familiar logistic form, setting ℎ𝑎 to
be a function of such covariates as age, race, and (where applicable) Hispanic ethnicity.
There are two ways to estimate our model. First, we can pick parameters to minimize
the logarithm of the likelihood function (18). Second, a simpler alternative is possible if age 𝐴𝑇𝑖 is
large enough for all observations. In this latter case, every apparent survivor is a Methuselah

24

case. Thus we can simply remove these records, and then set 𝛼 = 0 for the remaining records,
i.e., simply estimate a logistic regression on records that have a recorded death. This is a variant
of the “extinct generation estimator” first used, according to Preston, Heuveline, and Guillot
(2001), by Vincent (1951). An extinct generation approach has appears in a number of
subsequent students, including, e.g., Gavrilov and Gavrilova (2011).
Results
We first implement our econometric strategy with men in the NLS-OM cohort (who
were aged 52 to 59 in 1966). We estimate the model for non-Hispanic white men, because this
is the largest of our demographic groups. We use the SSA12 match, because that version of the
data has the most acute problem with Methuselah error, and thus it presents us with the most
difficult inference problem.7 As reported in Table 2, Methuselah error is on the order of 11% for
the non-Hispanic white men in the sample. We estimate model (18), using a baseline hazard
that is quadratic in age. As a technical matter, when setting up the maximization routine, we
implement a standard strategy that insures that the matching error rate is between 0 and 1.8
In the public release of the data, all observed deaths are recorded, but the age of death
is top-coded at 90 (i.e., the age of death is provided only among those dying at age 89 or
younger). By 2012, individuals in the cohort are aged 98 to 105, at which age nearly all men
have likely died, so it is reasonable to also implement our extinct generation estimation
procedure.

7

We also estimated the measurement model with the VS08 match, and it performed equally well with those data.
Programs are available from the authors. Our procedure for limiting the measurement error to be between 0 and
1 entails the use of a logistic error model, specifying error to be 𝛼 = 𝑒 𝛾 ⁄(1 + 𝑒 𝛾 ), then allowing 𝛾 to differ for
whites and blacks.
8

25

Using the measurement error (ME) model (18), we estimate 𝛼 to be 0.105. This is very
close to the error that we calculated directly, as reported in Table 2. The clearest way to
illustrate the hazard estimates is using plots. Figure 4 plots hazard curves for the ME model and
the extinct generation model, and also for the naïve logit model, which makes no correction for
Methuselah error. As expected, the ME model and extinct generation model give very similar
inferences, and estimated mortality is substantially higher once we correct for Methuselah
error. It is notable that the extinct generation approach yields estimates that are more precise
than with the ME model; this is sensible since that model makes assumptions that are more
restrictive.9
We next apply our empirical methods to the NHIS-NDI data. These data have a number
of advantages in comparison to the NLS-OM data. First, the dataset is much larger than the NLSOM dataset, so we can proceed with a model that estimates mortality separately for nonHispanic white, black, and Hispanic samples.10 More importantly, we can evaluate mortality
post age 90 because the data are not top-coded. Finally, this exercise is important given that
these data are often used to estimate mortality models.
To maintain comparison with the NLS-OM, we focus on men in birth cohorts 1907
through 1914 who appear in the 1986-1999 NHIS. These are men who were aged 72 to 92 in
these years of the NHIS. Our hazard estimation now begins at age 72, the youngest age we
observe the 1907 to 1914 cohort in the NHIS, and continues through age 105, the oldest
potential age in 2012, which is the last year available to us in the NHIS data. We estimate a logit

9

Specifically, the extinct generation approach stipulates that all missing deaths are Methuselah error, while the
ME model estimates the rate of Methuselah error.
10
The number of person years in our NHIS-NDI analysis is 119,007.

26

model with a baseline hazard that is quadratic in age and fully interacted with race/ethnicity
indicator variables.
We report results in Table 5. We estimate non-negligible Methuselah error rates for all
groups. It is lowest for non-Hispanic whites, higher for blacks, and higher yet for Hispanics.
Using estimates of Methuselah error rates, along with the fraction of the sample for which a
death was not observed in the NHIS data match, we can calculate the fraction of deaths that
were not observed because of matching error. For whites, the fraction of observations for
which a death was not recorded in the 2012 match is 0.0488; because our estimated
Methuselah error rate is 0.037, this suggests that 76% (0.037/0.0488) of observed surviving
whites are Methuselah cases. For blacks the fraction of individuals for whom a death was not
recorded is 0.0792, suggesting that 90% of observed surviving blacks are Methuselah cases.
Finally, among Hispanics the fraction of individuals for whom a death was not recorded is
0.1192, suggesting that 92% of observed Hispanic survivors are Methuselah cases.
We observe that for each racial/ethnic group, the estimated coefficient on age squared
is close to zero. There is no evidence of mortality deceleration.
In Figure 5 we plot our estimated hazard curves, and of course we are interested in
learning how our inferences differ from the naïve approach. Thus Panel A of Figure 5 displays
the hazard rates for blacks vs. non-Hispanic whites—first with the naïve logit model and then
with our Matching Error model. In the NHIS cohorts, a naïve model (which does not adjust for
matching error) shows a black-white mortality crossover at approximately age 85. A very
different pattern appears when we correct for matching error. At no age is the estimated
mortality hazard lower for blacks than for whites. In Panel B the naïve analysis shows Hispanic

27

men having a mortality advantage, especially at older ages. However, no statistically significant
differences between Hispanic and non-Hispanic white mortality rates are found once we
correct for differential measurement error. It appears that in these data both the black-white
crossover and the Hispanic paradox are due entirely to the Methuselah effect.
Concluding Remarks
The study of old age mortality holds an important place in demography. Observed
statistical patterns have motivated a large literature that explores plausible biological
mechanisms that underlie human aging. Among the key issues that have occupied scholarly
attention are the following: Do we see mortality rate deceleration in old age? Is there a blackwhite mortality crossover, with blacks having lower mortality at advanced ages? Is there a
paradoxical Hispanic advantage in mortality?
We explore these issues using data from two studies, the NLS-OM and NHIS, both of
which have been matched to administrative death records. Our key contribution is a careful
analysis of a pernicious form of measurement error—the failure to record some deaths. We
show that in both data sources there is a non-negligible amount of such measurement error,
and we show that error rates differ by race and ethnicity. Failure to recognize the error, and
correct for it, could lead us to believe in mortality rate deceleration, the black-white mortality
crossover, and the Hispanic paradox. Correction for the error reverses all of these inferences.
We recognize that other studies, especially those on animal populations, do not rely on
data matching, and there is evidence of mortality deceleration in non-human populations.
Having said that, our analysis leads us to be skeptical of evidence about deceleration in the

28

mortality of humans.11 Similarly, black-white differences in match rates seem to be a natural
feature of data that demographers often work with, and we have seen that a logical
consequence of this error structure is to generate a spurious black-white mortality crossover.
Similar logic pertains to the Hispanic paradox.
While we have made some progress in addressing the Methuselah effect, there are
substantial issues we have not resolved. Our model is very simple; we assume that the only
systematic factor affecting error is racial/ethnic group. It is likely that improvements in the Vital
Statistics system mean that matching error varies also by birth cohort. It is also plausible that
matching error may be a function of age at death, because data matching for deaths at unusual
ages may be easier than matches at common ages. Our analytical structure could be adapted to
account for these features.
In addition, we have not dealt with an alternative source of relevant measurement
error—the misreporting of age. In the NLS-OM and the NHIS-NDI, age misreporting is probably
not as common as in other data, because age was collected from individuals themselves,
typically many years before death (Eberstein et al., 2008; Lynch et al., 2003). Nonetheless, some
failure-to match may be due to age misreporting in the survey or death records. If such errors
depend only on race/ethnicity, the extinct generation variant of our model deals properly with
the problem (because the approach simply drops these cases), but more complex cases are
possible. If the age-misreporting process can be systematically modeled by demographers,
perhaps methods we develop here can be adapted to reduce biases in a more general setting.

11

Biological models that allow for mortality deceleration in drosophila and other non-primates may be quite
different than the human biology of aging. Older theories, such as those that posit limits to cell replication should
perhaps be reconsidered.

29

A great deal more work lies ahead for demographers interested in the accurate
assessment of mortality at older ages.

30

REFERENCES
Abraido-Lanza, A. F., Dohrenwend, B. P., Ng-Mak, D. S., & Turner, J. B. (1999). The Latino
mortality paradox: a test of the “salmon bias” and healthy migrant hypotheses.
American Journal of Public Health, 89 (10), 1543-1548.
Allison, P. D. (1982). Discrete time methods for the analysis of event histories. Sociological
Methodology, 13, 61-98.
Arias, E. (2006). United States life tables, 2003. National vital statistics reports, 54 (14), 1-40.
Berkman, L., Singer, B., & Manton, K. (1989). Black/white differences in health status and
mortality among the elderly. Demography, 26(4), 661-678.
Coale, A. J., & Kisker, E. E. (1986). Mortality crossovers: reality or bad data? Population Studies,
40(3), 389-401.
Cowper, D. C., Kubal, J. D., Maynard, C., & Hynes, D. M. (2002). A primer and comparative
review of major U.S. mortality databases. Annals of Epidemiology, 12, 462-468.
Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. (1921). United States Life Tables: 1890, 1901,
1910, and 1901-1910. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Dupre, M. E., Franzese, A. T., & Parrado, E. A. (2006). Religious attendance and mortality:
Implications for the black-white mortality crossover. Demography, 43(1), 141-164.
Eberstein, I. W., Nam, C. B., & Heyman, K. M. (2008). Causes of death and mortality crossovers
by race. Biodemography and Social Biology, 54(2), 214-228.
Gavrilov, L. A., & Gavrilova, N. S. (2006). Reliability theory of aging and longevity. In E. J. Masoro
& S. N. Austad (Eds.), Handbook of the Biology of Aging (pp. 3-42). Burlington, MA:
Academic Press.
Gavrilov, L. A., & Gavrilova, N. S. (2011). Mortality measurement at advanced ages: a study of
the Social Security Administration Death Master File. North American Actuarial Journal,
15 (3), 432-447.
Gompertz, B. (1825). On the nature of the function expressive of the law of human mortality
and on a new mode determining the value of life contingencies. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society A, 115, 513-583.
Greenwood, M., & Irwin, J. O. (1939). The biostatics of senility. Human Biology, 11, 1-23.

31

Hsu, Y.-C. (2012). Three essays on measurement and evaluation of mortality (Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation). Heinz College, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.
Johnson, N. (2000). The racial crossover in comorbidity, disability, and mortality. Demography,
37, 267-283.
Kannisto, V. (1994). Development of oldest old mortality, 1950-1990: Evidence from 28
developed countries. Odense, Denmark: Odense University Press.
Kestenbaum, B. (1992). A description of the extreme aged population based on improved
Medicare enrollment data. Demography, 29(4), 565-580.
Lariscy, J. T. (2011). Differential record linkage by Hispanic ethnicity and age in linked mortality
studies: implications for the epidemiologic paradox. Journal of Aging and Health, 23(8),
1263-1284.
Lynch, S. M., Brown, J. S., & Harmsen, K. G. (2003). Black-white differences in mortality
compression and deceleration and the mortality crossover reconsidered. Research on
Aging, 25(5), 456-483.
Manton, K. G., Poss, S. S., & Wing, S. (1979). The black/white mortality crossover: Investigation
from the perspective of the components of aging. The Gerontologist, 19(3), 291-300.
Manton, K. G., & Stallard, E. (1981). Methods for evaluating the heterogeneity of aging
processes in human populations using vital statistics data: Explaining the black/white
mortality crossover by a model of mortality selection. Human Biology, 53, 47-67.
Manton, K. G., & Stallard, E. (1984). Recent trends in mortality analysis. New York, NY:
Academic Press.
Manton, K. G., Stallard, E., & Vaupel, J. W. (1984). Methods for comparing the mortality
experience of heterogeneous populations. Demography, 18, 389-410.
Markides, K. S., & Coreil, J. (1986). The health of Hispanics in the Southwestern United States:
An epidemiological paradox. Public Health Reports, 101, 253-265.
Masters, R. K. (2012). Uncrossing the US black-white mortality crossover: The role of cohort
forces in life course mortality risk. Demography, 49(3), 773-796.
Minnesota Population Center and State Health Access Data Assistance Center.
(2016). Integrated Health Interview Series: Version 6.21. Minneapolis, MN: University of
Minnesota. Available from http://www.ihis.us

32

Myers, R. J. (1978). An investigation of the age of an alleged centenarian. Demography, 15(2),
235-236.
Nam, C. (1995). Another look at mortality crossovers. Social Biology, 42, 133-142.
National Center for Health Statistics. (2013). NCHS 2011 Linked Mortality Files Matching
Methodology. Hyattsville, MD: Office of Analysis and Epidemiology.
Oeppen, J., & Vaupel, J. W. (2002). Broken limits to life expectancy. Science, 296 (5570), 10291031.
Parnell, A. M., & Owens, C. R. (1999). Evaluation of U.S. mortality patterns at old ages using the
Medicare enrollment data base. Demographic Research, 1,
doi:10.4054/DemRes.1999.1.2
Patel, K. V., Eschbach, K., Ray, L. A., & Kyriakos, S. (2004). Evaluation of mortality data for older
Mexican Americans: Implications for the Hispanic paradox. American Journal of
Epidemiology, 159(7), 707-715.
Preston, S. H., Elo, I. T., Rosenwaike, I., & Hill, M. (1996). African-American mortality at older
ages: Results of a matching study. Demography, 33(2), 193-209.
Preston, S. H., Elo, I. T., & Stewart, Q. (1999). Effects of age misreporting on mortality estimates
at older ages. Population Studies, 53(2), 165-177.
Preston, S. H., Heuveline P., Guillot M. (2001). Demography: Measuring and Modeling
Population Processes. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers.
Preston, S. H., Elo, I. T., Hill, M. E., & Rosenwaike, I. (2003). The demography of African
Americans 1930-1990. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer Netherlands.
Preston, S. H., & Elo, I. T. (2006). Black mortality at very old ages in official US life tables: A
skeptical appraisal. Population and Development Review, 32(3), 557-566.
Rosenberg, H. M., Maurer, J. D., Sorlie, P. D., Johnson, N. J., MacDorman, M. F., Hoyert, D. L., …
Scott, C. (1999). Quality of death rates by race and Hispanic origin: a summary of current
research, 1999. Vital and Health Statistics, Series 2, 128, 1-13.
Shai, D., & Rosenwaike, I. (1987). Mortality among Hispanics in metropolitan Chicago: an
examination based on vital statistics data. Journal of Chronic Disease, 40, 445-51.
Swallen, K., & Guend, A. (2003). Data quality and adjusted Hispanic mortality in the United
States, 1989-1991. Ethnicity & Disease, 13, 126-33.

33

Thatcher, A. R., Kannisto, V., & Vaupel, J. W. (1998). The Force of Mortality at Ages 80 to 120.
Odense, Denmark: Odense University Press.
Vaupel, J. W., Manton, K. G., & Stallard, E. (1979). The impact of heterogeneity in individual
frailty on the dynamics of mortality. Demography, 16(3), 439-454.
Vaupel, J. W., & Yashin, A. (1985). Heterogeneity's ruses: Some surprising effects of selection on
population dynamics. The American Statistician, 39, 176-185.
Vincent, P. (1951). La mortalité des Vieillards. Population, 6, 181-204.
Wrigley-Field, E. (2014). Mortality deceleration and mortality selection: Three unexpected
implications of a simple model. Demography, 51, 51-71.

34

Table 1 Distribution of deaths as of 1990, by source of report, NLS-OM data
Survey

VS90 Match

VS08 Match

SSA12 Match

N

Black

874

634

893

734

1,420

Non-black Hispanic

20

14

21

17

82

Non-Hispanic white

1,730

1,405

1,797

1,625

3,467

36

30

38

31

51

2,660

2,083

2,749

2,407

5,020

Other race
Total

Source: Authors’ calculations, National Longitudinal Survey, Old Men Cohort.

35

Table 2 Measurement error by race and ethnicity: Respondents reported dead in the survey,
with a missing match to administrative records, NLS-OM data

VS90 Match
Fraction missing when survey reports a
death
Number missing
SSA12 Match
Fraction missing when survey reports a
death
Number missing
VS08 Match
Fraction missing when survey reports a
death
Number missing
N

Black

Non-black
Hispanic

Non-Hispanic
white

0.280

0.300

0.193

245

6

333

0.206

0.150

0.110

180

3

191

0.042

0.000

0.018

37
1,420

0
82

31
3,467

Source: Authors’ calculations, National Longitudinal Survey, Old Men Cohort. There are 2,660
respondents reported as deceased by the survey by 1990: 874 blacks, 20 non-black Hispanics,
1,730 non-Hispanic whites (and 36 other race not included in the above analysis). If we test the
null hypothesis that the rates of error are the same for blacks and non-Hispanic whites, we
reject the hypothesis at the 0.001 percent confidence level for the VS90 Match, the SSA12
Match, and the VS08 Match.

36

Table 3 Nonparametric estimates of hazard rate gap between blacks and non-Hispanic whites

Age
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74

A. Social Security Administration 2012 Match
Black-White Gap
P-value
Age
Black-White Gap
0.0027
0.500
75
0.0013
0.0013
0.803
76
0.0076
-0.0007
1.000
77
-0.0033
0.0028
0.531
78
-0.0112
0.0018
0.728
79
-0.0146
0.0006
0.895
80
-0.0262
0.0036
0.519
81
-0.0323
0.0114
0.041
82
-0.0265
0.0023
0.670
83
-0.0207
0.0124
0.058
84
-0.0417
0.0097
0.151
85
-0.0526
0.0120
0.078
86
-0.0290
0.0128
0.074
87
-0.0603
0.0060
0.434
88
-0.0295
-0.0033
0.752
89
-0.0361
0.0026
0.763

P-value
0.922
0.462
0.778
0.313
0.191
0.018
0.008
0.045
0.108
0.002
0.000
0.049
0.000
0.055
0.022

B. Vital Statistics 2008 Match
Age
Black-White Gap
P-value
Age
Black-White Gap
P-value
59
0.0046
0.198
75
0.0127
0.240
60
0.0075
0.124
76
0.0271
0.029
61
0.0002
1.000
77
0.0205
0.111
62
0.0031
0.562
78
0.0236
0.078
63
0.0092
0.059
79
0.0038
0.766
64
0.0042
0.437
80
-0.0098
0.539
65
-0.0025
0.727
81
-0.0067
0.765
66
0.0190
0.003
82
0.0102
0.555
67
0.0165
0.011
83
0.0133
0.510
68
0.0114
0.106
84
-0.0210
0.316
69
0.0317
0.000
85
-0.0344
0.161
70
0.0114
0.133
86
-0.0051
0.908
71
0.0215
0.011
87
-0.0498
0.064
72
0.0175
0.053
88
-0.0019
1.000
73
0.0181
0.054
89
0.0131
0.682
74
0.0059
0.559
Source: Authors’ calculations, National Longitudinal Survey, Old Men Cohort. P-values reported
are based on a two-tailed Fisher’s Exact Test of the hypothesis that blacks and non-Hispanic
whites have the same mortality rate at a given age.

37

Table 4 Estimated probability of surviving 21 years after Health Interview Survey for those
aged 85 and older, 1986 to 1989 surveys
Black
Fraction assumed alive
(N)

0.1071
(45)

Non-black
Hispanic
0.1875
(15)

Non-Hispanic
white
0.0667
(216)

Fraction confirmed deceased
(N)

0.8929
(375)

0.8125
(65)

0.9333
(3,020)

Total Sample Size

420

80

3,236

Expected number alive from SSA Life Tables

0.69

0.13

5.3

P-value for test of equality with non0.003
0.000
Hispanic whites
Source: Authors’ calculations, Minnesota Population Center and State Health Access Data
Assistance Center, Integrated Health Interview Series: Version 6.12. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota, 2015, and SSA 2013 Life Tables. Test for equality are from Fisher’s exact test, one
tailed.

38

Table 5 Parameter estimates from the measurement error-corrected hazard model, NHIS
data
Variable in the Hazard Model
Age
Age2
Black
Black × Age
Black × Age2
Hispanic
Hispanic × Age
Hispanic × Age2
Constant
Estimated Rate of Missing
Deaths
Error Rate for White

0.121
(0.0110)
-0.000408
(0.000380)
0.334
(0.267)
-0.0242
(0.0392)
0.000673
(0.00140)
0.0436
(0.450)
-0.0414
(0.0624)
0.00216
(0.00210)
-3.589
(0.0773)

0.037
(0.00229)
Error Rate for Black
0.071
(0.0091)
Error Rate for Hispanic
0.110
(0.0160)
Observations (N × Years)
119,007
Source: Authors’ calculations, National Health Interview Survey. In this regression the age
variable is constructed so that Age = 1 for the youngest age in the data, which is age 72.

39

Figure 1 Simulations of spurious mortality crossovers
Panel A Consequences of varying rates of Methuselah error
Simulation of Crossovers with Various Missing Death Scenarios

0.4
Probability of Death

0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
70

72

74

76

78

80

82

84

86

88

90

92

94

Age
High Mortality with 0% Missing Deaths
High Mortality with 1% Missing Deaths
High Mortality with 5% Missing Deaths
High Mortality with 10% Missing Deaths
High Mortality with 15% Missing Deaths
Reference Group

Note: The reference group is from the SSA Life Tables. The “high mortality” group has a 40%
higher mortality than the reference group. We then simulated missing deaths for the high
mortality group, with error rates of 0%, 1%, 5%, 10% and 15%.

40

Panel B Simulation of a black-white mortality crossover with small rates of missing deaths
0.4

Probability of Death

0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95
Age
Non-Hispanic whites with No Missing Deaths
Blacks with No Missing Deaths
Non-Hispanic whites with 1.8% Missing Deaths
Blacks with 4.2% Missing Deaths
Note: The gray curve shows the probability of death for non-Hispanic whites, from the 2013 SSA
Period Life Tables, and the black curve shows a population with 40% higher mortality. We then
simulate missing deaths for the non-Hispanic whites at 1.8% and for blacks at 4.2%.

41

Figure 2 Nonparametric estimated hazard curves for NLS-OM data matches
Black and Non-Hispanic white hazard rates, SSA2012 data
0.1200

Probability of Death

0.1000

0.0800
0.0600
0.0400
0.0200
0.0000
59 61 63 65 66 67 69 70 72 73 75 77 79 81 83 85 87 89
Age

Black and Non-Hispanic white hazard rates, VS2008 data
0.1600
Probability of Death

0.1400
0.1200
0.1000
0.0800
0.0600
0.0400
0.0200
0.0000
59

61

63

65

_________

67

Blacks

69

71

73

Age

-------

75

77

79

81

83

85

87

89

Non-Hispanic Whites

Note: The top panel uses SSA12 data and the lower panel VS08 data. Solid black lines indicate
blacks. Dotted black lines indicate non-Hispanic whites.

42

Figure 3 Nonparametric estimated hazard curves from NHIS data
Probability of Death for NHIS Data
0.4500
0.4000

Probability of Death

0.3500
0.3000
0.2500
0.2000
0.1500
0.1000
0.0500
0.0000
85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99 100 101 102 103 104 105

Age
Non-Hispanic Whites

Blacks

SSA Life Table, Female

Note: The solid black lines indicate blacks; dashed black lines indicate non-Hispanic whites; and
the dotted black lines indicate the SSA Life Table estimates.

43

Figure 4 Plots of the estimated hazard curves for three models, white men in the NLS-OM SSA Match

Note: The dashed-dot lines represent 95% confidence intervals.

44

Figure 5 Evidence on the black-white mortality crossover and Hispanic paradox in the naïve
logit model and measurement error-corrected model, NHIS-NDI data
Panel A The black-white mortality crossover

White vs. Black Mortality: Logit Model

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

1907-14 Birth Cohort, Observed at ages 72-92 in NHIS

70

80

90

100

Age
Whites

Blacks

White vs. Black Mortality: ME Model

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

1907-14 Birth Cohort, Observed at ages 72-92 in NHIS

70

80

90
Age
Whites

Blacks

Note: The dashed-dot lines represent 95% confidence intervals.

100

45

Panel B The Hispanic paradox

White vs. Hispanics Mortality: Logit Model

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

1907-14 Birth Cohort, Observed at ages 72-92 in NHIS

70

80

90

100

Age
Whites

Hispanics

White vs. Hispanics Mortality: ME Model

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1907-14 Birth Cohort, Observed at ages 72-92 in NHIS

70

80

90
Age
Whites

Hispanics

Note: The dashed-dot lines represent 95% confidence intervals.

100

