                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     RISKY BUSINESS? THE EFFECT OF MAJORING IN BUSINESS ON EARNINGS
                      AND EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT

                                      Rodney J. Andrews
                                      Scott A. Imberman
                                     Michael F. Lovenheim

                                      Working Paper 23575
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23575


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2017




We gratefully acknowledge that this research was made possible through data provided by the
University of Texas at Dallas Education Research Center. The conclusions of this research do not
necessarily reflect the opinions or official position of the Texas Education Agency, the Texas
Higher Education Coordinating Board, or the State of Texas. We would also like to thank Alyssa
Carlson, Sara Muehlenbein, Katelyn Heath and Mark Lu for excellent research assistance. We are
further grateful for generous financial support for this project provided by the Smith Richardson
Foundation. Finally, we'd like to thank seminar participants at Association for Education Finance
and Policy Annual Meeting, Association for Policy Analysis and Management International
Meeting, Michigan State University, Teachers' College, University of Georgia, and University of
Michigan for helpful comments and advice. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Rodney J. Andrews, Scott A. Imberman, and Michael F. Lovenheim. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Risky Business? The Effect of Majoring in Business on Earnings and Educational Attainment
Rodney J. Andrews, Scott A. Imberman, and Michael F. Lovenheim
NBER Working Paper No. 23575
July 2017
JEL No. I23,I26,J24

                                           ABSTRACT

One of the most important decisions a student can make during the course of his or her college
career is the choice of major. The field of study a student selects translates directly into the types
of skills and knowledge he or she will obtain during college, and it can influence the type of
career chosen after postsecondary education ends. Business is one of the most popular majors in
the US, accounting for 19% of all college degrees granted. We study the impact of choosing a
business major using a regression discontinuity design that exploits GPA cutoffs for switching
majors in some Texas universities. Even though nearly 60% of marginal business majors would
have majored in a STEM field otherwise, we find large and statistically significant increases in
earnings of 80% to 130% 12+ years after college entry, driven mainly by women. These are
considerably larger than OLS estimates that condition on a rich set of demographic, high school
achievement, and high school fixed-effects controls, which is consistent with students choosing
majors based on comparative advantage. We do not find statistically significant effects of
majoring in business on educational outcomes, except for positive effects on male 6-year
graduation rates.

Rodney J. Andrews                                 Michael F. Lovenheim
The University of Texas at Dallas                 Department of Policy Analysis and Management
800 West Campbell Road                            Cornell University
MS WT21                                           102 Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Richardson, TX 75080                              Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER                                          and NBER
rodney.j.andrews@utdallas.edu                     mfl55@cornell.edu

Scott A. Imberman
Michigan State University
486 W. Circle Drive
110 Marshall-Adams Hall
East Lansing, MI 48824-1038
and NBER
imberman@msu.edu
1         Introduction

The returns to skill in the labor market are historically high. Extensive empirical evidence
shows that investing in a college education leads to significant increases in future earnings (e.g.,
Hungerford and Solon, 1987; Ashenfelter and Krueger, 1994; Card, 1995; Kane and Rouse, 1995;
Jaeger and Page, 1996; Keane and Wolpin, 1997; Zimmerman, 2014). However, examining
average wage effects of a college education likely misses two important sources of heterogeneity
that can produce a misleading picture of the returns to investing in postsecondary education.
The first is heterogeneity in the returns to college quality, which has received much attention
in the literature.1 The second source of heterogeneity in the returns to college relates to the
course of study a student selects. The returns to majoring in English may be very different
from majoring in engineering or mathematics, for example. This heterogeneity can render
the average college-level return a misleading indicator of student expectations over how their
earnings will be impacted by a given postsecondary enrollment decision. To date, the return
to college major choice has received far less attention by researchers than the other margins
of postsecondary investment, especially in the United States. While it is widely believed that
college major choice is an important determinant of the returns to postsecondary education,
there is little evidence based on credible causal studies to support these beliefs.
        The contention that major choice affects the returns to education is supported, in part, by
the large difference in average earnings across majors. Carnevale and Cheah (2013) show that
median earnings of recent graduates ranged from $54,000 per year in engineering to around
$30,000 for recreation, arts or science degree holders. Kearney and Hershbein (2015) find
that median lifetime earnings by major range from $800,000 to $2 million and that engineering,
computer science, operations and logistics, physics, economics and finance pay the most. Major
choices guide much of what a student will learn during college and have a large impact on
    1
    A large body of prior work has found evidence of a positive causal effect of attending more selective or
higher-resource schools on future earnings (Brewer, Eide and Ehrenberg, 1999; Black and Smith, 2004, 2006;
Hoekstra, 2009; Andrews, Li and Lovenheim, 2016). This is especially the case for students from low-income
backgrounds (Dale and Krueger, 2002, 2013; Andrews, Imberman and Lovenheim, 2016). Some of the return
to college quality likely is driven by the fact that postsecondary quality/resources increase college completion
rates (Bound, Lovenheim and Turner, 2010) and reduce the time it takes students to obtain a baccalaureate
degree (Bound, Lovenheim and Turner, 2012).



                                                       1
students’ postsecondary experiences. One can argue that the choice of major field is the most
important decision a student will make in college, perhaps even more important than the choice
of which school to attend. Indeed, earnings difference across graduates of different majors is
as large as or larger than the average earnings gap between high school and college graduates
(Altonji, Blom and Meghir 2012). To the extent that rising demand for college workers has not
been evenly spread across fields of study, it is essential to understand the return to college majors
to inform optimal human capital decisions among students. In addition, understanding which
majors have the highest returns is important for guiding resource allocation in the postsecondary
sector: institutions may want to put more resources towards high return majors to best support
the post-collegiate earnings of graduates.
       It is difficult to estimate the causal effect of college major choice on earnings because students
do not randomly select into majors. There is considerable evidence that the majors associated
with the highest post-collegiate earnings are the majors that are selected by students with
the highest measured pre-collegiate academic ability (Arcidiacono 2004). Several prior studies
examine the relationship between college major choice and earnings, most of which attempt
to account for selection by controlling for pre-collegiate ability measures (James et al. 1989;
Grogger and Eide 1995; Hammermesh and Donald 2008; Kinsler and Pavan 2015).2 This
approach is unlikely to uncover the causal impact of major choice because high school skill
measures are an imperfect proxy for actual cognitive skill and because students in more technical
and high-earnings majors almost certainly have higher non-cognitive skills that allow them to
complete a more demanding course of study. Because these cognitive and non-cognitive skills
are independently valued in the labor market (Heckman, Stixrud and Urzua 2006), estimates
based on selection-on-observables methods are likely to be biased.3
       This paper provides estimates of the return to college major choices that addresses several of
   2
    See Altonji, Arcidiacono, and Maurel (2015) for a recent review of the literature.
   3
    There also is a small body of work examining how major choice relates to postsecondary outcomes, which
suggests major choices are correlated with persistence and completion (Leppel 2001; St. John et al. 2004). Using
detailed administrative data from the state of Missouri, Arcidiacono and Koedel (2014) show that African
American students who initially pursue STEM majors have lower graduation rates than similarly-prepared
African American students who pursue non-STEM fields, possibly because STEM majors are more difficult
(Koedel, 2011). While these studies are suggestive of a role for major choice in determining postsecondary
outcomes, none uses an empirical strategy that is likely to overcome the selection biases driven by different
types of students selecting different majors.


                                                       2
the difficulties faced by prior research. Our focus is on the return to majoring in business, which
is the single most popular field of study in the United States: In 2014, 19.2% of all bachelor
degrees awarded in the United States were in business and management. In contrast, 11.5%
of degrees were in liberal arts or humanities, 13.9% were in the social sciences, 5.3% were in
education, 10.6% were in health professions, and 17.0% were in science, technology, engineering
and math (STEM) fields.4 The popularity of the business major is not a new phenomenon.
The demand for this major has been consistently high over the past several decades. Business
majors tend to focus on providing students with skills and knowledge that currently are needed
in the labor market, including finance, accounting, management and computer skills. There is
much less emphasis on literature, philosophy, the arts, and the principles of scientific reasoning.
The specific focus of this major has generated controversy among policymakers and educators.
Proponents argue that this more focused training gives students skills that are highly valued
by employers in the labor market, which leads to high earnings returns and provides employers
the types of workers they need to foster economic growth. Opponents believe that training
students more broadly—for example, in the liberal arts tradition—would allow them to be
more productive workers in the long run and to be more adaptable to future changes in the
demand for specific types of labor. Despite the persistently high demand for the business major
and the significant resources states spend on supporting undergraduate business programs, both
sides lack credible empirical support for their claims that is based on robust causal methods.
       The main contribution of this paper is to fill some of the gaps in our knowledge about the
effect of majoring in business on postsecondary and labor market outcomes, focusing on public
universities in Texas. We employ rich administrative data from Texas that links students’ K-
12 records to their higher education records if they attend a public postsecondary institution
within the state. These data are then merged with administrative earnings information from
   4
     These tabulations are taken from the 2016 Digest of Education Statistics produced by the US Department
of Education. Some fields are agglomerated for exposition. In particular “liberal arts and humanities” in-
cludes, as defined in the Digest “liberal arts and sciences, general studies, and humanities,” “philosophy and
religious studies,” “history,” “foreign languages, literatures, and linguistics,” “theology and religious vocations,”
and “visual and performing arts.” “Social sciences” includes “social sciences” and “psychology.” “STEM” in-
cludes “biological and biomedical sciences,” “computer and information sciences,” “engineering,” “engineering
technologies and engineering-related fields,” “mathematics and statistics,” and “physical sciences and science
technologies.”



                                                         3
the unemployment insurance earnings system in Texas. Together, the data provide us with
detailed information on students’ pre-collegiate academic training, postsecondary outcomes,
and earnings. Using these rich data, we estimate the causal effect of the decision to major in
business on earnings and postsecondary outcomes using a regression discontinuity (RD) design.
Specifically, we exploit the fact that students in some institutions who wish to switch into the
business major from another major, an “undeclared” major or a “pre-business” major, must
meet minimum college GPA requirements to do so. Students whose overall GPA has met a
specified threshold have the option to declare a business major while some students who wish
to switch cannot because they cannot exceed the threshold within a certain time since enrolling.
Through this methodology, we are able to identify the causal impacts of majoring in business in
five of the largest institutions in Texas: University of Texas at Austin, Texas A&M University,
Texas Tech University, University of Houston and University of Texas at Arlington.
   We find that the likelihood that a student who begins college in a non-business major ends up
as a business major increases by about 5% at the GPA cutoff. This is a 71% increase relative to
the likelihood of majoring in business just below the cutoffs. Almost 60% of these new business
majors would have majored in a STEM field and another 9.4% would have majored in Economics
had they not had access to the business major. We use the option of majoring in business due to
exceeding the GPA threshold to instrument for majoring in business. Specifically, we estimate
two-stage least squares models that identify the effect of selecting a business major for the set
of students who change major due to just qualifying for the option to do so relative to the
distribution of counterfactual majors selected by students who just fail to qualify for the option
to major in business.
   Point estimates indicate that majoring in business increases 6- and 8-year graduation by
12-18 percentage points, although the estimates are not statistically significantly different from
zero at conventional levels. Transferring drops by similar amounts, but those estimates also
are not statistically significant. Our results point to large effects of majoring in business on
earnings. Twelve or more years after initial college enrollment, earnings are 0.60 to 0.82 log
points (or 81% to 128%) higher among those induced by the GPA cutoff rules to major in
business, depending on the size of the bandwidth. This effect is almost twice as large as the

                                                4
effect 10+ years after college enrollment, which suggests that returns to the business major
grow with experience.
      We compare these effects to OLS estimates that account for a rich set of student background
controls as well as institution-cohort and high school fixed effects. These controls are more
expansive than what has been used in the existing selection-on-observables literature.5 The
OLS estimates suggest smaller returns of around 15%, but the implicit counterfactual major
distributions differ between the OLS and RD models, making it difficult to compare the two. A
strength of our approach and data is that we can identify the distribution of alternative majors
at the GPA cutoffs. We re-weight the OLS estimates by the relative size of the counterfactual
major in the RD estimates, such that the OLS and RD estimates place similar weight on each
non-business major. After making this adjustment, the OLS results show virtually no impact on
earnings, in contrast to the 81% to 128% effect we estimate using RD. Results for postsecondary
outcomes also are larger in the RD relative to the OLS estimates, although the imprecision of
the results make us unable to statistically reject that the OLS and RD estimates are equal. That
the RD model yields substantially larger earnings effects than the OLS model that incorporate
rich controls is consistent with the findings of Kirkebøen, Leuven and Mogstad (2016) in Norway.
They demonstrate that students who obtain access to their first-choice major have particularly
large returns to that major, which is likely driven by student sorting on comparative advantage.
This type of selection on unobserved skill or preferences likely drives our results as well. An
important implication is that Texas institutions employing GPA cutoffs could increase the
returns to college substantially for a subset of students by lowering the GPA requirements for
business transfers.
      The size of our analysis sample allows us to examine heterogeneity by gender and initial
major choice. The earnings effects are concentrated among women, while the educational
attainment effects are concentrated among men. For women, majoring in business increases
earnings 12+ years after college enrollment by 1.4 log points. Because most marginal business
students would have majored in STEM, these findings suggest that the existence of the high-
  5
    For example, see James et al. (1989), Altonji (1993), Rumberger and Thomas (1993), Loury and Garman
(1995), Grogger and Eide (1995), Hammermesh and Donald (2008), Carnevale and Cheah (2013), and Hershbein
and Kearney (2015).


                                                   5
return business major can limit the effectiveness of policies designed to increase the rate of
women entering STEM fields. We also show that the effects are particularly large among
students whose first major is in a STEM field. These students experience a 1.6 log point
increase in earnings from majoring in business. Interestingly, switching to business prolongs
time to degree but also increases 6- and 8-year graduation rates by about 50%.
   Our paper makes three contributions to the literature. The first core contribution is to
provide the only empirical analysis in the US of the return to an important college major
using an identification strategy that can plausibly overcome biases associated with student
selection. There are two prior studies that use a similar approach in Chile (Hastings, Neilson
and Zimmerman 2013) and Norway (Kirkebøen, Leuven and Mogstad 2016). Both of these
papers use the fact that students jointly apply to a postsecondary school and a program of
study, and the admissions rules require programs to admit the best students according to a
common metric. As a result, there are sharp admissions cutoffs for school-major combinations
that support a regression discontinuity approach. They find evidence of large differences in the
returns across college majors. For business in particular, Hastings, Neilson and Zimmerman
estimate earnings returns of approximately 10%, while Kirkebøen Leuven and Mogstad find
positive returns to business relative to all alternative majors other than engineering.
   Relative to these studies, our analysis makes several contributions. First, the US postsec-
ondary system differs in critical ways from the Chilean and Norwegian contexts, making it
very difficult to generalize the findings from these analyses to the United States. In particular,
the timing of major choice differs substantially, as does the application process. In Chile and
Norway, students apply to fields and institutions jointly upon entry to college, and opportu-
nities to switch are extremely limited. In the US, on the other hand, the application system
is decentralized, and while some institutions allow students to pick a field upon entry, switch-
ing is relatively easy and usually does not require another application process or a change of
institutions. Typically, students are not required to (and often do not) pick a field upon first
enrolling in college. Thus, there may be substantial differences in the types of students who
are on the margins of major choice, and decisions about majors made in the second year of
college may have different effects on later outcomes than decisions made in the last year of high

                                                6
school. While we examine only one state, Texas is quite large and diverse, and the structure
and quality of its postsecondary system is much more representative of those of other states in
the US than are the Chilean and Norwegian systems.
   Second, all of the effects we identify are across students within a given school, while in these
other studies they must assume that college quality and major effects are additively separable.
Third, while Kirkebøen Leuven and Mogstad (2016) are able to identify relevant counterfactual
field choices, Hastings, Neilson and Zimmerman (2013) are unable to construct such counter-
factuals. The inability to measure counterfactual majors makes it difficult to interpret effects of
major choice on labor market outcomes. Fourth, the Norwegian and Chilean economies differ
substantially from the US in ways that make it very challenging to generalize results across
countries. As a result, it is unclear whether the returns they estimate can generalize to the US.
   The prior research on the return to majors in the US that most clearly addresses selection
bias is Arcidiacono (2004). He derives and estimates a dynamic structural model of college
choice and major choice. The model is flexible enough to allow students to experience major-
specific returns to ability and is identified predominantly off of period-specific shocks that allow
students to react to information they are receiving about their own preferences and abilities as
well as an “exclusion restriction” that state-average earnings only affect utility by impacting
individual earnings and not preferences or abilities. Using data from the National Longitudinal
Survey of 1972, he shows that the returns to college are highest for business and natural science
majors.
   While Arcidiacono (2004) provides a significant advancement over the previous selection-on-
observables literature, his model ultimately is identified under the assumption that his structural
model of college and major choices accurately reflects how students make these choices. That
there is little understanding of why students select certain majors makes modeling this decision
very difficult. Furthermore, most of the people he studies went to college in the 1970s and
1980s. Generalizing these results to current and future students is difficult, given the large
increases in the return to skill that have occurred since that time. Hence, it is important to
generate evidence on the returns to college major choice using more recent students. Our study
is the only other paper using US data that attempts to estimate the causal effect of choosing

                                                 7
a particular college major on earnings, and it is the only one that uses quasi-experimental
variation to overcome the problems caused by selection of students with different abilities and
preferences into different majors. Furthermore, the students we examine attended college in
the 2000s, so their experiences are more likely to reflect the return to major choice faced by
students currently in the postsecondary system.
    The second main contribution of our paper is the comparison of OLS and RD estimates
in a manner that accounts for the local nature of the RD parameter. Because we observe the
distribution of counterfactual majors, we can reweight the OLS results such that the RD and
OLS estimates employ the same distribution of alternative majors. This is novel in the return
to college major literature and allows a more direct assessment of the role of selection in driving
any differences between OLS and IV results.
    Finally, we provide the first analysis in the literature on how major choice affects post-
secondary outcomes in a manner that more plausibly handles selection bias than selection-on-
observables models. None of the other papers that use an RD approach in other countries
estimate impacts on potentially important educational outcomes such as graduation, graduate
school attendance and transferring. These are important outcomes that can potentially impact
lifetime outcomes through avenues not captured by earnings, and they can help explain some
of the earnings effects. Indeed, Kirkebøen Leuven and Mogstad (2016) focus on college grad-
uates under the assumption that the major field does not affect graduation likelihood. While
they provide evidence of this in Norway, in the US and many other more decentralized broad
access systems, dropouts are very common and field choice can plausibly impact completion.
Arcidiacono (2004) also does not examine educational outcomes, which underscores the novelty
of the evidence we provide on how major choice affects postsecondary outcomes.



2     Data

We use detailed administrative data linking K-12 education, postsecondary, and earnings records
for all students and workers in the State of Texas who attend a public secondary school and
a public college or university. The K-12 portion of the data contains a host of background


                                                8
characteristics that are useful in assessing the extent of selection into the business major. For
all students who went to high school in Texas, we observe the high school in which he or she
was enrolled, scores from state standardized tests, and a large set of demographic and educa-
tional characteristics such as race/ethnicity, gender, whether the student was eligible for free or
reduced-price lunch, whether the student was at risk of dropping out, and enrollment in gifted
and talented programs. The test score data we use are from the 11th grade Texas Assessment
of Academic Skills (TAAS) exams for reading, writing and mathematics from 1997 to 2002 and
for the Texas Assessment of Knowledge and Skills (TAKS) for students in 11th grade in 2003
and later. The TAAS and TAKS exams are administered to all students in Texas, and they
are “high stakes” in the sense that students must achieve a passing score on them in order to
graduate. Because students can retake them, we use the lowest score for each student, which
typically corresponds to the score from the first time students take the exam.
       Data on students’ college careers come from the Texas Higher Education Coordinating
Board (THECB). We observe, on a semester-by-semester basis, the institution in which the
student is enrolled, declared major field of study, enrollment in public Texas graduate degree
programs, credits attempted and grade points earned. The data also include the timing of
degree receipt for each degree earned from a public Texas institution. To calculate cumulative
GPA, we divide the cumulative grade points earned by the cumulative credits attempted in each
semester. College credit data are only available for all postsecondary institutions beginning in
1999, so we restrict our analysis samples to those who began college in 1999 and after. The
THECB only collects this information for people attending a public college or university in
Texas, but given the high quality and low cost of the Texas public postsecondary system, the
vast majority of students attend in-state (Andrews, Imberman and Lovenheim 2016). While
we have postsecondary data for all students in the Texas public system, our analysis sample
uses only those students who also graduated from high school in Texas so that we can link
postsecondary records to K-12 records. This constitutes 61% of students in the THECB data.6
       While we observe college majors for each semester, we focus on major selection at two
   6
    This restriction is done so that we can test for selection across the GPA discontinuity as a function of
pre-determined characteristics and so that we can control for such characteristics in our regression analysis.



                                                      9
distinct points in time. The first is in the initial semester of enrollment; GPA cutoffs for access
to business majors apply only to students who do not initially declare business as a major.
Thus, our main analysis sample contains those who do not declare a business major as of their
first semester of enrollment. The second time at which we measure major choice is at the end
of undergraduate enrollment. We define “final major” as the major at graduation or the final
major in which we observe an undergraduate student before her enrollment ends without a
degree. We group majors into 10 categories: business, liberal arts, economics, non-economics
social science, STEM, agriculture, communications, health, undeclared, and other.
   Both the K-12 and postsecondary records are linked to quarterly earnings data from the
Texas Workforce Commission (TWC) from 2008 through 2016. The TWC is the administrator
of the state’s unemployment insurance program. Since these data are the same data used to
determine unemployment insurance eligibility and tax bills for employers, they constitute a
highly reliable measure of earnings. However, an individual must work in the State of Texas
for an employer other than the federal government to be included in the data. Our earnings
measures follow those outlined in Andrews, Li and Lovenheim (2016) and Andrews, Imberman
and Lovenheim (2016) using the same quarterly earnings data in Texas. We first exclude the
top 0.5% of earnings, which corresponds to $95,928 in a quarter. The top 0.5% of earnings are
excluded because of the long right tail of the earnings distribution that dominates the data. We
then take the natural logarithm of earnings measured 10 or more (10+) or 12 or more (12+)
years after high school graduation. Finally, we de-mean this restricted log quarterly earnings
measure by year-quarter-high school graduation cohort means and average the residuals over
the relevant time periods within individuals. This creates a single log earnings measure for
each individual that is net of the interaction of year, season, and high school cohort effects.
In our preferred model, we restrict to individuals with at least 5 quarters of positive earnings
during the specificized time frame in order to measure earnings among full-time workers that
are likely more reflective of lifetime earnings. We find no evidence that the GPA discontinuity
leads to selection into this earnings sample, which supports this approach. Nonetheless, we
provide estimates without the five quarter restriction as well.
   Our analysis focuses on students who are first-time college enrollees in a four-year public

                                                10
institution in the 1999-2008 entry cohorts and who graduated from a public Texas high school.
We restrict our attention to these cohorts because we do not have consistent college GPA data
prior to 2000 and because we need to allow students sufficient time to finish college and enter the
workforce to measure several of our outcomes of interest. Table 1 contains summary statistics
for our analysis sample, which further restricts to institutions and cohorts with GPA cutoffs as
well as our preferred RD bandwidth (0.75 grade points below and 0.5 grade points above the
cutoff). Details on how we identify these cutoffs are provided below.
        The table shows tabulations for three groups: all students, those whose final major is
business, and those with a different final major. Business majors in the analysis sample have
lower high school test scores than non-business majors and they are more likely to be male. This
demonstrates the selection problem that our empirical analysis seeks to solve: those sorting into
business majors have different underlying abilities from students in other majors, only some of
which are observed. Despite the lower pre-collegiate ability level of business majors, they earn
more 10+ and 12+ years after college entry than their counterparts in non-business majors and
they have lower graduate school attendance.7 They do, however, have similar graduation rates.
Finally, column (7) demonstrates that business majors are popular in the analysis sample; 9%
of students have a final major of business, despite the fact that many of them are academically
ineligible to major in business and the sample is restricted to those who are not in business
upon entry into college. Among the full sample of Texas students, 16% have a final major in
business.



3         Empirical Methodology

3.1        Measuring GPA Cutoffs for Business Transfers

To overcome the biases from selection into business majors based on students’ unobserved char-
acteristics, we exploit the use of grade minima for students who wish to switch to business. In
    7
    We can only observe if a student attends graduate school at a public Texas institution. Despite missing
out-of-state graduate enrollment, we believe this measure is informative because in-state graduate school is
much less expensive for these students and there is little reason to believe switching majors would generate
systematic changes in the state where the student attends graduate school.


                                                    11
the US, while most universities have general admission criteria, certain fields within a university
impose additional requirements. This is commonly found in fields such as business and other
undergraduate professional schools where the requirements facilitate capacity control. There
are many ways in which the major can be restricted to students. In some cases, students
are required to meet minimum SAT or ACT scores upon admission to the university or have
a minimum high school GPA. Students who switch into a major while already enrolled at a
university (either from another major, from being undeclared, or upon advancing to an upper
level of a major) often must show competence in a set of prerequisite courses and/or overall
competence through cumulative GPA requirements. It is this last requirement on which our
analysis focuses. While the use of admission requirements also provides a potential avenue
for identification, the data available to us does not permit us to exploit these discontinuities.8
The UTD-ERC data do not include specific course records for students, so we are not able to
identify potential major switchers who take pre-requisite courses nor can we observe grades in
those courses. Thus, we exploit minimum cumulative college GPA requirements for students
who want to switch into the business major, which is the major in Texas for which there is the
most excess demand and for which these GPA rules have historically been employed to regulate
major size at several institutions.9
       We identify the impacts of choosing an undergraduate business major by comparing students
in the same institution who barely meet the cumulative GPA requirement set by a field to those
who barely miss that requirement in a regression discontinuity framework.10 Since institutions
do not report student GPA used for these requirements directly, we calculate our own measure
of GPA by dividing the cumulative grade points earned as of each semester by the cumulative
   8
     Such admission rules are common in Europe and South America and are used by Kirkebøen, Leuven and
Mogstad (2016) and Hastings, Neilson and Zimmerman (2013) to estimate the return to college major in Norway
and Chile, respectively.
   9
     We explored the potential for this strategy for many major fields. However, only business school cutoffs
were observed in a sufficiently large number of cohorts and institutions to provide reasonable precision for the
estimates. There was little systematic evidence of GPA cutoffs for other majors that would allow us to use
this approach to estimate earnings effects for other majors. While this limits the majors we can examine to
business, it has the benefit that there are not other major access discontinuities at the same place in the GPA
distribution that would complicate the interpretation of our estimates.
  10
     An alternative strategy would be to utilize admission requirements for specific fields upon entry to college,
such as minimum SAT or ACT scores or high school GPA. While promising, our data provide only limited
ability to do this as we do not have access to high school GPA, and the cohorts for which we have SAT and
ACT scores are limited to only 2004 - 2008.


                                                       12
number of credits attempted as of that semester. We make a series of sample restrictions
designed to reduce any resulting measurement error in the assignment variable. First, we
restrict to first-time, four-year (FTFY) college attendees. This restriction excludes transfer
students who begin college in a public two-year school. The difficulty that arises from including
two-year transfer students is that the institutions do not report in the data which credits are
accepted for transfer. Hence, including these transfers increases the risk that we would be
including credits that do not go towards the calculation of GPA used to admit students to the
field. Importantly, we do not exclude FTFY students who transfer later in their postsecondary
careers, since transferring could be a treatment effect of selecting a particular major. Indeed,
we examine this effect directly in our results below. For each student, we use the calculated
GPA thresholds for the institution and cohort in which the student first enrolled. The second
sample restriction is to include only students who have not declared for a business major in
their first semester of enrollment. Students who are declared business majors upon admission
are often exempted from the cumulative GPA requirement.
   Institutions generally provide multiple opportunities for students to exceed the thresholds
and declare majors, generating a range of completed credit hours during which students may
change majors. These are highlighted in Table 2, which shows the published requirements for
the institutions we use in this analysis. In most cases, there is a minimum number of credits
that must be attempted and, sometimes, strict timing requirements (e.g., a student cannot
declare after a certain semester) or a maximum number of credits that can be obtained to
remain eligible to declare a business major. This flexibility generates two main concerns. First,
it increases the likelihood of measurement error as we cannot precisely say at what point in
a student’s time at an institution the GPA requirement becomes binding. Second, it gives
students an opportunity to “game” the threshold by timing their application to match the
GPA requirements. To maximize power while also minimizing the risk of the second concern,
we use the highest cumulative GPA a student has at any point in his or her 2nd through 4th
semesters enrolled in a four-year public institution in Texas as the running variable.
   While this method of structuring the running variable largely removes the risk from students
gaming the timing of application by basing the forcing variable on whether a student ever

                                               13
exceeds the threshold during the period in which he is eligible to switch majors, there remains
the risk that students will try to manipulate their cumulative GPA through more direct means.
Examples of such behavior are altering effort or changing course-taking behavior. This is
the main threat to the validity of our empirical design. We show below through the use of
balance tests and observations of the density of the GPA distribution around the threshold
that there is no evidence of such manipulation. Furthermore, there are a number of reasons
why such attempts at manipulation likely would not invalidate our identification strategy. First,
a popular strategy among students may be to take easier courses to help ensure that they will
get a higher grade. While this is probably quite common, students need to be able to precisely
earn a specific grade if they are near a threshold, which is a much harder endeavor. That is, it is
likely that students who both barely exceed and do not exceed thresholds have the same course
taking strategy and put forth the same effort, but one student performs slightly worse in the
class than expected (or vice versa). A second possibility is that students take classes but drop
them if their grade falls below that needed for the threshold. In general, students cannot drop
a class beyond the first third of a semester, and thus they will not know what their final grade
would have been in the absence of dropping. The key to both of these concerns is that there
remains a level of exogenous variation in final grades regardless of students’ abilities to make
adjustments on the effort, course selection, and course dropping margins. That is, our running
variable is imperfectly manipulable. Lee (2008) shows that imperfect manipulability of the
running variable produces the local randomization that is key to the regression discontinuity
design. Using standard tests, we provide evidence that our running variable is imperfectly
manipulable.
   A final concern that represents a more straightforward manipulation mechanism is that
students could simply request that professors change their grades if they do not meet the
cutoff. Such requests are quite common in general and it is indeed likely that professors would
use factors unobserved to the econometrician to determine who receives the grade increases.
While we cannot rule out that such manipulation occurs, our balance and density tests indicate
that any impact on our estimates is likely negligible.
   To conduct this analysis, we need precise measures of the GPA cutoffs used at each insti-

                                                14
tution and in each year. Ideally, these cutoffs would all be published, and we would know for
which students each cutoff applies. Unfortunately, information on specific GPA requirements
is not consistently published, which makes determining cutoffs more complex. While in many
cases cutoffs are published either in a catalogue or on the department’s website, these typically
are only available for current students. Examples of these cutoffs can be seen in the second to
last column of Table 2.11 Given that the students in our analysis would have been applying for
the change in major 7 to 13 years prior and that it is common for cutoffs to change over time to
reflect major demand and department resources, the published current cutoffs differ from the
earlier cutoffs faced by the cohorts we analyze. In some cases, the cutoffs may not be published
at all but still may exist. This can occur because the department never actually published the
cutoff being used or because they effectively used a cutoff that was not part of a formal policy
but was used as a way to regulate excess demand in a given year. Additionally, there are some
differences between institutional GPA calculations and our GPA calculation due to rounding
errors or the exclusion of certain courses like remedial classes from the GPA calculation. Fi-
nally, since students in the same entry cohort may face different cutoffs based on the year in
which they apply for the major (recall that we use the 2nd through 4th semester enrolled and
some students may have gaps in their enrollment) students in the same entry cohort may face
slightly different cutoffs.
       Given these challenges with measuring cutoffs, we implement a procedure similar in spirit to
that used by Goodman, Hurwitz and Smith (2015) to identify “hidden” admission thresholds
for college admission via SAT score thresholds and Hoekstra (2009) for entry into a flagship
university.12 For each institution and entering cohort in Texas from 1999-2008, we estimate the
  11
     A key exception here is business school requirements for University of Texas at Austin, which are available
on their website back to 2004. We cross-checked our empirically identified cutoffs for the 2002 to 2005 college
entry cohorts with published rules two years later. The observed thresholds were very close to the published
thresholds - no more than 0.2 grade points away.
  12
     Goodman, Hurwitz and Smith (2015) use a data-driven procedure that formally tests for discontinuities at
various SAT scores for many institutions, limiting their analysis to the few institutions where discontinuities are
estimated with t-statistics greater than 3. Hoekstra uses a similar procedure and chooses the discontinuity that
provides the highest R2 . We follow a procedure more similar to Goodman, Hurwitz and Smith (2015) because,
as in their setting, we are not sure whether a cutoff rule exists in a given institution during a given year.




                                                        15
following regression discontinuity model:


 1(Business)i = β0 + β1 1(GP A ≥ GP A0 )i + β2 GP Ai + β3 1(GP A ≥ GP A0 )i × GP Ai + εi , (1)


where 1(Business) is an indicator for whether the student’s final major is business, GP A is
the student’s maximum GPA over his/her 2nd to 4th semester as defined above, and GP A0
is the proposed GPA cutoff for transferring into a business major. The model is estimated
separately by institution and cohort, where the cutoffs are set at GPA levels between 2.5
and 3.65 (the highest published cutoff at UT-Austin) in 0.05 grade point increments. Each
regression is restricted to students who are not declared business majors in their first semester
with M axGP A above 2.0.13
       After the model is estimated, we collect the cutoff for each institution-cohort with the
largest t-statistic for β1 given that t-statistic is at least 2.5.14 Finally, as a double check on
this empirically driven approach, we visually inspected figures that plot mean GPAs within 0.1
point bins for each institution-cohort to confirm the existence of discontinuities determined by
the strategy just described. In no case did we discard a cutoff chosen through the empirical
procedure due to the failure to visually observe a sufficient jump in business majors at the
identified cutoff.
       Through this procedure, we identified thresholds at five institutions: UT-Austin, Texas
A&M, Texas Tech, University of Houston, and UT-Arlington. The empirically-determined
cutoffs are highlighted in Table 2, with the published rules for 2015 provided for comparison.
In general, the empirically determined cutoffs for 1999 - 2008 are close to the published cutoffs
used in 2015. This is particularly true for UT-Austin and Texas A&M, which contain most of
the cohorts with cutoffs. Exact cutoffs for each year and institution are shown in Table 3, along
with the size of the estimated discontinuity and the t-statistic of the test of the null hypothesis
  13
    We restrict to students with GPAs above 2.0 to avoid including students on academic probation.
  14
    We conducted a similar exercise for communications, engineering, physical sciences, social sciences, biology,
economics, agriculture, and computer science. While published cutoffs exist for many sciences and engineering
programs, the rates of switching into these majors are very low. Hence, we did not find consistent evidence of
GPA cutoffs being used for these majors or any of the others tested besides business. Thus, business appears
to be the only major for which GPA cutoffs are used to regulate demand in Texas. That these cutoffs do not
exist for other majors also suggests we are not measuring some mechanical effect related to the likelihood of
majoring in a given subject and GPA.


                                                       16
of no discontinuity. Online Appendix Figures A-4 through A-8 show plots for each of these
institutions and cohorts while Appendix Figure A-9 shows the t-statistic for each cohort in
these institutions, highlighting those that fall above 2.5. For UT-Austin and Texas A&M, we
are able to identify cutoffs in each year except 2005 for TAMU. In Texas Tech, University of
Houston, and UT-Arlington, only a handful of cohorts have cutoffs and these are mostly early
cohorts. This either occurs because the cutoffs are only used when there is excess demand - it
is likely demand was lower than expected in the other years, which led to nonenforcement of
any GPA cutoff rule - or there are simply not enough marginal students who wish to change
majors to generate a detectable effect. Nonetheless, these cutoffs imply that our estimates will
be weighted towards the two flagship institutions, so the local average treatment effects should
be interpreted in this context. Our results mostly reflect returns for the more elite public
institutions. We also provide estimates using samples restricted to the flagships to formalize
this feature of our empirical design.


3.2    Regression Discontinuity Model

Using the discontinuities shown in Table 3, we estimate the following linear probability models
on the analysis sample described above to identify the effect of the admission thresholds on the
distribution of majors:


      1(M ajori = M ajork )ijc = α0 + α1 1(GP Ai ≥ GP A0jc ) + f (GP Ai ; γ)

                                     +1(GP Ai ≥ GP A0jc ) ∗ f (GP Ai ; δ) + ΩXi + µjc + εijc    (2)


where M ajori is the final major and M ajork is one of the ten major categories listed in Table
1 (including business), GP Ai is the student’s cumulative GPA as defined above, GP A0jc is
the cutoff for business in institution j for student entry cohort c, and f (.) is a polynomial
in maximum GPA in semesters 2-4. Our preferred method uses a quadratic polynomial in the
running variable, but we also show estimates using linear and cubic polynomials. The vector µjc
is a set of institution-cohort fixed effects, and ΩXi is the set of observed student characteristics
shown in Table 1 as well as student race/ethnicity indicators. The observables and fixed effects

                                                17
are included to improve precision, but estimates without them are very similar. We show results
that use bandwidths of (-0.5, 0.5), (-0.75, 0.5) and (-1.0, 0.5) grade points. Because of where the
cutoffs are located, observations more than 0.5 GPA points above the cutoff come from schools
where the cutoffs are lower, which introduces concerns about sample composition across the
distribution of the running variable. For this reason, we do not increase the bandwidth above
the cutoff. As we show below, our results are insensitive to the specific bandwidth used.
   The coefficient of interest in equation (2) is α1 . When k = business, α1 is the first stage
estimate. When k 6= business, α1 shows how the GPA cutoff affects the likelihood of majoring
in other subjects. Thus, we are able to determine not only how these cutoff rules affect business
majoring but also the distribution of majors from which the marginal business majors are drawn.
This allows us to clearly specify the distribution of counterfactual majors for students at the
thresholds, which are critical in interpreting the estimated effects of majoring in business on
outcomes. Unlike the OLS estimates that are common in the literature, the RD results show
how outcomes change due to being permitted to major in business relative to a student’s second
choice major. From a policy perspective, this is an extremely important parameter because it
shows the effect of choosing business relative to each student’s most likely alternative. While
comparisons among majors such as business and English are interesting, if few students are
on the margin of choosing between them, the comparison is less informative. Rather, we want
to know what the effect of choosing a given major is relative to the other likely majors in a
student’s choice set. This is the parameter identified by our RD framework.
   To estimate the impacts of major choice on attainment and earnings, we estimate reduced-
form models and “fuzzy RD” models that use the cutoff itself as an instrument for field choice.
The reduced form model is:


    Yijc = π0 + π1 1(GP Ai ≥ GP A0kjc ) + f (GP Ai ; γ) + 1(GP Ai ≥ GP A0jc ) ∗ f (GP Ai ; δ)

              +ΩXi + µjc + εijc ,                                                               (3)


where Yijc is the set of education and labor market outcomes discussed in Section 2. All other
variables in the model are as previously defined; π1 is the estimate of the impact of exceeding


                                                18
the GPA threshold on the various outcomes we examine in this analysis, and it is the parameter
of interest in this model.
       For the fuzzy RD models, we estimate equation (2) with k = business as the first-stage
model and then estimate the following second stage model:




                 d ijc +f (GP Ai ; γ)+1(GP Ai ≥ GP A0jc )∗f (GP Ai ; δ)+ΩXi +µjc +εijc , (4)
 Yijc = β0 +β1 Business


where Business
        d i is the predicted probability that the student i’s final major will be business,

calculated using the estimates from equation (2).
       The identification assumption underlying our empirical approach is that students cannot
manipulate their GPAs precisely so as to decide whether or not they exceed a threshold within
a small neighborhood of the threshold. That is, student characteristics (both observed and un-
observed) need to move smoothly through the thresholds. Using the rich set of observed char-
acteristics of students from the K-12 data, we can test this assumption by examining whether
student characteristics including, crucially, pre-college test scores, change at the discontinuities.
Estimates of π1 from equation (3) using various observed pre-determined characteristics as the
dependent variable are shown in Table 4. We present results from models that use a quadratic
spline in the running variable and a bandwidth of 0.75 GPA points below the cutoffs and 0.5
above the cutoffs.15 We show results both with and without postsecondary institution-cohort
fixed effects. The dependent variables include pre-collegiate academic achievement measures
such as Texas standardized test scores and SAT/ACT scores, demographic characteristics, and
socioeconomic characteristics. The coefficients are universally close to zero and almost none is
statistically significant. One estimate (SAT math with fixed effects) is significant at the 10%
level and gifted status in high school is significant at the 1% level in both models. Even so, the
point estimates on these estimates are small and negative. Hence they work against our find-
ings that business majors right above the cutoff earn more in the labor market. These results
are inconsistent with student sorting around the threshold in a manner that would generate
  15
    Estimates for alternative bandwidths and specification of the running variable are similar in magnitude and
statistical significance.


                                                      19
positive selection and provide strong support for the validity of our approach.
       We also examine whether there is bunching in the density of the underlying distributions
of students at the threshold, which would indicate GPA manipulation (McCrary, 2008). Figure
1 contains GPA densities that have been rescaled such that they are relative to the cutoffs at
each institution and in each year. This distribution is at its peak around the cutoffs, which
is a function of where the departments decide to locate the thresholds. However, there is no
evidence of bunching above the cutoffs. Together, Figure 1 and Table 4 suggest there is no
manipulation of the running variable in an area local to the major GPA cutoffs.16



4        Results

4.1       First Stage Estimates

Figure 2 and Table 5 provides estimation results for the first stage impact of exceeding a cutoff
for business major access on majoring in business. There is an increase in majoring in business
of about 0.05 at the threshold that varies little with the bandwidth. The estimates are affected
little by the addition of background controls and institution-cohort fixed effects as well, and they
are highly statistically significant (t-statistics are in excess of 10). Figure 2 presents compelling
visual evidence of an increase in the likelihood of having a final major in business as a function
of the GPA cutoffs. While we include quadratic smoothers and a vertical line at cutoff, the
discontinuity would be evident from the raw plot of means. Figure 2 shows that the likelihood
of majoring in business right below the threshold is about 7%, so there is a 71% increase in the
likelihood of majoring in business at the GPA discontinuity.
       In order to interpret any effects of this shift in major choice on outcomes, it is important to
identify what majors students would have chosen if they had not been able to select business.
That is, we want to know what the counterfactual “second-choice” majors are for the compliers.
We estimate the effect of being given access to the business major relative to one’s second major
choice using equation (2). This is an important parameter of interest, as it shows the effect of
  16
    A formal density test at the discontinuity with a bin size of 0.05 provides an estimate of 0.029 (se 0.018).
A figure showing the results of this test is provided in Appendix Figure A-1


                                                      20
capacity restrictions on the distribution of final majors. This parameter differs from one that
compares average outcomes across two majors, where in actuality few students may be deciding
between two particular fields (e.g., arts and humanities vs. engineering).
   We estimate the counterfactual distribution of majors by setting up a series of linear prob-
ability models as in equation (2) but with the dependent variable being a major other than
business. The sum of the α1 coefficients in these regressions should equal the negative of the α1
coefficient in equation (2) when the business major is the dependent variable. These estimates
all use a quadratic spline in the running variable and include institution-cohort fixed-effects.
Results are shown in Table 6. The first two rows for each bandwidth show the estimates of the
effect of being above the GPA cutoffs on majoring in the given field. The third row shows what
percent of the increase in the business major comes from this field. This is calculated as the
negative of the ratio of the effect on the given major to the effect on majoring in business. Note
that since we estimate separate models for each outcome there are no cross-model parameter
restrictions on the estimates. As a result, the sum of the counterfactual major effects does not
exactly equal the negative of the business major effect. We rescale the counterfactuals to sum
to 100% in order to account for this problem.
   Table 6 shows that about 60% of the students who gain access to business because of the
GPA rules would have majored in STEM. The rest of the majors outside of undeclared and
communications each form similar-sized components of the counterfactual. Online Appendix
Figure A-2 presents RD figures for each of these majors. While Table 6 shows that the counter-
factual for the marginal business students is a mix of alternative majors, GPA cutoffs largely
act to shift students out of STEM and Economics and into business. The second stage estimates
will be relative to this mix of counterfactual majors.
   Of note in Table 6 is the large positive effect on majoring in communications. Panel (f) of
Online Appendix Figure A-2 shows that this effect is driven completely by one outlier point
right at the discontinuity. This effect does not survive a donut analysis, provided in Appendix
Table A-1, in which we exclude observations proximate to the threshold. Our main results
remain when we do this analysis, as shown in Online Appendix Table A-5. This suggests that
our estimates are not being driven by the jump in the likelihood of majoring in communications

                                                21
at the GPA cutoff.


4.2       Effects on Postsecondary and Labor Market Outcomes

Table 7 shows estimates of the effect of majoring in business on educational outcomes. Although
none of the estimates is statistically significantly different from zero at even the 10% level, the
graduation likelihood effects are positive and non-trivial in magnitude. Estimates using our
preferred bandwidth of (-0.75, 0.5) indicate that majoring in business increases the likelihood
of graduating in 6 years by 18 percentage points and in 8 years by 12 percentage points. Figure
3 shows RD plots for the 6-year graduation rate. There is a clear visual discontinuity at the
GPA cutoff. Online Appendix Figure A-3 shows similar plots for 4- and 8-year graduation rates.
Consistent with Table 7, there is no evidence of an effect for 4-year graduation but there is for
graduation within 8 years.
       We do not see any effect of majoring in business on attending a public graduate school in
Texas, but business majors are less likely to transfer. The transfer result, though not statisti-
cally significant, probably reflects the fact that these students are able to select their first-choice
major, which reduces the incentive to transfer institutions. Figure A-3 shows visual evidence
that aligns strongly with results in Table 7. Taken together, the results in Table 7 suggest that
majoring in business due to passing a GPA threshold has a positive effect on postsecondary
attainment.
       In Table 8, we present RD estimates of the effect of choosing a business major on earnings
10+ and 12+ years after first enrolling in college.17 We show estimates using all three band-
widths with no controls (columns 1 and 4), with institution-cohort fixed effects (columns 2 and
5) and with institution-cohort fixed effects as well as observed characteristics (columns 3 and 6).
Our earnings measures are adjusted log earnings as described in Section 2, and we show results
restricted to workers with at least five quarters of positive earnings and to workers with at least
one quarter of positive earnings. The estimates are remarkably consistent across specifications:
using our preferred earnings measure in columns (1-3), 10+ year earnings increase by 0.36 -
  17
    Online Appendix Table A-2 presents reduced form estimates of the effect of passing the GPA threshold on
earnings.



                                                    22
0.43 log points, or 43% - 54%, and 12+ year earnings increase by 0.60 - 0.82 log points, or
82% - 127%. Figure 4 presents visual evidence of the discontinuity in earnings as well. Point
estimates from specifications using all earnings observations are similar in magnitude to those
using the five-quarter earning sample but are much less precisely estimated. This is because
we are adding a lot of variation in the dependent variable (and thus in the error term) that is
uncorrelated with whether students select a business major. The exclusion of this extraneous
earnings variation that is unlikely to be indicative of lifetime earnings is a main argument for
restricting the analysis to those with five quarters of earnings.
   The results in Table 8 also suggest that the returns to business major grow with potential
experience. The estimates for 12+ years are universally larger than the estimates for 10+
years, although they tend not to be statistically different. In our preferred specification, the
effects almost double across earnings time periods. This is at least suggestive evidence that the
returns to business majors reflect human capital differences rather than signaling, as signaling
effects should diminish rather than strengthen as workers gain experience and employers directly
observe their productivity.
   One of the concerns with using administrative earnings data from one state is selection into
the earnings sample. Such selection comes from two sources: individuals who do not work (or
who have fewer than five quarters of earnings) and individuals who work out of state. Neither
group is included in our earnings measures. If being a business major increases in-Texas labor
force participation, then the RD estimates can be biased by the changing composition of earners
at the cutoff. Online Appendix Table A-3 shows IV estimates in which the dependent variable is
the likelihood an individual is observed in the earnings data. There is no statistically significant
evidence that being induced to major in business by passing a GPA cutoff is associated with
changes in the likelihood of being in the earnings sample. Furthermore, the estimates are
generally small in magnitude. This evidence suggests that our earnings estimates are not being
driven or heavily influenced by changes in the composition of earners around the GPA cutoffs.




                                                23
4.3       Comparison with OLS Estimates

The estimates in Table 8 point to large effects of majoring in business on earnings. One
of the motivations for using an RD approach to estimate the return to business majors is
concerns related to selection on unobservables in the OLS models. It thus is useful to compare
our results to those one would obtain from an OLS model that controls for the rich set of
student background, academic achievement and institution-cohort fixed effects available in our
data. These estimates contain a broader set of controls than prior work using selection-on-
unobservables methods, so they are a good point of comparison with respect to what one might
find using state-of-the-art OLS techniques.
       A core difficulty in comparing the OLS and IV estimates is that the RD estimates represent
a local average treatment effect for students on the margin of being academically eligible for the
major and the OLS estimates show average treatment effects. In order to reduce differences in
the estimates driven by heterogeneous treatment effects, we estimate OLS models that control
for the student characteristics in Table 1 and institution-cohort fixed effects on the RD sample.
To do this, we only use the RD cohorts and institutions, and we limit our sample to those
in the (-0.75, 0.5) bandwidths. These estimates are shown in Table 9. In the top panel, we
estimate the effect of each major category relative to business majors, and in the bottom panel
we estimate the average difference between business majors and all other majors. Adjusted
for students observed characteristics, business students earn more than those in other majors,
although the estimates are far smaller than the RD results. Business majors also are more
likely to graduate and to transfer.18
       It is quite difficult to compare the OLS estimates in Table 9 to the RD estimates in Table
7 and 8 because the mix of counterfactual majors is different across the two estimates. Table
6 shows the distribution of comparison majors for the RD models, while column (7) of Table
1 shows the same for the OLS estimates. Thus, while 60% of the counterfactual is comprised
of STEM majors and 9% is comprised of Economics majors in the RD estimates, in the OLS
  18
     Online Appendix Table A-4 shows OLS estimates for the full sample of institutions, cohorts and students
in Texas. The estimates are quite similar to those in Table 9, suggesting that the OLS estimates in the RD
sample are more broadly applicable. Additionally, these estimates are consistent with OLS results in prior
selection-on-observable studies, making comparisons with the IV results particularly useful.


                                                    24
results these majors only comprise 26.3% and 2.1% of the counterfactual, respectively. To align
the distribution of counterfactuals, we take the counterfactual ratios estimated in Table 6 and
apply them to the coefficient estimates in the top panel of Table 9. That is, we essentially
reweight OLS by the implicit IV weights related to each counterfactual major (Angrist, Graddy
and Imbens 2000), such that the models do not differ in the distribution of majors selected by
non-business students. Specifically, we estimate:


                                                   X −α1,k
                                           RB =                 × βk ,                                        (5)
                                                    k
                                                         α1,B

where α1,k is the parameter estimate from equation (2) with an indicator for major k as the
dependent variable, α1,B is the parameter estimate from equation (2) with an indicator for
business major as the dependent variable, and βk is the OLS estimate of the effect of major
k relative to business on a given outcome. Equation (5) shows that the estimated return to
business for a given mix of counterfactual majors is a weighted average of the OLS estimated
outcome difference between business and each major (βk ) weighted by the proportion of the
                                                    −α1,k 19
counterfactual constituted by each major (          α1,B
                                                         ).
       The implied effects of majoring in business on educational attainment from calculating
equation (5) is similar to the IV estimates, but this is not the case for earnings. The OLS
results with the RD counterfactual mix predict a six-year graduation effect of 9.7% and an
eight-year graduation effect of 11.0%. These are similar to the estimates in Table 7, though
somewhat smaller. However, equation (5) predicts earnings effects of -1.4% for both the 10+
and 12+ earnings measures. Looking at Table 9, it is clear why this is the case: most marginal
business majors in the RD model are drawn from majors with higher earnings returns according
to the OLS model. This stands in stark contrast to what the RD estimates predict.
       Why might the OLS and RD estimators yield such different estimates of the effects of
choosing a business major on labor market outcomes? Table 1 shows that business majors
in the RD sample have lower pre-collegiate academic achievement. If business students have
  19
    As discussed above, the sum of the −α1,k estimates does not exactly equal α1,B because we allow the
coefficients on other variables
                             P (including the running variables) to vary across specifications. That is, we do not
impose the restriction that k −α1,k = α1,B . We rescale the α1,k to force the counterfactual weights to sum to
1, but in practice this has little effect on the results or conclusions.


                                                        25
unobserved attributes that are negatively correlated with earnings as well, then this could
lead OLS estimates to be lower than RD estimates. However, this would likely cause the
graduation results to be biased in similar ways, which is in contrast to what we find. We believe
the estimates are most consistent with selection into business majors based on comparative
advantage, similar to what is found by Kirkebøen, Leuven and Mogstad (2016) in Norway.20
They show that students typically have a higher return to their first-choice major than their
second-choice major. The same pattern holds in Texas: students who are able to major in
business because they barely qualify for admission to the major have much higher returns than
similar students who have to select their second-choice major below the cutoff. This effect
is larger in our estimates than in Kirkebøen, Leuven and Mogstad (2016), which we argue is
sensible for two reasons. First, the compliers in our study are making major choices mostly in
their second year of college rather than in high school, so they likely know more about their
own preferences and talents than high school seniors. Second, the earnings distribution is more
dispersed in the US than in Norway, so the return to selecting into a field that is a good match
may be much higher.


4.4     Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

Figure 5 shows the reduced form earnings impacts from crossing the GPA threshold with no
controls or fixed-effects by gender. Once the data are separated by gender it becomes clear
that the earnings impacts entirely come from women. Women see a noticeable discontinuity in
earnings while there is virtually no change for males. The first two rows of Table 10 provide
estimates by gender for our outcomes of interest. While the first stage estimates differ little
across genders, the differences in the second stage are stark. Among men, there is a statistically
significant increase in 6-year graduation, about half of which comes from a reduction in time-
to-degree (as the 8-year graduation increase is half the size). Men are also less likely to transfer
when they major in business. On the other hand, the earnings effects of selecting a business
major are driven almost completely by women. Earnings among women who major in business
  20
    If sorting into business is based on comparative advantage in the labor market, we would expect the bias
with respect to labor market outcomes to be larger than the bias for educational outcomes, which is what we
find.


                                                    26
because they pass the GPA cutoff are 1.4 log points higher 12+ years after college entry, which
is a very large effect. From a policy perspective, this is an important finding because of the
large policy interest in increasing female participation in STEM and Economics that has arisen.
At least for this sample, the returns to business are far higher than the returns to these other
majors.21 This is a hurdle to increasing female participation in these majors, to the extent these
policies are aimed at inducing women to select majors that have lower labor market returns.
      Because such a large proportion of compliers come from STEM fields, we estimate effects
by whether students’ first major was STEM in row (3) of Table 10. All of the effects are driven
by the subset of students who begin college in a STEM field. Earnings increase 12+ years post-
college entry by 1.6 log points, and 6-year graduation increases by 51 percentage points. While
the impacts may seem large, it is likely these students were struggling in their STEM majors
and hence would likely have a strong comparative disadvantage in terms of both completion
and labor market outcomes.
      Finally in row (4) of Table 10, we estimate effects for students at UT-Austin and Texas A&M.
As Table 3 shows, this sample comprises most of our analysis group. Further, this sample is of
interest because they are attending the elite postsecondary institutions in the state, and there
is little evidence on how institutional quality and major effects interact. The earnings effects
are slightly larger than in the full sample, with a 12+ earnings increase of 0.94 log points. The
graduation estimates are also larger than in the full sample, though as in Table 8 they are
not statistically significant. We also find a marginally significant decline in the likelihood of
transferring. These results provide suggestive evidence that the returns to business are higher
at more-selective institutions, which is interesting because the control groups attend the same
selective schools. Nonetheless, we lack the statistical power to provide more than suggestive
evidence on heterogeneity in the returns to business by postsecondary institution quality.


4.5       Robustness Checks

We show several robustness checks that probe the sensitivity of our estimates to core modeling
assumptions in Online Appendix Table A-5. Throughout the paper, we have shown estimates
 21
      Similar to the full sample, about 60% of the counterfactual majors for women is STEM and 9% is Economics.


                                                       27
for different bandwidths that demonstrate our results are not being driven by our selection of
a particular bandwidth. In Table A-5, we show that we obtain similar results when we use
a cubic spline in the running variable rather than a quadratic. We also show estimates for a
linear spline. These estimates are much different, indicating little effect of choosing a business
major on the outcomes we consider. This is due to the fact that, as the Figures 3-5 and A-3
demonstrate, the linear specification does a poor job of fitting the data. The quadratic fit is
far better, which is underscored by the similarity of the results when we include a cubic spline.
    As shown in Table 6 and Figure A-2, there is an increase in communications majors at
the GPA cutoffs. This appears to be an outlier in the data, however. To determine the
extent to which our results reflect the returns to communications, Table A-5 presents donut
RD estimates that exclude those with GPAs within 0.1 or 0.05 of each cutoff. We previously
showed in Table A-1 that with a donut of 0.1 the positive communications estimate falls and
becomes statistically insignificant in the 0.75 and 1.0 bandwidths. In this table we look at how
the donut estimates affect outcomes directly. The first stage estimated impacts on majoring in
business are similar and the second stage estimates are, if anything, larger than the baseline
results. However, they are quite imprecise. Nonetheless, that the point estimates increase when
we exclude those proximate to the threshold suggests our baseline results are not being driven
by communications majors.



5     Conclusion

In this paper, we provide new evidence on the returns to choice of major using administratively-
linked unemployment insurance, K-12 and higher education data from the State of Texas, with
a particular focus on the undergraduate business major. This allows us to track earnings of
students well after completing their college careers and measure detailed educational attainment
outcomes. We identify five public universities in Texas in which GPA minima were in effect
that regulated the ability of students to switch into a business major once enrolled. Using these
cutoffs, we estimate regression discontinuity models that identify the causal effect of selecting
a business major for students who just qualify for the option to take on a business major on


                                               28
postsecondary and labor market outcomes. While we focus on only one major - business -
these are the first US-based estimates of the returns to college major using techniques that
can separate student selection effects from causal effects. Furthermore, business is the most
popular single major both in Texas and throughout the United States, making it of high interest
to study in its own right.
   We show that the GPA thresholds employed by the five universities lead to large changes in
the likelihood a student majors in business. There is suggestive, albeit statistically insignificant,
evidence that majoring in business increases 6- and 8-year graduation rates, and we find that
selecting a business major among those at the discontinuity increases earnings 12 or more years
after initial enrollment by 127%. Earnings effects are localized to women, while educational
attainment effects are localized to men. Additionally, most of the educational and labor mar-
ket outcome effects are driven by students who first selected a STEM major. The estimated
impact of majoring in business on earnings using the RD estimator differs substantially from
OLS estimates, even after aligning the distribution of counterfactual majors across estimators.
We argue this difference is likely coming from selection of students into majors based on com-
parative advantage, which is consistent with the OLS and RD estimates aligning more closely
for graduation if the sorting is driven by perceived labor market returns.




                                                 29
References

[1] Altonji, Joseph G., 1993. “The Demand for and Return to Education When Education
   Outcomes are Uncertain.” Journal of Labor Economics 11(1): 48-83.

[2] Altonji, Joseph G., Peter Arcidiacono and Arnaud Maurel. 2015. “The Analysis of Field
   Choice in College and Graduate School: Determinants and Wage Effects.” NBER Working
   Paper No. 21655.

[3] Altonji, Joseph G., Erica Blom and Costas Meghir. 2012. “Heterogeneity in Human Capital
   Investments: High School Curriculum, College Major, and Careers.” NBER Working Paper
   No. 17985.

[4] Andrews, Rodney J., Jing Li and Michael F. Lovenheim. 2016. “Quantile Treatment Effects
   of College Quality on Earnings.” Journal of Human Resources 51(1): 200-238.

[5] Andrews, Rodney J., Scott A. Imberman and Michael F. Lovenheim. 2016. “Recruiting
   and Supporting Low-Income, High-Achieving Students at Flagship Universities.” NBER
   Working Paper No. 22260.

[6] Angrist, Joshua D., Kathryn Graddy and Guido W. Imbens. 2000. “The Interpretation of
   Instrumental Variables Estimators in Simultaneous Equations Models with an Application
   to the Demand for Fish.” Review of Economic Studies 67: 499-527.

[7] Arcidiacono, Peter. 2004. “Ability Sorting and the Returns to College Major.” Journal of
   Econometrics 121(1-2): 343-375.

[8] Arcidiacono, Peter and Cory Koedel. 2014. “Race and College Success: Evidence from
   Missouri.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6(3): 20-57.

[9] Ashenfelter, Orley C. and Alan B. Krueger. 1994. “Estimates of the Economic Returns to
   Schooling from a New Sample of Twins.” American Economic Review 84(5): 1157-1173.

[10] Black, Dan A. and Jeffrey A. Smith. 2004. “How Robust is the Evidence on the Effects of
   College Quality? Evidence from Matching.” Journal of Econometrics 121(1-2): 99-124.

                                            30
[11] Black, Dan A. and Jeffrey A. Smith. 2006. “Estimating the Returns to College Quality
   with Multiple Proxies for Quality.” Journal of Labor Economics 24(3): 701-728.

[12] Bound, John, Michael F. Lovenheim and Sarah E. Turner. 2010. “Why Have College
   Completion Rates Declined? An Analysis of Changing Student Preparation and Collegiate
   Resources.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(3): 129-157.

[13] Bound, John, Michael F. Lovenheim and Sarah E. Turner. 2012. “Increasing Time to
   Baccalaureate Degree in the United States.” Education Finance and Policy 7(4): 375-424.

[14] Brewer, Dominic J., Eric R. Eide and Ronald G. Ehrenberg. 1999. “Does It Pay to At-
   tend an Elite Private College? Cross-Cohort Evidence on the Effects of College Type on
   Earnings.” Journal of Human Resources 34(1): 104-123.

[15] Card, David. 1995. “Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the
   Return to Schooling.” In L.N. Christofides, E.K. Grant, and R. Swidinsky, editors, Aspects
   of Labor Market Behaviour: Essays in Honour of John Vanderkamp. Toronto: University
   of Toronto Press.

[16] Carnevale, Anthony P., Jeff Strohl, and Michelle Melton. 2011. “What’s it Worth?: The
   Economic Value of College Majors.” Center on Education and the Workforce, Georgetown
   University.

[17] Dale, Stacey Berg and Alan B. Krueger. 2002. “Estimating the Payoff to Attending a
   More Selective College: An Application of Selection on Observables and Unobservables.”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(4): 1491-1527.

[18] Dale, Stacey B. and Alan B. Krueger. 2014. “Estimating the Effects of College Character-
   istics over the Career Using Administrative Earnings Data.” Journal of Human Resources
   49(2): 323-358.

[19] Goodman, Joshua, Michael Heurwitz and Jonathan Smith. 2015. “College Access, Initial
   College Choice, and Degree Completion.” NBER Working Paper No. 20996.



                                             31
[20] Grogger, Jeff and Eric Eide. 1995. “Changes in College Skills and the Rise in the College
   Wage Premium.” Journal of Human Resources 30(2): 280-310.

[21] Hastings, Justine S., Christopher A. Neilson, and Seth D. Zimmerman. 2013. “Are some
   degrees worth more than others? evidence from college admission cutoffs in Chile.” NBER
   Working Paper No. 19241.

[22] Hamermesh, Daniel S. and Stephen G. Donald. 2008. “The Effect of College Curricu-
   lum on Earnings: An Affinity Identifier for Non-ignorable Non-response Bias.” Journal of
   Econometrics 144(2): 479-491.

[23] Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud and Sergio Urzua. 2006. “The Effects of Cognitive and
   Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior .” Journal of Labor
   Economics 24(3): 411-482.

[24] Hershbein, Brad and Melissa Kearney. 2015. “Major Decisions: What Graduates Earn over
   Their Lifetimes.” Hamilton Project Report.

[25] Hoekstra, Mark. 2009. “The Effect of Attending the Flagship State University on Earnings:
   A Discontinuity-Based Approach.” Review of Economics and Statistics 91(4): 717-724.

[26] Hungerford, Thomas and Gary Solon. 1987. “Sheepskin Effects in the Returns to Educa-
   tion.” Review of Economics and Statistics 69(1): 175-177.

[27] Jaeger, David A. and Marianne E. Page. 1996. “Degrees Matter: New Evidence on Sheep-
   skin Effects in the Returns to Education.” Review of Economics and Statistics 78(4): 733-
   740.

[28] James, Estelle, Nabeel Alsalam, Joseph C. Conaty and Duc-Le To. 1989. “College Quality
   and Future Earnings: Where Should You Send Your Child to College?” American Economic
   Review 79(2): 247-252.

[29] Kane, Thomas J. and Cecilia Elena Rouse. 1995. “Labor-Market Returns to Two- and
   Four-Year College.” American Economic Review 85(3): 600-614.


                                             32
[30] Keane, Michael P. and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 1997. “The Career Decisions of Young Men.”
   Journal of Political Economy 105(3): 473-522.

[31] Kinsler, Josh and Ronni Pavan. 2015. “The Specificity of General Human Capital: Evi-
   dence from College Major Choice.” Journal of Labor Economics 33(4): 933-972.

[32] Kirkebøen, Lars, Edwin Leuven and Magne Mogstad. 2016. “Field of Study, Earnings, and
   Self-Selection.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.

[33] Koedel, Cory. 2011. “Grading Standards in Education Departments at Universities.” Ed-
   ucation Policy Analysis Archives 19(23).

[34] Lee, David. 2008. “Randomized Experiments from Non-Random Selection in U.S. House
   Elections.” Journal of Econometrics 142(2): 675-697

[35] Leppel, Karen. 2001. “The Impact of Major on College Persistence among Freshmen.”
   Higher Education 41(3): 327-342.

[36] Loury, Linda Datcher, and David Garman. 1995. “College Selectivity and Earnings.” Jour-
   nal of Labor Economics 13(2): 289-308.

[37] Rumberger, Russell W. and Scott L. Thomas. 1993. “The Economic Returns to College
   Major, Quality and Performance: A Multilevel Analysis of Recent Graduates.” Economics
   of Education Review 12(1): 1-19.

[38] McCrary, Justin. 2008. “Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discon-
   tinuity Design: A Density Test.” Journal of Econometrics 142(2): 698-714.

[39] St. John, Edward P., Shouping Hu, Ada Simmons, Deborah Faye Carter, and Jeff Weber.
   2004. “What Difference Does a Major Make? The Influence of College Major Field on
   Persistence by African American and White Students.” Research in Higher Education 45(3):
   209-232.

[40] Zimmerman, Seth D. 2014. “The Returns to College Admission for Academically Marginal
   Students.” Journal of Labor Economics 32(4): 711-754.


                                              33
   Figure 1: Distribution of Max GPA Conditional on Non-Business First Major




Max GPA is calculated as the maximum cumulative GPA during the 2nd to 4th semesters enrolled. The sample is restricted to
Texas residents who enroll as a first-time four-year student in a cohort and institution identified as having a GPA cutoff and who
do not select a business major in their 1st semester.




                 Figure 2: Final Major in Business as Function of Max GPA




Max GPA is calculated as the maximum cumulative GPA during the 2nd to 4th semesters enrolled. The sample is restricted to
Texas residents who enroll as a first-time four-year student in a cohort and institution identified as having a GPA cutoff and who
do not select a business major in their 1st semester.




                                                               34
                                    Figure 3: Six-Year Graduation Rate




Max GPA is calculated as the maximum cumulative GPA during the 2nd to 4th semesters enrolled. The sample is restricted to
Texas residents who enroll as a first-time four-year student in a cohort and institution identified as having a GPA cutoff and who
do not select a business major in their 1st semester.




                                                               35
              Figure 4: Effect of Exceeding Business GPA Cutoff on Earnings




                      (a) Adjusted Ln(Earnings) 10 or More Years After College Entry




                      (b) Adjusted Ln(Earnings) 12 or More Years After College Entry
GPA is calculated as the maximum cumulative GPA during the 2nd to 4th semesters enrolled. The sample is restricted to Texas
residents who enroll as a first-time four-year student in a cohort and institution identified as having a GPA cutoff and who do not
select a business major in their 1st semester.




                                                               36
                                Figure 5: Effect of Exceeding Business GPA Cutoff on Earnings by Gender




                           (a) 10+ Years Adjusted Ln(Earnings) - Males                (b) 12+ Years Adjusted Ln(Earnings) - Males




37
                         (c) 10+ Years Adjusted Ln(Earnings) - Females               (d) 12+ Years Adjusted Ln(Earnings) - Females

     GPA is calculated as the maximum cumulative GPA during the 2nd to 4th semesters enrolled. The sample is restricted to Texas residents who enroll as a
     first-time four-year student in a cohort and institution identified as having a GPA cutoff and who do not select a business major in their 1st semester. See
     text for details on construction of the earnings measures.
                                                                 Table 1: Summary Statistics

                            Background from HS Data                                             Outcomes
                                               Non-                                                             Non-
                             All    Business Business                                  All   Business         Business                            Final       First
                          Students Majors     Majors                                Students Majors           Majors                              Major      Major
                             (1)       (2)      (3)                                     (4)     (5)              (6)                                (7)        (8)
      Math Score            0.93      0.89     0.94              Adj Ln(Earn)         0.363   0.484            0.350       Business                0.09         -
      (SD)                 (0.44)    (0.46)   (0.44)             10+ Years           (0.673) (0.623)          (0.676)                             (0.29)        -
      Reading Score         0.77      0.67     0.78              Adj Ln(Earn)         0.357   0.478            0.344       Liberal Arts            0.21       0.30
      (SD)                 (0.39)    (0.45)   (0.39)             12+ Years           (0.764) (0.718)          (0.767)                             (0.41)     (0.46)
      Male                  0.47      0.57     0.46              Grad in               0.41    0.36             0.41       Soc Science             0.17       0.10
                           (0.50)    (0.50)   (0.50)             4 Years              (0.49)  (0.48)           (0.49)                             (0.38)     (0.30)
      Gifted                0.39      0.31     0.40              Grad in               0.79    0.79             0.79       Econ                    0.02       0.01
                           (0.49)    (0.46)   (0.49)             6 Years              (0.40)  (0.41)           (0.40)                             (0.16)     (0.09)
      At Risk               0.06      0.08     0.06              Grad in               0.84    0.85             0.84       STEM                    0.25       0.29




38
                           (0.24)    (0.27)   (0.24)             8 Years              (0.37)  (0.35)           (0.37)                             (0.43)     (0.46)
      College Plan          0.92      0.92     0.92              Grad School           0.16    0.08             0.17       Agriculture             0.05       0.02
                           (0.27)    (0.27)   (0.27)                                  (0.37)  (0.27)           (0.37)                             (0.21)     (0.13)
      Asian                 0.10      0.14     0.10              Transfers             0.13    0.23             0.12       Communications          0.10       0.05
                           (0.30)    (0.34)   (0.30)                                  (0.34)  (0.42)           (0.33)                             (0.29)     (0.21)
      Hispanic              0.12      0.10     0.12                                                                        Health                  0.05       0.08
                           (0.32)    (0.30)   (0.33)                                                                                              (0.21)     (0.27)
      Black                 0.05      0.06     0.05                                                                        Undeclared              0.02       0.08
                           (0.21)    (0.23)   (0.21)                                                                                              (0.13)     (0.27)
      White                 0.73      0.70     0.73                                                                        Other                   0.08       0.08
                           (0.44)    (0.46)   (0.44)                                                                                              (0.27)     (0.27)

      Observations         56,603        5,140       51,463                           56,603       5,140        51,463                            56,603     56,603
     Source: Linked K-12, higher education and quarterly earnings data as described in the text. The sample is restricted to Texas residents who enroll as a
     first-time four-year student in a cohort and institution identified as having a GPA cutoff and who do not select a business major in their 1st semester. Only
     students within -0.75 to 0.5 of a GPA cutoff are included in the table. Earnings include all earnings that occur 10 or 12 plus years after college entry that are
     residual to year-quarter-high school cohort means. Only earnings among those who work 5 quarters or more in the data are included. Final Major refers to
     the major at graduation or at last enrollment for non-graduates. First Major is the major in the first semester of enrollment. Because the sample is restricted
     to those whose first major is not business, this entry is left blank in column (8).
     Table 2: Rules and Characteristics of Published Cutoffs for Internal Transfers (Major Switching) to Business

                    Published                                      Published GPA        Empirically Identified             Cohorts with
     Institution    Rules                                         Threshold in 2015   GPA Thresholds 1999 - 2008       Identified Thresholds

     UT-Austin      Min 24 credits at UT-Austin.                        3.65                  3.20 - 3.65                   1999 - 2008
                    Max 2 application attempts by 4th semester.
                    Course requirements.

     Texas A&M      Min 30 credits at Texas A&M.                        3.30                  2.60 - 3.40            1999 - 2004, 2006 - 2008
                    Max 60 credits from all institutions.
                    Course requirements.

     Texas Tech     Min 18 credits.                                     3.00                  2.60 - 2.90          2002, 2004 - 2005, 2007 - 2008

     U Houston      30 - 45 credits.                                    3.00                  2.50 - 2.60                1999, 2000, 2005




39
     UT-Arlington   Min 12 credits in business courses.                 2.25                  2.55 - 2.75                2000, 2001, 2003
Table 3: Empirically Identified GPA Cutoffs by Cohort and Institution

            Institution      Entry Cohort       GPA    Estimate   t-statistic

            UT-Austin             1999          3.45    0.065         4.4
                                  2000          3.40    0.041         3.1
                                  2001          3.35    0.055         5.0
                                  2002          3.55    0.060         4.4
                                  2003          3.40    0.061         6.1
                                  2004          3.20    0.045         4.5
                                  2005          3.35    0.061         5.2
                                  2006          3.40    0.063         5.6
                                  2007          3.65    0.086         5.3
                                  2008          3.50    0.050         4.1

            Texas A& M            1999          2.60    0.083         4.1
                                  2000          3.30    0.103         5.4
                                  2001          3.15    0.049         2.9
                                  2002          3.30    0.063         3.3
                                  2003          3.40    0.052         2.9
                                  2004          3.05    0.037         2.6
                                  2006          3.00    0.048         3.3
                                  2007          3.10    0.052         3.6
                                  2008          2.70    0.061         4.2

            Texas Tech            2002          2.60    0.075         2.9
                                  2004          2.60    0.076         3.1
                                  2005          2.65    0.103         4.1
                                  2007          2.55    0.077         2.8
                                  2008          2.90    0.054         2.5

            U Houston             1999          2.50    0.115         3.3
                                  2000          2.60    0.102         2.8
                                  2005          2.60    0.089         2.9

            UT-Arlington          2001          2.75    0.099         2.7
                                  2002          2.70    0.102         3.5
                                  2003          2.55    0.086         3.1


           GPA is calculated as the student’s maximum cumulative GPA
           between the 2nd and 4th semesters enrolled, not including sum-
           mer semesters. The GPA is also re-centered to be relative to
           the cutoff in each institution-cohort. Samples are restricted to
           students whose first observed enrollment is in a four-year institu-
           tion and who are not declared for business in their first semester
           of enrollment and have a cumulative GPA of at least 2.0. For
           each institution-cohort, we estimate a separate regression of hav-
           ing a final major in business on a linear spline in maximum GPA
           between semesters 2 and 4 and a cutoff indicator progressively in-
           creased by 0.05 grade points from 2.5 to 3.8. The GPA value that
           provides the cutoff estimate with the largest t-statistic for that
           institution-cohort is shown here provided the t-statistic exceeds
           2.50.




                                           40
                             Table 4: Balance Tests of GPA Cutoffs on Student Characteristics

                                                          Writing           SAT             SAT                  ACT
                             Math          Reading       (Std Dev)         Verbal           Math              Composite
      Model                (Std Dev)      (Std Dev)     1999 - 2003      2004 - 2008     2004 - 2008          2004 - 2008             Male

      No FE                   0.002         0.001           -0.003            -1.0            -2.7                -0.06              0.006
                             (0.012)       (0.007)         (0.006)           (5.4)           (4.6)               (0.15)             (0.019)
      Inst-Cohort FE          -0.005        -0.003          -0.008            -2.4           -4.2*                -0.11              0.009
                             (0.010)       (0.004)         (0.007)           (3.3)           (2.4)               (0.12)             (0.018)

      Observations           56,603         56,603         45,738           19,161          19,161                9,907              56,603

      Model                   Asian       Hispanic         White            Black          At Risk       Econ Disadvantage           Gifted

      No FE                   0.002         -0.001          -0.002          0.001            -0.003               0.001            -0.017***
                             (0.005)       (0.004)         (0.007)         (0.003)          (0.004)              (0.003)            (0.005)
      Inst-Cohort FE          0.002         -0.003         -0.0001          0.002            -0.003              -0.0002           -0.021***




41
                             (0.003)       (0.004)         (0.005)         (0.003)          (0.004)              (0.003)            (0.004)

      Observations           56,603         56,603         56,603           56,603          56,603               56,603              56,603

     GPA is calculated as the student’s maximum cumulative GPA between the 2nd and 4th semesters enrolled, not including summer semesters.
     The GPA is also re-centered to be relative to the cutoff in each institution-cohort. The sample is restricted to Texas residents who enroll
     as a first-time four-year student in a cohort and institution identified as having a GPA cutoff and who do not select a business major in
     their 1st semester. Each estimate is from a separate regression of the listed variable on the GPA cutoff and a quadratic spline parametric
     smoother. Inst-cohort FE regressions also include institution-cohort fixed-effects. TAAS scores are in standard deviations of the statewide
     distribution. The bandwidth is 0.75 GPA points below, 0.5 GPA points above the cutoff. Standard errors are clustered by 0.1 point
     relative GPA (the running variable) bins. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
Table 5: Effect of Exceeding GPA Cutoff on Having a Final Major in Business

                                                                     Controls &
                            No Controls      Inst-Cohort FE        Inst-Cohort FE
            Bandwidth           (1)                (2)                   (3)

            (-0.5, 0.5)      0.0520***           0.0533***            0.0522***
                              (0.0042)            (0.0037)             (0.0041)
            Obs                47,272              47,272               47,272

            (-0.75, 0.5)     0.0486***           0.0495***            0.0488***
                              (0.0052)            (0.0047)             (0.0050)
            Obs                56,603              56,603               56,603

            (-1, 0.5)        0.0498***           0.0504***            0.0495***
                              (0.0045)            (0.0043)             (0.0047)
            Obs                63,965              63,965               63,965
           GPA is calculated as the student’s maximum cumulative GPA between the
           2nd and 4th semesters enrolled, not including summer semesters. The GPA
           is also re-centered to be relative to the cutoff in each institution-cohort.
           The sample is restricted to Texas residents who enroll as a first-time four-
           year student in a cohort and institution identified as having a GPA cutoff
           and who do not select a business major in their 1st semester. All models
           include a quadratic spline in GPA. Models with controls include information
           from high school records for 11th grade math and reading test scores, gifted
           status, gender, race, at-risk status, economic disadvantage, and whether
           the student had a college plan. Standard errors are clustered by 0.1 point
           relative GPA (the running variable) bins. *, **, and *** denote significance
           at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.




                                               42
                                                                     Table 6: Counterfactual Major Choices

                                    Business          Liberal      Social
      Bandwidth                  (from Table 5)        Arts       Science       Econ         STEM          Agriculture     Communications          Health     Undeclared         Other

      (-0.5, 0.5)                   0.0522***         -0.0095      -0.0067     -0.0056     -0.0366***       -0.0077*           0.0206***           -0.0051       -0.0018       -0.0082*
                                     (0.0041)        (0.0058)     (0.0081)    (0.0036)      (0.0071)        (0.0039)            (0.0022)          (0.0050)      (0.0020)       (0.0045)
      % of Counterfactual                              15.7%        11.1%       9.2%          60.4%          12.7%               -34.0%             8.4%          3.0%          13.5%

      (-0.75, 0.5)                  0.0488***         -0.0091      -0.0064 -0.0052*        -0.0319***         -0.0054          0.0146***           -0.0016       -0.0006       -0.0097**
                                     (0.0050)        (0.0055)     (0.0074) (0.0027)         (0.0070)         (0.0042)           (0.0030)          (0.0051)      (0.0018)        (0.0043)
      % of Counterfactual                              16.5%        11.6%    9.4%             57.7%            9.7%              -26.4%             2.9%          1.1%           17.5%

      (-1.0, 0.5)                   0.0495***         -0.0073      -0.0067     -0.0036     -0.0291***       -0.0094*           0.0158***           -0.0047       -0.0012       -0.0080*
                                     (0.0047)        (0.0057)     (0.0063)    (0.0024)      (0.0064)        (0.0037)            (0.0024)          (0.0047)      (0.0015)       (0.0042)
      % of Counterfactual                              13.5%        12.4%       6.6%          53.7%          17.3%               -29.2%             8.7%          2.2%          14.8%
     GPA is calculated as the student’s maximum cumulative GPA between the 2nd and 4th semesters enrolled, not including summer semesters. The GPA is also re-centered to be
     relative to the cutoff in each institution-cohort. The sample is restricted to Texas residents who enroll as a first-time four-year student in a cohort and institution identified as




43
     having a GPA cutoff and who do not select a business major in their 1st semester. Samples are restricted to students whose first observed enrollment is in a four-year institution
     and who are not declared for business in their first semester of enrollment. The models contain institution-cohort fixed effects, a quadratic spline in GPA and controls for 11th grade
     math and reading test scores, gifted status, gender, race, at-risk status, economic disadvantage, and whether the student had a college plan. Bandwidth is denoted as (distance
     below, distance above) the cutoff. The % Counterfactual is the negative of the ratio of each estimate to the business estimate, scaled such that they sum to 100. Standard errors
     are clustered by 0.1 point relative GPA (the running variable) bins. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
Table 7: IV Estimates of Majoring in Business on Education
         Outcomes

                   Grad in      Grad in Grad in         Attend Public
                   4 Years      6 Year 8 Years           Grad School        Transfer
 Bandwidth           (1)          (2)     (3)                (4)              (5)

                                    A. Bandwidth = (-0.5, 0.5)
 (-0.5, 0.5)         0.041       0.130       0.067           -0.090          -0.082
                    (0.136)     (0.136)     (0.140)         (0.176)         (0.102)
 Observations       47,272      47,272      47,272          47,272          47,272
                                    B. Bandwidth = (-0.75, 0.5)
 (-0.75, 0.5)        0.008       0.181       0.121           0.016           -0.175
                    (0.157)     (0.155)     (0.157)         (0.194)         (0.123)
 Observations       56,603      56,603      56,603          56,603          56,603
                                    C. Bandwidth = (-1.0, 0.5)
 (-1.0, 0.5)         0.010       0.202       0.148           -0.003          -0.178
                    (0.157)     (0.155)     (0.154)         (0.183)         (0.113)
 Observations       63,965      63,965      63,965          63,965          63,965

GPA is calculated as the student’s maximum cumulative GPA between the 2nd and
4th semesters enrolled, not including summer semesters. The GPA is also re-centered
to be relative to the cutoff in each institution-cohort. The sample is restricted to
Texas residents who enroll as a first-time four-year student in a cohort and institution
identified as having a GPA cutoff and who do not select a business major in their
1st semester. All models include institution-cohort fixed-effects, a quadratic spline
in GPA, 11th grade math and reading test scores, gifted status, gender, race, at-risk
status, economic disadvantage, and whether the student had a college plan. Band-
width is denoted as (distance below, distance above) the cutoff. Standard errors are
clustered by 0.1 point relative GPA (the running variable) bins. *, **, and *** denote
significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.




                                          44
                               Table 8: IV Estimates of Majoring in Business on Earnings

                                                   At Least 5 Quarters                                At Least 1 Quarter
                                                   of Positive Earnings                               of Positive Earnings
      Years after College Entry          No         Inst-Cohort        Controls &      No       Inst-Cohort   Controls &
      Included in Earnings             Controls          FE          Inst-Cohort FE Controls         FE     Inst-Cohort FE
                                         (1)             (2)               (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)
                                                                        A. Bandwidth = (-0.5, 0.5)
      10+ Yrs                            0.443         0.387*             0.397*            0.490          0.357             0.301
                                        (0.285)        (0.223)            (0.192)          (0.439)        (0.413)           (0.394)
                                        26,544         26,544             26,544           31,754         31,754            31,754
      12+ Yrs                           0.607*         0.620*            0.596**            0.680          0.702             0.669
                                        (0.344)        (0.300)           (0.263)           (0.513)        (0.479)           (0.431)
                                        23,358         23,358            23,358            24,351         24,351            24,351
                                                                        B. Bandwidth = (-0.75, 0.5)
      10+ Yrs                            0.481         0.439*            0.434**            0.485          0.377             0.325
                                        (0.300)        (0.234)           (0.199)           (0.402)        (0.391)           (0.362)




45
                                        31,998         31,998             31,998           38,291         38,291            38,291
      12+ Yrs                           0.846*        0.853**            0.822**            0.721          0.741             0.723
                                        (0.456)       (0.384)            (0.352)           (0.505)        (0.477)           (0.427)
                                        28,277         28,277             28,277           29,473         29,473            29,473
                                                                        C. Bandwidth = (-1.0, 0.5)
      10+ Yrs                           0.467*         0.421*             0.360*            0.446          0.328             0.245
                                        (0.274)        (0.225)            (0.187)          (0.386)        (0.384)           (0.349)
                                        36,330         36,330             36,330           43,476         43,476            43,476
      12+ Yrs                           0.764*        0.761**            0.651**            0.753         0.764*             0.663*
                                        (0.372)       (0.328)            (0.290)           (0.459)        (0.445)           (0.385)
                                        32,191         32,191             32,191           33,561         33,561            33,561

     GPA is calculated as the student’s maximum cumulative GPA between the 2nd and 4th semesters enrolled, not including summer
     semesters, and is re-centered to be relative to the cutoff in each institution-cohort. Samples are restricted to Texas residents who
     enroll as a first-time four-year student in a cohort and institution identified as having a GPA cutoff and who do not select a business
     major in their 1st semester. All models include a quadratic spline in GPA. Models with controls include 11th grade math and reading
     test scores, gifted status, gender, race, at-risk status, economic disadvantage, and whether the student had a college plan. Bandwidth
     is denoted as (distance below, distance above) the cutoff. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 0.1 relative GPA bins. *,
     **, and *** denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively. Observation counts are shown below the standard errors.
       Table 9: OLS Estimates of Impacts of College Major Choice on Education Outcomes and Earnings - RD Sample

                             Adj Ln (Earn)     Adj Ln(Earn)       In Sample         In Sample     Graduate in     Graduate in   Graduate in   Enroll in TX   Transfers to
                            10+ Years After   12+ Years After   10+ Years After   10+ Years After   4 Years         6 Years       8 Years     Public Grad    Other Public
      Fields Relative to     College Entry     College Entry     College Entry     College Entry                                                School        Institution
      Business                    (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)           (5)             (6)            (7)          (8)             (9)

      Liberal Arts             -0.327***         -0.330***         -0.071***         -0.064***       -0.099***     -0.104***     -0.104***         0.012          -0.026
                                 (0.021)           (0.026)           (0.015)          (0.015)          (0.011)      (0.021)       (0.021)         (0.010)        (0.018)
      Soc Science              -0.228***         -0.225***          -0.041**          -0.030*          -0.026*       -0.009        -0.012        0.077***      -0.115***
                                 (0.021)           (0.026)           (0.015)          (0.016)          (0.013)      (0.013)       (0.013)         (0.012)        (0.011)
      Economics                 0.181***          0.206***             0.015            0.007           -0.015       -0.001        0.0006       -0.087***        -0.012*
                                 (0.020)           (0.028)           (0.022)          (0.022)          (0.016)      (0.012)       (0.010)         (0.015)       (0.0007)
      STEM                      0.090***          0.105***             0.008           0.016         -0.114***        0.001       -0.0001        0.079***      -0.115***
                                 (0.016)           (0.021)           (0.015)          (0.014)          (0.012)      (0.016)       (0.014)         (0.014)        (0.010)
      Agriculture              -0.197***         -0.171***            -0.025           -0.019           -0.013        0.009        0.001         0.036***      -0.158***
                                 (0.031)           (0.039)           (0.015)          (0.016)          (0.014)      (0.016)       (0.015)         (0.012)        (0.017)
      Comm                     -0.177***         -0.168***         -0.070***         -0.068***        0.103***      0.035**         0.019       -0.044***      -0.116***
                                 (0.022)           (0.028)           (0.012)          (0.011)          (0.011)      (0.013)       (0.013)         (0.015)        (0.014)




46
      Health                      -0.024            -0.051           0.046**          0.042**        -0.275***     -0.363***     -0.376***       0.150***       0.220***
                                 (0.031)           (0.036)           (0.018)          (0.018)          (0.023)      (0.025)       (0.028)         (0.029)        (0.035)
      Other                    -0.136***         -0.140***            -0.020           -0.016        -0.135***     -0.071***     -0.065***       0.051***      -0.039***
                                 (0.025)           (0.029)           (0.014)          (0.014)          (0.016)      (0.018)       (0.018)         (0.012)        (0.012)
      Undeclared               -0.309***         -0.310***         -0.110***           -0.103           -0.236     -0.623***     -0.715***        -0.024*       0.319***
                                 (0.031)           (0.038)           (0.016)          (0.015)          (0.036)      (0.029)       (0.021)         (0.014)        (0.058)

      Business Relative        0.154***          0.144***           0.028*             0.022          0.055***      0.085***      0.093***      -0.050***      0.060***
      to All Other Fields       (0.015)           (0.020)           (0.014)           (0.014)          (0.009)       (0.022)       (0.023)       (0.011)        (0.017)

      Observations              31,998            28,277            56,603             56,603          56,603        56,603        56,603        56,603         56,603
     Adjusted log earnings models are restricted to individuals with at least 5 quarters of positive earnings. The sample is restricted to Texas residents who enroll
     as a first-time four-year student in a cohort and institution identified as having a GPA cutoff and who do not select a business major in their 1st semester. Only
     students within -0.75 to 0.5 GPA points of a cutoff are included in the regression. All models include institution-cohort fixed effects, high school fixed-effects,
     and controls from high school records for 11th grade math and reading test scores, gifted status, gender, race, at-risk status, economic disadvantage, and
     whether the student had a college plan. Restricted to first-time first-year students who attended a public high school in Texas. Standard errors clustered by
     institution-cohort. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
                           Table 10: Heterogenous Impacts of Majoring in Business (IV Estimates)


                                         Adj Ln(Earn)        Adj Ln(Earn)
                             First       5 Quarter Min       5 Quarter Min        Grad in Grad in          Grad in     Attend Public
                             Stage          10+ Yrs             12+ Yrs           4 Years 6 Years          8 Years      Grad School Transfer
      Subsample               (1)             (2)                 (3)               (4)     (5)              (6)            (7)       (8)
      Males                0.051***           -0.272               0.151           0.258      0.531**       0.247           -0.054          -0.282*
                            (0.007)          (0.299)              (0.573)         (0.256)     (0.213)      (0.174)         (0.242)          (0.160)
                            26,534           15,153               13,490          26,534      26,534       26,534          26,534           26,534

      Females              0.046***         1.173***              1.417**          -0.219       -0.140      0.011           0.091            -0.063
                            (0.007)          (0.417)              (0.531)         (0.133)      (0.120)     (0.188)         (0.232)          (0.153)
                            30,069           16,845                14,787         30,069       30,069      30,069          30,069           30,069

      Non-Stem             0.054***           0.153                0.564           0.140        0.108       0.034           -0.148          -0.346*
      1st Major             (0.006)          (0.208)              (0.385)         (0.155)      (0.169)     (0.158)         (0.181)          (0.181)




47
                            39,963           23,079               20,275          39,963       39,963      39,963          39,963           39,963

      Stem                 0.037***          1.513**              1.613*           -0.415     0.510**      0.467**          0.577           0.374*
      1st Major             (0.010)          (0.599)              (0.929)         (0.475)     (0.228)      (0.225)         (0.371)          (0.196)
                            16,640            8,919                8,002          16,640      16,640       16,640          16,640           16,640

      UT-Austin            0.037***          0.637*               0.944*           -0.084       0.378       0.327           0.235           -0.285*
      & TAMU Only           (0.005)          (0.347)              (0.430)         (0.273)      (0.258)     (0.227)         (0.306)          (0.150)
                            46,018           24,900               22,716          46,018       46,018      46,018          46,018           46,018

     The table shows IV estimates of the effect of majoring in business on each outcome for several subsamples. GPA is calculated as the student’s
     maximum cumulative GPA between the 2nd and 4th semesters enrolled, not including summer semesters. The GPA is also re-centered to be
     relative to the cutoff in each institution-cohort. Samples are restricted to Texas residents who enroll as a first-time four-year student in a
     cohort and institution identified as having a GPA cutoff and who do not select a business major in their 1st semester. All models include
     institution-cohort fixed-effects, a quadratic spline in GPA, 11th grade math and reading test scores, gifted status, gender, race, at-risk status,
     economic disadvantage, and whether the student had a college plan. Bandwidth is 0.75 grade points below and 0.5 grade points above the
     cutoff. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 0.1 point relative GPA (the running variable) bins. *, **, and *** denote significance
     at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively. 5% and 10% levels, respectively. Observation counts are shown below the standard errors.
A   Online Appendix




                      48
Figure A-1: Discontinuity Density Test (McCrary, 2008)




                          49
Figure A-2: Other Final Majors as Functions of Max GPA
                     (a) Social Science




                      (b) Economics




               (c) Liberal Arts & Humanities




                            50
    (d) Health




  (e) Agriculture




(f ) Communications




        51
                                       (d) Other Major




                                        (e) Undeclared




Max GPA calculated as the maximum cumulative GPA during the 2nd to 4th semesters
enrolled. Sample is restricted to TX residents who enroll as a first-time four-year student and
do not select a business major in their 1st semester.




                                              52
                         Figure A-3: Additional Education Outcomes
                                           (a) 4-Year Graduation




                                           (b) 8-Year Graduation




                                    (c) Public Grad School Attendance




                                              (d) Transferring




Max GPA calculated as the maximum cumulative GPA during the 2nd to 4th semesters enrolled. Sample is
restricted to TX residents who enroll as a first-time four-year student and do not select a business major in
their 1st semester.                                     53
Figure A-4: Institution-Year Business Major by GPA Plots - UT at Austin




                Cutoff = 3.45                Cutoff = 3.40




                Cutoff = 3.35                Cutoff = 3.55




                Cutoff = 3.40                Cutoff = 3.20




                Cutoff = 3.35                Cutoff = 3.40




                Cutoff = 3.65                Cutoff = 3.50




                                  54
Figure A-5: Institution-Year Business Major by GPA Plots - Texas A&M




               Cutoff = 2.60                Cutoff = 3.30




               Cutoff = 3.15                Cutoff = 3.30




               Cutoff = 3.40                Cutoff = 3.05




               Cutoff = 3.30                Cutoff = 3.30




               Cutoff = 2.70




                                 55
Figure A-6: Institution-Year Business Major by GPA Plots - Texas Tech




               Cutoff = 2.60                Cutoff = 2.55




               Cutoff = 2.65                Cutoff = 2.55




               Cutoff = 2.90




                                 56
Figure A-7: Institution-Year Business Major by GPA Plots - University of Houston




                    Cutoff = 2.50                 Cutoff = 2.60




                    Cutoff = 2.60




 Figure A-8: Institution-Year Business Major by GPA Plots - UT at Arlington




                    Cutoff = 2.75                 Cutoff = 2.70




                    Cutoff = 2.55




                                       57
Figure A-9: T-Statistic For Cutoff by GPA, Institution, and Year




                               58
                                                Table A-1: Counterfactual Major Choices - 0.1 Grade Point Donut

                                  Business       Liberal       Social
      Bandwidth                                   Arts        Science       Econ         STEM        Agriculture      Communications            Health       Undeclared        Other

      (-0.5, 0.5)                 0.0460**       -0.0108      0.0198       -0.0067     -0.0442**        -0.0077            0.0187**           -0.0324***        0.0022         -0.0037
                                  (0.0179)      (0.0196)     (0.0151)     (0.0084)      (0.0160)       (0.0071)            (0.0079)            (0.0069)        (0.0051)       (0.0086)
      % of Counterfactual                        -16.7%       30.6%        -10.3%        -68.2%         -11.9%              28.9%               -50.0%           3.4%           -5.7%

      (-0.75, 0.5)                0.0455*** -0.0048           0.0173       -0.0011 -0.0353**            -0.0055             0.0010            -0.0145**         0.0045         -0.0147
                                   (0.0132) (0.0136)         (0.0114)     (0.0053) (0.0131)            (0.0074)            (0.0067)            (0.0059)        (0.0028)       (0.0100)
      % of Counterfactual                    -9.0%            32.6%         -2.1%   -66.5%              -10.4%               1.9%               -27.3%           8.5%          -27.7%

      (-1.0, 0.5)                 0.0505*** -0.0015           0.0143       0.0031 -0.0322**            -0.0161**            0.0071            -0.0204***        0.0023         -0.0112
                                   (0.0115) (0.0118)         (0.0090)     (0.0051) (0.0119)             (0.0078)           (0.0054)            (0.0040)        (0.0029)       (0.0091)
      % of Counterfactual                    -2.7%            26.2%         5.7%    -59.0%               -29.5%             13.0%               -37.4%           4.2%           22.2%
     GPA is calculated as the student’s maximum cumulative GPA between the 2nd and 4th semesters enrolled, not including summer semesters. The GPA is also re-centered to
     be relative to the cutoff in each institution-cohort. The sample is restricted to Texas residents who enroll as a first-time four-year student in a cohort and institution identified




59
     as having a GPA cutoff and who do not select a business major in their 1st semester. Samples are restricted to students whose first observed enrollment is in a four-year
     institution and who are not declared for business in their first semester of enrollment. The models contain institution-cohort fixed effects, a quadratic spline in GPA and
     controls for 11th grade math and reading test scores, gifted status, gender, race, at-risk status, economic disadvantage, and whether the student had a college plan. Bandwidth
     is denoted as (distance below, distance above) the cutoff. Observations within 0.1 grade points of the cutoff are dropped. Standard errors are clustered by 0.1 point relative
     GPA (the running variable) bins. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
                                                        Table A-2: Impacts of Majoring in Business on Earnings - Reduced-Form

                                                                     At Least 5 Quarters                                                                  At Least 1 Quarter
                                                                     of Positive Earnings                                                                 of Positive Earnings
      Years after College Entry No Controls             Inst-Cohort FE         Controls &         In Earnings Sample No Controls Inst-Cohort FE                      Controls &         In Earnings Sample
      Included in Earnings                                                   Inst-Cohort FE         Controls & FE                                                  Inst-Cohort FE         Controls & FE
                                    (1)                        (2)                 (3)                    (4)             (5)          (6)                               (7)                  (8) (8)
                                                                                                         A. Bandwidth = (-0.5, 0.5)
      10+ Yrs                              0.025             0.023*               0.023**                  0.005                0.029               0.022                0.018                  0.009
                                          (0.015)            (0.012)              (0.011)                 (0.007)              (0.025)             (0.025)              (0.024)                (0.008)
                                          31,998             26,544               26,544                  47,272               31,754              31,754               31,754                 47,272
      12+ Yrs                              0.031              0.033               0.031**                  -0.001               0.037               0.038                0.036                  -0.003
                                          (0.016)            (0.014)              (0.013)                 (0.007)              (0.026)             (0.024)              (0.022)                (0.010)
      Observations                        23,358             23,358                23,358                 47,272               24,351              24,351               24,351                 47,272
                                                                                                          B. Bandwidth = (-0.75, 0.5)
      10+ Yrs                             0.025*             0.024*               0.024**                  0.007                0.028               0.022                0.019                  0.009
                                          (0.014)            (0.012)              (0.010)                 (0.006)              (0.022)             (0.022)              (0.021)                (0.008)
                                          31,998             31,998               31,998                  56,603               38,291              38,291               38,291                 56,603
      12+ Yrs                              0.040             0.042*               0.040**                  0.004                0.037               0.038               0.037*                  0.002
                                          (0.019)            (0.017)              (0.015)                 (0.007)              (0.024)             (0.023)              (0.020)                (0.010)
                                          28,277             38,277               28,277                  56,603               29,473              29,473               29,473                 56,603




60
                                                                                                           C. Bandwidth = (-1.0, 0.5)
      10+ Yrs                             0.025*             0.024*               0.020*                   0.009                0.026               0.019                0.014                  0.011
                                          (0.014)            (0.012)              (0.010)                 (0.007)              (0.022)             (0.022)              (0.020)                (0.008)
                                          36,330             36,330               36,330                  63,965               43,476              43,476               43,476                 63,965
      12+ Yrs                             0.039**            0.040**              0.034**                  0.005                0.041              0.042*               0.036*                  0.002
                                          (0.018)            (0.016)              (0.014)                 (0.007)              (0.024)             (0.023)              (0.019)                (0.010)
                                          32,191             32,191               32,191                  63,965               33,561              33,561               33,561                 63,965

     The table shows estimates of the effect of surpassing a GPA threshold on each outcome. GPA is calculated as the student’s maximum cumulative GPA between the 2nd and 4th semesters enrolled, not
     including summer semesters. The GPA is also re-centered to be relative to the cutoff in each institution-cohort. Samples are restricted to Texas residents who enroll as a first-time four-year student in a
     cohort and institution identified as having a GPA cutoff and who do not select a business major in their 1st semester. All models include a quadratic spline in GPA. Models with controls include 11th
     grade math and reading test scores, gifted status, gender, race, at-risk status, economic disadvantage, and whether the student had a college plan. Bandwidth is denoted as (distance below, distance above)
     the cutoff. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 0.1 point relative GPA (the running variable) bins. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively. Observation
     counts are shown below the standard errors.
               Table A-3: IV Estimates of Majoring in Business on Being in the Earnings Sample

                                                   At Least 5 Quarters                                At Least 1 Quarter
                                                   of Positive Earnings                               of Positive Earnings
      Years after College Entry          No         Inst-Cohort        Controls &      No       Inst-Cohort   Controls &
      Included in Earnings             Controls          FE          Inst-Cohort FE Controls         FE     Inst-Cohort FE
                                         (1)             (2)               (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)
                                                                        A. Bandwidth = (-0.5, 0.5)
      10+ Yrs                            -0.224         0.098              0.101            0.382          0.165             0.175
                                        (0.239)        (0.139)            (0.136)          (0.314)        (0.157)           (0.152)
                                        47,272         47,272             47,272           47,272         47,272            47,272
      12+ Yrs                            -0.156         -0.008             -0.010           -0.214         -0.059            -0.063
                                        (0.252)        (0.145)            (0.143)          (0.287)        (0.192)           (0.190)
                                        47,272         47,272             47,272           47,272         47,272            47,272
                                                                        B. Bandwidth = (-0.75, 0.5)
      10+ Yrs                            -0.189         0.144              0.146            0.389          0.179             0.185
                                        (0.214)        (0.138)            (0.134)          (0.342)        (0.166)           (0.160)
                                        56,603         56,603             56,603           56,603         56,603            56,603




61
      12+ Yrs                            -0.108         0.073              0.071            -0.144         0.045             0.043
                                        (0.256)        (0.153)            (0.148)          (0.313)        (0.215)           (0.211)
                                        56,603         56,603             56,603           56,603         56,603            56,603
                                                                        C. Bandwidth = (-1.0, 0.5)
      10+ Yrs                            -0.131         0.172              0.179            0.423          0.200             0.212
                                        (0.205)        (0.136)            (0.134)          (0.330)        (0.163)           (0.159)
                                        63,965         63,965             63,965           63,965         63,965            63,965
      12+ Yrs                            -0.043         0.101              0.103            -0.106         0.046             0.047
                                        (0.253)        (0.151)            (0.148)          (0.302)        (0.207)           (0.211)
                                        63,965         63,965             63,965           63,965         63,965            63,965

     GPA is calculated as the student’s maximum cumulative GPA between the 2nd and 4th semesters enrolled, not including summer
     semesters, and is re-centered to be relative to the cutoff in each institution-cohort. Samples are restricted to Texas residents who
     enroll as a first-time four-year student in a cohort and institution identified as having a GPA cutoff and who do not select a business
     major in their 1st semester. All models include a quadratic spline in GPA. Models with controls include 11th grade math and reading
     test scores, gifted status, gender, race, at-risk status, economic disadvantage, and whether the student had a college plan. Bandwidth
     is denoted as (distance below, distance above) the cutoff. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 0.1 relative GPA bins. *,
     **, and *** denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively. Observation counts are shown below the standard errors.
     Table A-4: OLS Estimates of Impacts of College Major Choice on Education Outcomes and Earnings - Full Sample

                             Adj Ln (Earn)     Adj Ln(Earn)       In Sample         In Sample     Graduate in   Graduate in   Graduate in   Enroll in TX   Transfers to
                            10+ Years After   12+ Years After   10+ Years After   10+ Years After   4 Years       6 Years       8 Years     Public Grad    Other Public
      Fields Relative to     College Entry     College Entry     College Entry     College Entry                                              School        Institution
      Business                    (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)             (9)

      Liberal Arts               -0.216            -0.226            -0.045            -0.042        -0.059        -0.129        -0.141        -0.027         -0.007
                                (0.007)           (0.007)           (0.002)           (0.002)       (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.002)        (0.008)
      Soc Science                -0.190            -0.194            -0.022            -0.013         0.019         0.033         0.050         0.039          0.045
                                (0.006)           (0.006)           (0.003)           (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.003)        (0.006)
      Economics                   0.191             0.205             0.015             0.016         0.001         0.041         0.045        -0.046         -0.007
                                (0.013)           (0.015)           (0.008)           (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.009)       (0.010)       (0.006)        (0.015)
      STEM                        0.050            0.056             -0.014            -0.007        -0.036        -0.026        -0.025         0.025         -0.024
                                (0.005)           (0.006)           (0.002)           (0.002)       (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.002)        (0.005)
      Agriculture                -0.055            -0.052            -0.025            -0.021         0.013         0.126         0.138         0.003          0.036
                                (0.015)           (0.016)           (0.004)           (0.005)       (0.006)       (0.012)       (0.012)       (0.006)        (0.016)
      Comm                       -0.170            -0.168            -0.042            -0.043         0.058         0.070         0.075        -0.038          0.003
                                (0.007)           (0.008)           (0.004)           (0.004)       (0.007)       (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.006)        (0.008)




62
      Health                     -0.017            -0.025             0.003            -0.001        -0.090        -0.222        -0.266        -0.021          0.020
                                (0.006)           (0.007)           (0.002)           (0.002)       (0.005)       (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.002)        (0.011)
      Other                      -0.119            -0.126            -0.024            -0.023        -0.043        -0.100        -0.122        -0.007         -0.047
                                (0.005)           (0.006)           (0.002)           (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.002)        (0.006)
      Undeclared                 -0.185            -0.195            -0.080            -0.076        -0.090        -0.288        -0.364        -0.043         -0.119
                                (0.007)           (0.008)           (0.003)           (0.003)       (0.005)       (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.003)        (0.015)

      Business Relative          0.129             0.133             0.031             0.028         0.044         0.104         0.121         0.010          0.013
      to All Other Fields       (0.005)           (0.005)           (0.002)           (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.002)        (0.005)

      Observations              521,613           442,575           928,280          928,280        928,280       928,280       928,280       928,280        928,280
     Adjusted log earnings models restricted to individuals with at least 5 quarters of positive earnings. All models include institution-cohort fixed effects, high
     school fixed-effects, and controls from high school records for 11th grade math and reading test scores, gifted status, gender, race, at-risk status, economic
     disadvantage, and whether the student had a college plan. Restricted to first-time first-year students who attended a public high school in Texas. Standard
     errors clustered by institution-cohort.
     Table A-5: IV Estimates of the Effect of Majoring in Business on Postsecondary and Labor Market Out-
                comes - Robustness Checks

                            First Stage     Adj Ln(Earn)         Adj Ln(Earn) Grad in            Grad in      Grad in     Attend Public       Transfer
                                            5 Quarter Min        5 Quarter Min 4 Years           6 Year       8 Years      Grad School
                                               10+ Yrs              12+ Yrs
      Specification              (1)             (2)                  (3)        (4)                (5)          (6)             (7)             (8)
      Cubic Spline           0.051***             0.321              0.772**           0.112       0.112       0.057           0.123            -0.049
                              (0.005)            (0.298)             (0.363)          (0.181)     (0.074)     (0.085)         (0.140)          (0.085)
                              56,603             31,998              28,277           56,603      56,603      56,603          56,603           56,603

      Linear Spline          0.052***             -0.160              0.040            -0.027      -0.065      0.077           -0.055           0.064
                              (0.004)            (0.218)             (0.260)          (0.123)     (0.020)     (0.123)         (0.152)          (0.100)
                              56,603             31,998              28,277           56,203      56,203      56,203          56,203           56,203

      0.1 GPA Point          0.046***             0.909               1.052            0.101       -0.211      -0.462         -0.582**         -0.220*
      Donut                   (0.013)            (0.871)             (1.017)          (0.536)     (0.651)     (0.390)          (0.279)         (0.189)




63
                              47,155             26,665              23,586           47,155      47,155      47,155           47,155          47,155

      0.05 GPA Point         0.042***             0.716               1.351            -0.078      0.127       0.111           -0.319           -0.133
      Donut                   (0.009)            (0.448)             (0.860)          (0.306)     (0.365)     (0.438)         (0.377)          (0.212)
                              51,535             29,121              25,725           51,535      51,535      51,535          51,535           51,535

     GPA is calculated as the student’s maximum cumulative GPA between the 2nd and 4th semesters enrolled, not including summer semesters. The
     GPA is also re-centered to be relative to the cutoff in each institution-cohort. Samples are restricted to Texas residents who enroll as a first-time
     four-year student in a cohort and institution identified as having a GPA cutoff and who do not select a business major in their 1st semester.
     All models include institution-cohort fixed-effects, 11th grade math and reading test scores, gifted status, gender, race, at-risk status, economic
     disadvantage, and whether the student had a college plan. Bandwidth is 0.75 grade points below and 0.5 grade points above the cutoff. The first
     two rows show estimates using cubic and linear splines in the running variable. The second two rows show estimates using a quadratic spline in
     the running variable but excluding observations within 0.1 and 0.05 GPA points of the cutoffs, respectively. Standard errors in parentheses are
     clustered by 0.1 point relative GPA (the running variable) bins. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
     5% and 10% levels, respectively. Observation counts are shown below the standard errors.
