                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   INCOME MOBILITY, INCOME RISK AND WELFARE

                                          Tom Krebs
                                       Pravin Krishna
                                      William F. Maloney

                                      Working Paper 23578
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23578


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2017




We are grateful to seminar participants at Columbia, Harvard and Pennsylvania State University
for many useful comments. Particular thanks to Francois Bourguignon, Francisco Ferreira, Gary
Fields, and the other participants at the World Bank/Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona
Workshop on Mobility for very helpful discussions. Our appreciation to Edwin Goni and
Mauricio Sarrias for inspired research assistance. This work was partially supported by the
Regional Studies Program of the Office of the Chief Economist for Latin America at the World
Bank, the World Bank Research Support Budget and the Strategic Research Program. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Tom Krebs, Pravin Krishna, and William F. Maloney. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Income Mobility, Income Risk and Welfare
Tom Krebs, Pravin Krishna, and William F. Maloney
NBER Working Paper No. 23578
July 2017
JEL No. F0,J0,J6

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper presents a framework for the quantitative analysis of individual income dynamics,
mobility and welfare, with ex-ante identical individuals facing a stochastic income process and
market incompleteness implying that they are unable to insure against persistent shocks to
income. We show how the parameters of the income process can be estimated using repeated
cross-sectional data with a short panel dimension, and use a simple consumption-saving model
for quantitative analysis of mobility and welfare. Our empirical application, using data on
individual incomes from Mexico, provides striking results. Most of measured income mobility is
driven by measurement error or transitory income shocks and therefore (almost) welfare-neutral.
Only a small part of measured income mobility is due to either welfare-reducing income risk or
welfare-enhancing catching-up of low-income individuals with high-income individuals, both of
which, nevertheless, have economically significant effects on social welfare. Strikingly, roughly
half of the mobility that cannot be attributed to measurement error or transitory income shocks is
driven by welfare-reducing persistent income shocks. Decomposing mobility into its fundamental
components is thus crucial from the standpoint of welfare evaluation.

Tom Krebs                                       William F. Maloney
Department of Economics                         The World Bank
University of Mannheim                          Wmaloney@worldbank.org
68131 Mannheim
Germany
tkrebs@econ.uni-mannheim.de

Pravin Krishna
Johns Hopkins University
1740 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
and NBER
Pravin_Krishna@jhu.edu
I. Introduction

Income mobility, that is, the extent to which individuals move across different sections of the
income distribution, is a central issue in a variety of public policy discussions today.1 Income
mobility is important as it is seen as indicative of the opportunities afforded by society to
escape one’s origins, thus allowing low-income individuals to catch-up with those with higher
incomes. While such mobility may generally be seen as enhancing social welfare, it must
be recognized that individual income changes, and thus mobility, may also be driven by the
risk to incomes to which individuals are exposed,2 which may be welfare-reducing instead.

   In this paper, we develop an analytical framework for the estimation and welfare-theoretic
evaluation of individual (intra-generational) income dynamics that takes into account these
different (and, competing, from a welfare-theoretic perspective) drivers of income mobility.3
We begin by noting that the literature on income mobility has often focused on two important
questions: the quantitative/empirical measurement of the extent and nature of the change in
individual incomes and, separately, the social-welfare-theoretic evaluations of such changes.4
Two methodological issues have arisen in this area. First, the parametric formulations used in
   1
      In developing country contexts, see, for example, Hnatkovska, Lahiri and Paul (2012), who examine
income mobility across different castes in India and the recent World Bank flagship publication, Economic
Mobility and the Rise of the Middle Class (2012), which focuses on Latin America. Clearly income mobility
is a concern in developed countries as well – see, for instance, the recent analysis of mobility patterns in the
United States by Chetty et. al. (2014).
    2
      On the relevance of risk in income earnings, especially for the poor in developing countries, see the
discussion in Banerjee and Duflo (2011, Chapter 6) and also Collins et. al. (2009).
    3
      Our focus here is on intra-generational or within-lifetime mobility, as opposed to the related but distinct
concept of inter-generational mobility which looks at relative income gains achieved by individuals given the
position in the income distribution occupied by their parents. Our focus on intra-generational mobility is
driven by the fact that most longitudinal datasets on individuals do not support a study of inter-generational
mobility as they do not contain information on parental income or educational status. We should note that
focusing on intra-generational mobility nevertheless suffices for us to make our central point regarding the
role of risk in driving mobility.
    4
      For the former, see Lillard and Willis (1978), Shorrocks (1978b), Geweke, Marshal and Zarkin (1986),
Conlisk (1990) and Fields and Ok (1996). For the latter, see, Atkinson (1983), Markandya (1982, 1984),
Atkinson, Bourguignon and Morrison (1992), Dardononi (1993), and Gottschalk and Spolaore (2002). Ad-
ditionally, the discussion over suitable social (income) mobility measures (indices), which may be used to
evaluate mobility given the pattern of individual income changes in society, constitutes a very well researched
area that has generated a number of important contributions in recent years. See Fields and Ok (1999) for
a survey discussion.


                                                       1
the measurement of income changes are not easily used as inputs to the quantitative welfare-
theoretic analysis, thereby constituting a problematic gap between these two literatures.
Furthermore, as the literature has often pointed out, the measurement of dynamic income
changes is itself confronted by (at least) the following two problems. First, income data are
subject to measurement error and, second, a significant proportion of the observed income
changes may be simply temporary in nature - resulting, typically, in an overestimation of the
relevant mobility in income.5 This is also important from the perspective of welfare analysis,
as measurement error has no effect on workers’ welfare and transitory shocks to income
are perhaps easily smoothed out, resulting in small welfare effects. In addition, welfare
analysis is confronted by an additional challenge. Since individual utility is postulated as
taking consumption rather than income as its argument, its direct valuation requires reliable
data on individual consumption levels, which are often unavailable for developing countries.
To use the more easily available data on incomes, a theoretical framework is required that
translates the estimated income dynamics into consumption changes taking into account the
institutional constraints individual agents face.

   To highlight and explore the competing effects of welfare-enhancing “catch-up” relative
to welfare-reducing risky income changes on mobility, our conceptual focus in this paper
is on the income dynamics of ex-ante identical individuals. As we will discuss in detail in
subsequent sections of the paper, this corresponds to an examination of income changes and
mobility in “residual income”, income after conditioning for the standard determinants of
income such as education and experience. Our focus on “residual income” mobility allows
us to make our central point concerning the potentially welfare-reducing impact of income
mobility when it is driven by risky income changes, without having to engage a different and
difficult question regarding the welfare-theoretic evaluation of mobility between individuals
who are not ex-ante identical: For instance, how much convergence of incomes is optimal,
from a welfare perspective, between individuals with different initial education levels.6
   5
     See, for example, Lillard and Willis (1978) Solon (2001), Luttmer (2002), Fields et al (2003), Glewwe
(2004), and Antman and McKenzie (2007).
   6
     We note additionally, that residual income is a significant portion of income in our data (as indicated in
Table 2) and that measured residual income mobility is, nevertheless, not much different from unconditional
income mobility in our data.


                                                      2
   The analytical framework we develop to study income mobility provides a close link be-
tween the welfare theory and the empirical methodology used in the measurement of the
income dynamics, thereby helping to bridge the gap between these literatures. At the same
time, this framework overcomes many of the methodological problems that we have just dis-
cussed. Our approach consists of two steps. First, we follow a large empirical literature on
individual income dynamics and postulate a stochastic income process that is highly param-
eterized, but sufficiently elaborate to distinguish between changes in income resulting from
trend growth and other predictable factors and changes in income that are unpredictable.7
The unpredictable part of income change, in turn, has two components, one first degree
autoregressive (AR(1)) component reflecting persistent shocks to income and another com-
ponent that is i.i.d and captures transitory shocks and measurement error in the income
        8
data.       We show how income mobility, measured in relation to the correlation of incomes
over time,9 relates to the various parameters of the underlying income process. Further,
we show how the parameters of the income process can be estimated using an econometric
approach that exploits both the longitudinal and repeated cross-sectional features of income
data, and apply our estimation strategy to individual income data from Mexico (Sections
III-V).10 Our econometric approach is particularly suited for the application to Mexico and
other developing countries, where data sets with a long panel dimension do not exist, but
repeated cross-sectional observations with a very short panel dimension (rotating panel) are
available.
   7
      See, for example, Baker and Solon (2003) and Meghir and Pistaferri (2011) for a detailed discussion of
the literature.
    8
      Examples of transitory shocks are fluctuations in temporary layoffs, overtime labor supply, bonuses,
lottery prizes, and bequests. Permanent innovations are associated with, for instance, promotions, layoffs that
lower the value of the worker’s skill set, severe health shocks and accumulations of high quality experience.
    9
      Specifically, we use a quite basic and familiar measure, the Hart Index, which is the complement of
the correlation between the logarithm of incomes over times ( see Hart (1981) and Shorrocks (1993)). As
Fields and Ok (1996) discuss, however, the literature has recently made important advances in studying
the “multi-faceted concept” of mobility and a number of different theoretical measures, each capturing a
different aspect of mobility have been introduced. We have no contribution to make to this discussion and
simply use the Hart Index as our basic measure of mobility.
  10
      See Bourguignon, Goh and Kim (2006) for an interesting exercise that compares results on poverty
vulnerability (the propensity to move into poverty) obtained using panel data on incomes with those ob-
tained from repeated cross- sections instead and finds that model parameters recovered from pseudo-panels
approximate reasonably well those estimated directly from a true panel.


                                                      3
   In a second step, we follow the large literature on consumption-saving models to provide
a link between income dynamics, consumption, and welfare.11 To translate stochastic in-
come into consumption and welfare, we develop a dynamic general equilibrium model with
incomplete markets in which the consumption/saving choice of heterogeneous workers in the
presence of income variability is explicitly modeled. As is well known, general versions of
such models are difficult to solve, and most work in the literature has therefore been com-
putational. In contrast, we rely upon an extended version of the incomplete-markets model
developed and analyzed by Constantinides and Duffie (1996) and Krebs (2007) that is highly
tractable, but still rich enough to allow for tight links between the econometric framework
and the welfare-theoretic model. This approach allows us to provide a clear analytical and
quantitative discussion of these interrelated concepts, and specifically the role of income vari-
ability. We discuss in detail how different determinants of measured income mobility may
have quite different implications for welfare. Specifically, we show that the auto-correlation
coefficient of the AR(1) process (the catching-up parameter) measures “good mobility” in
the sense that a reduction in this parameter increases both mobility and welfare. In contrast,
social welfare is (almost) unaffected by measurement error or transitory income shocks even
though mobility increases with the variance of the i.i.d. component of labor income. Finally,
the variance of persistent income shocks (income risk) increases mobility, but decreases so-
cial welfare. This implies that two societies with the same initial distribution of income
and the same level of measured income mobility and aggregate growth may experience quite
different social welfare changes depending upon the different combinations of the underlying
income parameters. The welfare expressions that we derive are also functions of the income
parameters. Estimates of these parameters, as discussed above, thus allow for a quantitative
analysis of individual and social welfare.

   Two aspects of our analysis make our framework particularly suitable for application in
developing country contexts. First, our theoretical framework makes specific assumptions
regarding the (non-) availability of institutions to insurance against variations in permanent

  11
     See Deaton (1991) for the basic partial equilibrium model and Huggett (1993) and Aiyagari (1994) for
the seminal applications to general equilibrium analysis. See Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2009)
for a recent survey.



                                                    4
income. Agents are allowed to save, but not allowed to borrow. No other insurance schemes,
such as those that may be organized by a government, exist. We believe this characterization
to be closer to that of developing economies, but this analysis would be relevant in any con-
texts where such borrowing constraints bind and where the relevant social insurance schemes
are absent. Second, our estimation framework for estimating transitory and persistent in-
come risk, confronts, through the use of suitable moment conditions, a common feature of
developing country data sets on individual incomes, i.e., the availability of repeated cross-
sections of the data with a large number of observations, but with a short panel dimension.



   We present a quantitative implementation of our framework that underscores the im-
portance of decomposing income dynamics into its components. Specifically, an application
using data on individual incomes from Mexico yields striking results. Most of measured
income mobility is driven by measurement error or transitory income shocks and therefore
(almost) welfare-neutral, and only a small part of measured income mobility is due to either
welfare-reducing income risk or welfare-enhancing catching-up of low-income individuals with
high-income individuals. However, despite the small mobility effects, (idiosyncratic) persis-
tent income risk has significant negative effects on social welfare – eliminating or insuring it
would generate welfare gains that are equivalent to an increase in lifetime consumption by
about 10 percent even if workers are only moderately risk-averse (log-utility).12 Eliminating
the catch-up of low income individuals with high income individuals yields a loss in social
welfare of similar magnitude. Decomposing mobility into its fundamental components is
thus seen to be crucial from the standpoint of welfare evaluation.

   In sum, in this paper we make two contributions. First, we present a tractable framework
that provides a transparent link between income dynamics, mobility, and welfare. Second,
we apply our approach to individual income data from Mexico and show the importance of
decomposing income mobility into its fundamental components.
  12
     In comparison, for the same preference parameters, Lucas (2003) computes welfare cost of aggregate
consumption fluctuations in the US that are two orders of magnitude smaller. Thus, even though our
estimates of persistent income risk seem small when measured mobility is the yardstick, their welfare effect
is large indeed.


                                                     5
   We conclude the introduction with a general remark. In this paper, we use a tractable
model to provide a link between income dynamics and consumption and welfare. The sim-
plicity of our approach has the advantage of clarifying the basic channels that we like to
emphasize in this paper. However, it has the disadvantage of leaving out some additional
channels that are potentially important. For example, we use an exchange economy so that
any effect of income risk on physical capital accumulation (Aiyagari, 1994) or human capital
accumulation (Krebs, 2003) are ruled out by assumption. Further, we focus on households
with little financial wealth implying very strong effects of permanent labor income shocks
on consumption, a result that finds support in the data for households with little financial
wealth (Blundell, Pistaferri, and Peston 2008). In contrast, for wealthy households the ev-
idence indicates that the effect of permanent income shocks on consumption is less than
one-to-one (Blundell, Pistaferri, and Peston 2008). Moreover, endogenous labor supply and
payments from family members can provide consumption insurance, in particular in the
context of developing countries. Finally, we have adopted the time-honored assumptions of
time-additive expected utility preferences.13 Gottschalk and Spolaore (2002) analyze mobil-
ity and welfare in a setting with more general preferences that do not obey the independence
axiom. Extending our analysis to models that allow for non-expected utility preferences and
additional insurance channels are important topics for future research.


II. Income and Mobility

II.1. Income Process

Consider a large number of workers indexed by i. For notational ease, we focus on one
cohort of workers who enter the labor market for the first time in period t = 0 so that
t = 0, 1, . . . stands for both calendar time and age (experience) of the worker. Let yit stand
for the labor income of worker i in period t. Following a longstanding tradition in micro-
econometrics, we postulate that the log of yit is given by the sum of returns to observable
  13
    We also assume that the one-period utility function is logarithmic, but our analysis can easily be extended
to the general case of CRRA-utility functions.



                                                      6
                                                             14
worker characteristics, and ”residual” component:

                                         ln yit = λx · xit + vit                                       (1)

where xit denotes the vector of observable worker characteristics, λx denotes the correspond-
ing vector of coefficients and vit denotes residual income and is itself given by vit = ωit +ηit +µ
where ωit is a persistent component, ηit is transitory and µ denotes the mean of income.

   The persistent component, ωit , follows an AR(1) process

                                         ωi,t+1 = ρωit + i,t+1 ,                                      (2)

where ρ is a parameter measuring the persistence of shocks. The term  denotes a stochastic
innovation to labor income, which we assume to be i.i.d. over time and across individuals.
We further assume that the transitory component of labor income, ηit , is i.i.d. over time
and across individuals. Moreover, ηit and i,t+n are uncorrelated for all t and n. All random
variables are normally distributed so that labor income is log-normally distributed. More
specifically, we assume that it ∼ N (0, σ2 ), ηit ∼ N (0, ση2 ), and ωi0 ∼ N (0, σω2 0 ).

   Importantly, note that for expositional simplicity, we do not allow for individual means
in our specification (1) above, but simply impose that the mean of the income process µ is
the same for all individuals. However, theoretical expressions that we derive below can also
be derived by allowing for individual means, µi in (1). As we will discuss later (in Section
V), we are able to easily accommodate the presence of such individual “fixed effects” in our
empirical implementation.

   Equations (1) and (2) together imply that:
                                               t−1
                                               X
                              vit = ρt ωi0 +         ρt−n−1 i,n+1 + ηit + µ .                         (3)
                                               n=0

Thus, labor income in period t is determined by initial condition, ω0 , and stochastic changes,
the latter being represented by the transitory shocks, η, and permanent shocks, . From (3)
  14
    See, for example, Baker and Solon (2003) and Meghir and Pistaferri (2011) for a detailed discussion of
the literature. In contrast to some papers in the literature (Gottschalk and Moffitt, 1994, and Carroll and
Samwick, 1997), we do not impose the random walk restriction on the persistent component of labor income.

                                                       7
and our assumptions about , η, and ω0 it follows that expected labor income is E[lnyit ] = µ
and labor income uncertainty before ωi0 is known is given by
                                (                        2t
                                   ρ2t σω2 0 + ση2 + 1−ρ
                                                      1−ρ
                                                            2
                                                         2 σ if ρ 6= 1
                   var[vit ] =       2        2     2
                                                                        .                                    (4)
                                   σω0 + ση + tσ if ρ = 1


   As we have mentioned earlier, our study examines income mobility of ex-ante identical
individuals within their lifetimes (i.e., intra-generational income mobility).15 From (2), the
parameter ρ measures persistency of income and thus (1 − ρ) measures the extent to which
individuals with low levels of income “initially” will catch up with individuals with high
initial income. In our context, the “initial” period corresponds to the time of entry into the
work force after the completion of formal education. Since labor income may vary initially for
equivalent individuals, catching-up in this context measures the extent to which individuals
                                                                                          16
with initially low incomes catch up to those with initially high incomes.

II.2. Mobility

As noted in the introduction, our empirical measure of income mobility between 0 and t,
which we denote by mt , is the Hart index, defined as the complement of the correlation in
residual incomes at 0 and t (see Shorrocks (1993)):

                              mt = 1 − corr(vi0 , vit )                         (5)
                                         cov(vi0 , vit )
                                   = 1−                  ,
                                          σvi0 · σvit
                                         p                    p
   where we have used the notation σvi0 = var(vi0 ) and σvit = var(vit ). Using our
income specification from the previous section, we find the following expression for the co-
variance:
  15
      For recent work on intra-generational mobility, see Antman and McKenzie (2007), Cuesta and Pizzolitto
(2010), Dang et. al. (2011), and Cruces et. al (2011).
   16
      In the terminology of the growth literature, it measures convergence.To see this, suppose ρ < 1. In this
case, we have convergence towards the “steady state”: E[lnyit |ωi0 ] → µ. Let ∆0 = ln yi0 − d¯ be the initial
distance from the steady state and ∆t = ln yit − d¯ be the distance in period t. We can then define the time,
T , it takes to get halfway towards the steady state, which is simply the solution to ∆T /∆0 = 1/2. Using the
expression for ∆T and ∆0 , it is straightforward to see that T is increasing in ρ for ρ < 1, that is, an increase
in ρ reduces the speed of convergence.

                                                       8
                                                                t−1
                                                                X
                                                        t
                   cov(vi0 , vit ) = cov(ωi0 + ηi0 , ρ ωi0 +          ρt−n−1 i,n+1 + ηit + µ)              (6)
                                                                n=0
                                 = ρt σω2 0

Using (3) and (6), we find the following expression for income mobility:17
                         
                                              ρt σω
                                                  2
                         
                         
                           1  −   √ 2 2 2t 2 2 1−ρ2t 2 if ρ 6= 1
                                           r        0

                                    σω0 +ση ρ σω0 +ση +     σ
                   mt =                                 1−ρ2           .                                   (7)
                                            2
                                           σω0
                                   √       √
                          1 − σ2 +σ2 σ2 +σ2 +tσ2 if ρ = 1
                         
                         
                                              ω0   η   ω0   η   




        Equation (7) defines residual income mobility as a function of the parameters of interest,
σ2 ,   ση2 , and ρ. It is straightforward to show that mobility is increasing in the volatility
parameters σ2 and ση2 . This is intuitive as an increase in the variance of income shocks
increases the variability of individual incomes, lowering the correlation between incomes
across time, thus increasing mobility.

        Importantly, income mobility is decreasing in ρ:
                               ∂mt                 ∂mt                ∂mt
                                    > 0 ,               > 0 ,             < 0.                              (8)
                               ∂σ2                ∂ση2                ∂ρ

Intuitively, any increase in ρ increases income persistence, reducing the catching-up effect
and therefore reducing mobility.


III. Econometric Implementation

The discussion in the preceding sections has described how the different parameters of the
income process (σω2 0 , σ2 , ση2 and ρ) affect mobility. To get to a quantitative assessment of
these linkages, we turn next to the methodology and data used to estimate these parameters.
   17
    For ρ < 1, the ω-process has a stationary distribution. If we choose as initial distribution this stationary
                                                        2       2      2         2
distribution, the ω-process becomes stationary with
                                     t        2   2
                                                     σωt = σω0 = σ /(1 − ρ ). In this case the mobility
expression (7) reduces to mt = 1 − ρ / 1 + ση /σω0 .

                                                       9
III.1. Estimation

We continue to assume that log labor income, ln yit , is specified as in (1) but with some
elaboration to account for age cohorts as follows:
                                            X
                 ln yit = λt + λx · xit +       λz δ(zit ) + vit           (10 )
                                            z
                   vit = µ + ωit + ηit

   where, again, x0it is vector of observable individual characteristics beyond age (education,
education2 , gender), λt is a constant that varies by calendar time period (thus absorbing
the effects of macroeconomic factors such as aggregate productivity growth and aggregate
economic fluctuations on income), λx is a vector of coefficients for the vector of worker
characteristics x0 , and δ(zit ) are age-dummies, with λz being the corresponding coefficients.

   Equation (1’) resembles a typical Mincer specification for labor income for which the
residual, vit , is the sum of two unobserved stochastic components, ωit and ηit . As in Carroll
and Samwick (1997), we first use equation (1’) to estimate the residuals vit and then use
these estimated residuals to estimate, in a second step, the parameters of interest. As noted
above, this implies, importantly, that our mobility measure relates to residual income v
rather than unconditional income y.

   For notational simplicity, assume that all individuals i “are born” in period t = 0, so
that t and z simultaneously stand for age of the individual and calendar time. Equations (1)
and (2) which describe our labor income process imply that the change in residual income
variance with age is given by:

                   V ar[viz ] = var[(ωiz + ηiz )]
                                                  1 − ρ2z 2
                              = ση2 + ρ2z σω2 0 +        σ               (40 )
                                                  1 − ρ2 



(4’) links the changes in cross sectional residual income variances over for any age cohort z
with our parameters of interest. Unfortunately, however, (4’) is not sufficient to separately

                                                10
identify σω2 0 and σ2 since, as can be seen from the expression on the right hand side, both
evolve at the same rate with z. We therefore also use the covariance restriction,

                 cov(viz , vi,z+1 ) = cov((ωiz + ηiz ), (ωi,z+1 + ηi,z+1 ))
                                                    1 − ρ2z 2
                                    = ρ2z+1 σω2 0 +         ρσ                (60 )
                                                    1 − ρ2 


to achieve identification of all four parameters. Notice that (4’) requires, on the left hand
side, estimates of the cross-sectional variance of residual income for each age group z, while
(6’) requires that we use the panel dimension of our data set to estimate the covariances
in individuals’ residual incomes viz over time. Thus, our estimation strategy exploits both
the panel dimension and the repeated cross sections available in the data set. As in Carroll
and Samwick (1997), we use residual income data at the individual level to obtain unbiased
                                                                               2
estimators of the terms on the left hand side of (4’) and (6’). Specifically, viz and viz vi,z+1
serve as individual level ”observations” of the variance and covariance terms on the left hand
sides of (4’) and (6’) respectively.

   We emphasize here that equations (4’) and (6’) taken together enable separate identifi-
cation of the variance of initial incomes, σω2 0 , and the variance of persistent income shocks,
σ2 . Specifically, the system allows for initial income differences (determined possibly by het-
erogeneous but fixed and unobserved individual characteristics) and for persistent shocks to
income whose evolution over time (as contrasted with fixed individual characteristics which
do not change, by definition) enables the separate identification of these parameters. Initial
draws of persistent characteristics ωi0 will be important in determining income inequality,
but income mobility will nevertheless be determined by the magnitude of shocks to income
(as indicated in (7)).

   We estimate our system of two equations ((4’) and (6’)) using a simultaneous, non-
linear, seemingly unrelated regressions model (NLSUR) (as described in Gallant, 1975 and
Amemiya, 1983). This permits the estimation of the two non-linear equations, with the
cross-equation restrictions implied by the common parameters, simultaneously and achieves
additional estimation efficiency by combining information from both equations (Davidson &

                                                 11
MacKinnon, 2004).18


IV. Data

Using the estimation methodology described in the preceding section, we estimate income
mobility parameters using individual income data from Mexico. Specifically, the individual
income data are taken from the Encuesta Nacional de Empleo Urbano (ENEU, Mexican
National Urban Employment Survey) which was conducted by the Instituto Nacional de
Estadistica, Geografia e Informatica (INEGI, National Institute of Statistics, Geography
and Information), the primary statistical agency in Mexico, and the Secretaria del Trabajo y
Prevision Social (STPS, Secretariat of Labor and Social Security), Mexico’s Labor Ministry.



   Until recently, the ENEU was the primary survey instrument for collecting earnings and
employment data in Mexico. The survey is sampled to be representative geographically and
by social strata (see INEGI 2000). The basic sampling unit is the dwelling. Demographic in-
formation is collected on the household (households) occupying each dwelling. Subsequently,
an employment questionnaire is administered for each individual aged 12 and above in the
household on position in the household, level of education (years of schooling), age and sex
as well as standard measures related to participation in the labor market: occupation, hours
worked, employment conditions, search and earnings.

   The ENEU is constructed as a rotating panel, where households are surveyed every quar-
ter for a total of five quarters.19 ENEU, in its modern form, has employed a consistent
survey instrument from 1987 to 2004; it is thus one of very few long-running surveys with a
  18
     See also Davidson and MacKinnon (2004) for a through discussion of the asymptotic equivalence between
estimates obtained using a non-linear-least-squares methodology and the generalized method of moments.
  19
     In each round of the rotating panel, the questionnaire records absent members, adds any new members
who have joined the household, and records any changes in schooling that have taken place. If none of the
original group of household members is found to be living in the dwelling unit in the follow-up survey, the
household is recorded as a new household. The interviewers do not track households that move, so they
leave the panel. Rates of attrition are comparable to other developing countries (See Antman and McKenzie,
2007).


                                                    12
panel dimension in the developing world. In our study, we are able to use this 18 year span
comprising a total of 72 quarters of data, with, as we have discussed, households appearing
in the survey for five quarters before they are dropped.20 Worker earnings include overall
earnings in the individual’s principal occupation from fixed salary payments, hourly or daily
wages, piece-meal work, commissions, tips and self employment earnings.

   We note that while the ENEU survey records employment information on all members
of the household above 12 years old, for younger workers employment is generally transient
and time is often divided among schooling, unpaid support to the household and paid work.
Similarly, much later in life, work again becomes more transient. In our analysis, we focus
on individuals between the ages 20 and 65.


V. Results

As discussed in the previous section, our estimation methodology proceeds in two steps. As
in Carroll and Samwick (1997), we first use individual data to estimate a Mincer earnings
regression. In a second step, the residuals from the Mincer regression are used to estimate
income mobility parameters using (4’) and (6’). Table 2 reports the estimates from the
first stage earnings regression using the ENEU data described in the preceding section. Our
estimates are consistent with earlier findings in the literature. Specifically, earnings increase,
but at a decreasing rate, with education. Further, earnings increase with potential experience
(age) up until the age of 44 after which they decrease again. Males appear to earn 31 percent
more than women, conditional on the other covariates.21

   We use next the residuals from the earnings regression, vit , to construct individual level
  20
     Since 2004, the ENEU has been replaced by the Encuesta Nacional de Ocupacion y Empleo (ENOE,
Survey of Occupation and Employment) in 2005. Unfortunately, however, the ENOE instrument differs from
ENEU in important ways that make it impossible to match the surveys with confidence.
  21
     For robustness we have also run alternate earnings specifications, allowing for both more and less tem-
poral variation, by allowing all parameters to vary in each time period, and separately by constraining even
the constant to be invariant across periods (unlike in the specification reported on in Table 2, which includes
year fixed effects). The results do not change appreciably.



                                                      13
“observations” of income variances vit2 and covariances vit vi,t+1 ,22 that are to be used on the
left hand side of equations (4’) and (6’) to estimate the income mobility parameters. The
age profile of the constructed variance and covariance measures are indicated in Figures 1
and 2, which are generated by regressing the two variables respectively on a complete set of
age and time dummies and then plotting the former against age (see Deaton and Paxson,
1994, for a similar exercise). Consistent with equations (4’) and (6’), the accumulation of
persistent shocks, σ2 , as age increases, gives both relationships an upward slope, albeit at
rates differing by a factor of ρ.

   Estimation results from the joint estimation of (4’) and (6’), as described in the previous
section, yield the parameter estimates listed in Table 3. The first column presents the results
using the full sample, while the second column provides results obtained using data from
just those households that enter the sample in the first quarter of each year. Our estimates
of the income mobility parameters are also in line with those obtained previously in the
literature. The autoregressive component, ρ, is estimated to be 0.977, which suggests that
persistent shocks to income experienced by any individual i will indeed last a long time.

   We note here that the estimate of ρ that we have obtained as being close to one is not
driven by the exclusion of individuals mean effects in the income specification (1). If we
allow individual fixed effects, µi , in income as follows: vit = ωit + ηit + µi , the expressions
(4’) and (6’) are modified in the following fashion:

                                                              1 − ρ2z 2
                    V ar[viz ] == σµ2 + ση2 + ρ2z σω2 0 +            σ                  (400 )
                                                              1 − ρ2 
                                                              1 − ρ2z 2
                   cov(viz , vi,z+1 ) = σµ2 + ρ2z+1 σω2 0 +          ρσ                  (600 )
                                                              1 − ρ2 

where σµ2 denotes the variance of individual fixed effects, µi . In estimating the framework
above, however, we were unable to obtain separate estimates for σµ2 and σω2 0 due to the
apparent collinearity between these two – as would be implied by a value of ρ close to 1.
Thus, allowing the initial shocks to dissipate at a different rate than the fixed effects does not
 22
      Note that vt+1 denotes individual i’s residual one year (four quarters) after t


                                                       14
yield a different estimate of ρ. Separately, the system above may be estimated by allowing
for different autoregressive coefficients ρω and ρ to be attached to σω2 0 and σ2 respectively –
thereby allowing the initial draws of persistent income to dissipate at a different rate than
the later set of persistent shocks, . Specifically, this allows for a different estimate of ρ to
be obtained from the rate of dissipation of later shocks (while also allowing for individual
fixed effects). Estimating this system yields estimates of ρω ≈ 1 and ρ ≈ 1, affirming once
again a value of ρ ≈ 1.

   A separate issues concerns our estimation assumption of a common ρ over different work-
ers, especially those of different ages. To asses the restrictiveness of this assumption, we
allow ρ to vary by age groups - for instance, by dividing workers into three groups - those
under 30, those between 30 and 50 and, finally, those over 50 years of age. However, we are
unable to reject that the estimates of ρ for the different age groups are different from each
other – thus mitigating this concern.

   The estimated variance of transitory shocks to income, ση2 = 0.202, is significantly larger
than the variance of persistent shocks to income, σ2 = 0.015. This is not surprising given
that the η-term in our specification also captures measurement error in income, which we
expect to be quite large in our data set.23 Finally, the estimated variance in initial incomes
σω2 0 = 0.104. The R2 goodness-of-fit statistic is estimated to be 0.13.24 As the results in
the second column indicate, the estimates are not appreciably different with the restricted
sample of households who enter the survey in just the first quarter of each year.

   Given our estimates of the income parameters (i.e., ρ = 0.977, σω2 0 = 0.104, ση2 = 0.202
and σ2 = 0.015), we can use expressions (7) to analyze mobility patterns. In particular, we
can compute how much the individual parameters contribute to overall mobility. Plugging
in our estimates of the parameters characterizing the income process into (7), we obtain
estimates of mobility in residual income which we report in Table 4. Specifically, mobility in
residual income over a 1 year period is calculated to be 0.67. For 10 years, calculated mobility
 23
      See Antman and McKenzie (2007) for a discussion of measurement error and mobility using this data.
 24
      R2 for equations (4’) and (6’) is estimated to be 0.15 and 0.16 respectively.



                                                    15
increases to 0.76 and for 25 years, it increases to 0.84. The reasons behind the surprisingly
high one-year mobility level, and relatively modest increases thereafter, become clearer in
the next rows which set to zero each of the key parameters and calculate the resulting change
in mobility. Notice, first, that 1-year mobility falls by a full 90 percent if we set ση2 = 0 – no
transitory shocks or measurement error. As we have noted earlier, measurement error should
not enter welfare calculations and individuals can often smooth transitory shocks through
own savings so that their welfare impact is limited. By contrast, “bad mobility” σ2 due to
risk and “good” mobility due to convergence, ρ, account for roughly 1 percent each across
one year.25

   The relative impact of these parameters clearly changes as we increase the span over which
we are measuring mobility. At 25 years, setting transitory shocks to zero reduces mobility by
a still large, but much reduced 23 percent (as transitory shocks are, by definition, transitory
and mobility over this duration is driven to a greater extent by the cumulative effect of
persistent shocks experienced by individuals over this period). By contrast, mobility due
to persistent risk accounts for 7.4 percent and mobility due to convergence accounts for 8.6
percent. Having identified which parameters have the largest influence on measured mobility,
we now turn to their relative contribution to welfare.


VI. Welfare Analysis

The voluminous literature on consumption and saving with individual income risk and in-
complete insurance markets has generated a number of insights.26 One important insight is
that workers can effectively self-insure against transitory income shocks through borrowing
or own saving, and that the effect of these shocks on equilibrium prices and quantities are
relatively small.27 A second important insight of this literature is that very persistent or
fully permanent income shocks have substantial effects on consumption and welfare even if
  25
     Note that since mobility is highly non-linear in its underlying parameters, measured mobility does not
decompose additively into its component parts.
  26
     See, for example, Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2009) for a recent survey.
  27
     See, for example, Aiyagari (1994) for quantitative work and Levine and Zame (2002) for a theoretical
argument.

                                                    16
individual households have own savings, but no or only limited access to insurance markets.
Indeed, when labor income is the main source of income and labor income shocks are highly
persistent, we would expect that consumption responds (almost) one-for-one to labor income
shocks. This point has been made more formally Constantinides and Duffie (1996) using dy-
namic general equilibrium exchange models with incomplete markets. Constantinides and
Duffie (1996) only consider the case in which income follows a random walk (ρ = 1), but
Krebs (2007) also analyzes an extension with ρ < 1 and costs of financial intermediation
that introduce a spread between the borrowing rate and the lending rate. In this section,
we discuss the main ideas and results of the model analyzed in Krebs (2007).

VI.1. Consumption

The model features long-lived, risk-averse ex-ante identical workers with homothetic pref-
erences who make consumption/saving choices in the face of uninsurable income shocks.
Workers’ preferences over consumption plans, {cit }, allow for a time-additive expected util-
ity representation with one-period utility function of the CRRA-type, where in this paper
we confine attention to the log-utility case (degree of relative risk aversion of 1):
                                                "∞                 #
                                                 X
                            U ({cit }|ωi0 ) = E     β t ln cit |ωi0 .                     (9)
                                                 t=0

Workers maximize expected lifetime utility subject to a sequential budget constraint that
allows them to transfer wealth across periods through saving (or borrowing). The model is
an exchange economy with endogenous interest rate (general equilibrium). Since workers are
ex-ante identical, we do not distinguish between income yit and residual income vit in this
discussion.

   In order to apply the equilibrium characterization result of Krebs (2007), we need to
introduce three modification of the labor income process (1). First, we abstract from ex-
ante heterogeneity and time-effects. For simplicity, we set µ = 0 so that the mean of labor
income (aggregate labor income) is normalized to one (see below). Second, measurement
error should not enter into the worker’s budget constraint, and the part of η that represents
measurement error should therefore be omitted. Further, as we have argued before, the part

                                               17
of η that is due to true income shocks is expected to have only small effects on equilibrium
consumption and welfare. To simplify the analysis, we neglect these small effects of transitory
income shocks and set lnyit = ωit , where {ωit } is an AR(1) process as in specification (2).
Third, the distribution of the innovation term, , and the distribution of initial income , ω0 ,
include a mean-adjustment:  ∼ N (−σ2 /2, σ2 ) and ω0 ∼ N (−σω2 0 /2, σω2 0 ). This adjustment
is necessary to ensure that σ2 and σω2 0 can be interpreted as uncertainty parameters (see
below).28

   Our specification of the labor income process implies that

                                           E[yi,t+1 |It ] = yitρ                                            (10)
                                                                 σ2
                                         var[yi,t+1 |It ] = e          −1
                                                 E[yi0 ] = 1
                                                                  2
                                                var[y0 ] = eσω0

where It denote the information available at time t. Thus, increases in either σ or σω0 in-
crease the variance of labor income without any change in the (conditional) mean – they lead
to a mean-preserving spread. In other words, the two parameters measure risk/uncertainty.29

   If ρ = 1 and labor income follows a random walk, then the equilibrium interest rate
will adjust so that individual workers will optimally decide to set consumption equal to
labor income (see Constantinides and Duffie (1996) and Krebs (2007) for details). The
argument is outlined in the Appendix. If ρ is not equal to one, but not too far away from
one, then a sufficiently large difference in the borrowing and lending rate (cost of financial

  28
     The main part of the analysis in Krebs (2007) deals with the random walk case, but the Appendix
discusses the extension to labor income shocks that are not fully permanent. The labor income process
specified in the Appendix of Krebs (2007) is equivalent to an AR(1) process with an innovation term that
has finite support, which rules out the case of a normal distribution. One way to apply the results of Krebs
(2007) to the present analysis is to truncate all normal distributions at an arbitrarily large point, and to think
of all equilibrium results as approximate results for which the approximation error can be made arbitrarily
small.
  29
     The n-period ahead variances, var[yi,t+n |It ], in general depend on σ2 for n ≥ 2 if ρ < 1. We can correct
for these “higher-order” effects without essentially changing the main results of the paper. More precisely, a
modified version of the welfare formula (11), which adjusts for the change in mean income, yields quantitative
results that are very close to the results reported here. Details are available on request.

                                                       18
intermediation) will ensure that in equilibrium households still choose to set consumption
equals labor income (see the Appendix of Krebs (2007) for details). In short, in equilibrium
we have cit = yit , that is, consumption and labor income move one-for-one.

VI.2. Mobility and Welfare

Using cit = yit = ωit and the income specification discussed above, we can evaluate the
expected lifetime utility (9) of an individual with initial income ωi0 . Taking the expectation
over ωi0 yields social welfare, W , where we assume that each individual household is assigned
equal weight in the social welfare function. In other words, social welfare is the expected
lifetime utility from an ex ante point of view when the initial condition, ω0 , is not yet known
(veil of ignorance). More formally, we have
                                 "∞              #
                                   X
                      W = E           β t ln cit                                           (11)
                                   " t=0"   ∞
                                                                    ##
                                            X
                            = E E                 β t ln cit |ωi0
                                            t=0
                                                   σ2
                                                                        
                                          β                  1
                            = E −                      +         ωi0
                                   (1 − β)(1 − βρ) 2      1 − βρ
                                       β       σ2       1 σω2 0
                            = −                    −
                                (1 − β)(1 − βρ) 2     1 − βρ 2


   The formula (11) shows how social welfare depends on the various income parameters
and the preference parameter β. In particular, (11) shows that an increase in uncertainty,
either about initial conditions or about future labor market conditions, will reduce social
welfare. Further, an increase in ρ increases uncertainty about lifetime income, and therefore
reduces welfare:
                               ∂W           ∂W         ∂W
                                      < 0 ,      < 0 ,    <0                               (12)
                               ∂σω2 0       ∂σ2       ∂ρ

   In order to express welfare changes in economically meaningful units, we calculate the cor-
responding change in consumption in each period and possible future state that is necessary
to compensate the worker for the change in uncertainty. For example, suppose we compare

                                                      19
two economies, one with income parameters (σω2 0 , σ2 , ρ) and one with income parameters
(σ̂ω2 0 , σ̂2 , ρ̂). We then define the consumption-equivalent welfare change, ∆, of moving from
(σω2 0 , σ2 , ρ) to (σ̂ω2 0 , σ̂2 , ρ̂) as
                                          "∞                     #    "∞            #
                                           X                           X
                                      E      β t ln (cit (1 + ∆)) = E    β t ln ĉit ,      (13)
                                 t=0                                 t=0

where c is consumption in the first economy and ĉ is consumption in the second economy.
Using the definition (13) and the welfare formula (11), we find:

                                              β     σ̂2    (1 − β) σ̂ω2 0
                              ln(1 + ∆) =                +                                  (14)
                                          (1 − β ρ̂) 2     (1 − β ρ̂) 2
                                                β        2
                                                        σ   (1 − β) σω2 0
                                          −                −
                                            (1 − βρ) 2        1 − βρ 2


   As mentioned before, measurement error and transitory shocks have (almost) no effect
on welfare. In contrast, the effect of the other two mobility parameters, σ and ρ, turn out
be quite substantial. For example, based on the welfare formula (14) and an annual discount
factor of β = 0.96, a value that is standard in the macro-economic literature (for example,
Cooley and Prescott, 1995), we find that removing all “bad mobility”, setting σ2 = 0, leads
to a welfare gain of about 12 percent of lifetime consumption. Using the same discount
factor, the welfare cost of removing all “good mobility”, setting ρ = 1, is equal to 8 percent
of lifetime consumption, again a significant welfare effect. Finally, removing both “good”
and “ bad” mobility at the same time, setting σ2 = 0 and ρ = 1, leads to a net welfare gain
of about 10 percent of lifetime consumption. The last result shows that the welfare formula
(14) is highly non-linear and that the positive welfare effect of catching-up, ρ < 1, is closely
linked to the presence or absence of persistent income shocks, . Calculations with other
values of β yield similar results as indicated in Table 5.

   In sum, the application of our general framework to Mexico provides striking results. The
parameter that accounts for the largest part of measured mobility, ση , has (almost) no effect
on welfare, and the two parameters that have large effects on welfare, σ and ρ, have only
a modest contribution to measured mobility, and least over small time durations. Clearly,

                                                       20
our welfare results depend on the choice of preference parameters, namely the degree of risk
aversion and the degree of impatience (discounting). However, by using a logarithmic utility
function we have already chosen a relatively low degree of (relative) risk aversion, namely
one, and any increase in the degree of risk aversion would only increase the welfare effects.
Further, lowering the discount factor β will lower the welfare effects, but for a wide range of
values of β the welfare effects remain substantial and the ranking of the different parameters
remains the same (see Table 5). In short, our welfare results are valid for a wide range of
preference parameters.




VII. Conclusions

   This paper develops an analytically tractable framework linking individual income dy-
namics, social mobility and welfare. This analytical framework that we develop has the
merit that the links between different determinants of income mobility and social welfare
are drawn out in a simple and transparent manner − allowing for a clearer analytical and
quantitative discussion of these interrelated concepts than has generally been possible in
the past. In particular, we discuss in detail how different determinants of measured income
mobility (shocks to income, and convergence forces, for instance) may have quite different
implications for welfare. This implies that two societies with the same initial distribution
of income and the same level of measured income mobility may be characterized by quite
different levels of social welfare. Decomposing the determinants of mobility is thus shown to
be crucial from the standpoint of welfare evaluation.

   An important strength of the proposed framework is its empirical implementability. The
quantitative evaluation of mobility and welfare in our context entails the estimation of in-
come process parameters may be achieved using combined cross sectional and longitudinal
data on individual incomes and relatively straightforward econometric techniques. The re-
sults from Mexico are striking. Most of measured mobility is estimated to be driven by
transitory shocks to income and is therefore (almost) welfare neutral. Only a small part
of mobility (i.e., mobility in permanent income) is driven by either social-welfare-reducing

                                              21
persistent income shocks or welfare-enhancing catching-up of low-income individuals with
high-income individuals. Importantly, roughly half of the of the mobility that is not driven
by measurement error or transitory income shocks, can be attributed to welfare-reducing
shocks to permanent income. Decomposing mobility into its fundamental components is
thus crucial from the standpoint of welfare evaluation.




                                             22
Appendix

Here we outline the proof that cit = yit is an equilibrium choice. Details can be found in
Krebs (2007) and Krebs, Krishna, and Maloney (2010).

   Consider the sequential budget constraint

                         ai,t+1 = (1 + r)ait + yit ∀t                       (A1)

where ait is asset holding (financial wealth) of individual i in period t and r is the risk-free
interest rate. The first-order conditions (consumption Euler equation) associated with the
worker problem of maximizing expected lifetime utility (11) subject to the sequential budget
constraint read:
                                                               
                                                cit
                     1 = β(1 + r) E                       | Iit       ,          (A2)
                                            ci,t+1

where It is the information available to individual i in period t. A straightforward but lengthy
argument shows that the first-order conditions (A2) in conjunction with the transversality
condition are sufficient conditions for the solution of the worker’s utility maximization prob-
lem, and that the transversality condition is equal to the no-Ponzi-scheme condition.

   We assume that assets are in zero aggregate net supply: E[ait ] = 0. Suppose all workers
begin life with no financial wealth, ai0 = 0. Clearly, cit = yit and ai,t+1 = 0 solve the
sequential budget constraint. Suppose further that income follows a logarithmic random
walk, ρ = 1. Substituting cit = yit into the first-order conditions (A2) and using yi,t+1 =
ei,t+1 yit shows that (A2) holds if the interest rate is given by:
                                            2
                             r = β −1 e−σ − 1 ,                           (A3)

Further, a straightforward argument shows that the transversality condition is satisfied.
Thus, the choice cit = yit is individually optimal, that is, it solves the workers’ utility
maximization problem. It also satisfies the asset market clearing condition. Hence, cit = yit
and ai,t+1 = 0 conjunction with the interest rate (A3) constitute an equilibrium.


                                                      23
   If ρ < 1, an argument similar to the above argument shows that cit = yit and ai,t+1 = 0
solve the corresponding first-order conditions and transversality condition for an arbitrary
but bounded set of income realizations if i) there is a spread between the borrowing rate and
the lending rate (cost of financial intermediation) and ii) the spread is large enough. Krebs
(2007) provides an argument along those lines. Krebs, Krishna, and Maloney (2010) rule out
borrowing (credit constraints), which is equivalent to the limit of an infinite borrowing rate.
Clearly, the interest rate spread necessary to decentralize the no-trade equilibrium depends
on the set of income realization chosen.




                                              24
References

Aiyagari, R., 1994, “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” Quarterly Journal
   of Economics, 109: 659-84.

Amemiya, T., 1983,“Nonlinear Regression Models” Handbook of Econometrics, Amsterdam,
  The Netherlands 1:333-389.

Antman, F. and McKenzie, D., 2007, “Earnings Mobility and Measurement Error: A Pseudo-
  Panel Approach,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 56(1): 125-162.

Atkinson, A. B., 1983, “The Measurement of Economic Mobility,” in Social Justice and
  Public Policy, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Atkinson, A., B., Bourguignon, F., and Morrisson, C., 1992, “Empirical Studies of Earnings
  Mobility,” in Lesourne, J., and Sonnenschein, H., eds., Fundamentals of Pure and Applied
  Economics, Volume 52, Harwood Academic Publishers, Philadelphia.

Attanasio, O., and C. Binelli (forthcoming)” Mexico in the 1990s: the Main Cross-Sectional
   Facts,” in Review of Economic Dynamics.

Baker, M., and Solon, G., 2003, “Earnings Dynamics and Inequality among Canadian Men,
  1976-1992: Evidence from Longitudinal Income Tax Records, Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics, 21: 289-321.

Banerjee, A., and Duflo, E., Poor Economics, Public Affairs: NY

Benabou, R., and Ok. E. A., 2001a, “Social Mobility and the Demand for Redistribution:
  The POUM Hypothesis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116: 447-487.

Benabou, R., and Ok, E. A., 2001b, “Mobility as Progressivity: Ranking Income Processes
  According to Equality and Opportunity.” NBER Working Paper Series, Number 8431.

Bourguignon, F., Goh, C. and Kim, D., 2006, “Estimating Individual Vulnerability to
  Poverty with Pseudo-Panel Data” in Morgan, S. L., Grusky, D. B., and Fields G. S.,
  eds., Mobility and Inequality Frontiers of Research in Sociology and Economics, Stan-
  ford University Press. Stanford.Blundell, R., Pisaferri, I. Peston (2008) “Consumption
  Inequality and Partial Insurance,” American Economic Review 09: 1887-1921.

Carroll, C., and Samwick, 1997, “The nature of precautionary wealth,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, Elsevier, vol. 40(1), pages 41-71



                                           25
Chetty, R., Hendren, N., Kline. P., and Saez, E., 2014, ”Where is the Land of Opportunity?
  The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States”, itNBER Working
  Paper No. 19843

Collins, D., Murdoch, J., Rutherford, S., and Ruthven, O., 2009, Portfolios of the Poor,
   Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ

Conlisk , J., 1990, “Monotone Mobility Matrices,” Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 15:173-
  191.

Constantinides, G., and Duffie, D., 1996, “Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Consumers,”
  Journal of Political Economy 104: 219-240.

Cruces, G., P. Lanjouw, L. Lucchetti, E. Perova, R.Vakis, and M. Viollaz, 2011, ““Intra-
  generational mobility and repeated cross-sections: a three-country validation exercise,”
  Policy Research Working Paper Series 5916, The World Bank.

Cuesta, J., H. and G. Pizzolitto, 2011, “Using Pseudo Panels To Measure Income Mobility
  In Latin America,” Review of Income and Wealth, 57:2 p.224-246.

Dang, Hai-Anh, P. Lanjouw, J. Luoto, D. McKenzie 2011 “Using Repeated Cross Sections
  to Explore Movements in and out of Poverty,” Policy Research Working Paper 5550.

Danziger, S., and Gottschalk. P., 1998, “Family Income Mobility: How Much Is There,
  and Has It Changed?” in Auerbach, J., and Belous, R., eds., The Inequality Paradox,
  Washington D.C.: National Policy Association.

Dardanoni, V., 1993, “Measuring Social Mobility,” Journal of Economic Theory, 61: 372-94.

Davidson, R and J. G. MacKinnon, 2004, Econometric Theory and Methods Oxford Univer-
  sity Press, New York.

Daeton, A., 1991, “Saving and Liquidity Constraints,” Econometrica 59: 1221-1248.

Deaton, A. and Paxson, C., 1994, “Intertemporal Choice and Inequality,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 102(3): 437-467.

Fields, Gary S. and Ok, E. A., 1996, “The Meaning and Measurement of Income Mobility,”
   Journal of Economic Theory, 71: 349-377.

Fields, Gary S. and Ok, E. A., 1999, “The Measurement of Income Mobility: An Introduction
   to the Literature,” in Silber , J., ed., Handbook of Inequality Measurement,, Dordrecht,
   Germany: Kluwer Academic Publishers.


                                            26
Fields, Gary S., Cichello, P., Feije, S., Menendez, M., and Newhouse D., 2003 “For Richer
   or Poorer? Evidence from Indonesia, South Africa, Spain and Venezuela” Journal of
   Economic Inequality, 1: 67-99.

Friedman, M. 1962. Capitalism and Freedom, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University.

Gallant, A. R. 1975, “Seemingly Unrelated Nonlinear Regressions”’ Journal of Econometrics,
  3(1): 35-50.

Geweke, J., Marshall, R., and Zarkin, G., 1986, “Mobility Indices in Continuous Time
  Markov Chains,” Econometrica, 54(6): 1407-1423.

Glewwe, P., 2004, “How Much of Observed Economic Mobility is Measurement Error? A
   Method to Remove Measurement Error, with an Application to Vietnam”, —itMimeo,
   World Bank, Washington DC.

Gottschalk, P., and Moffit, R., 1994, “The Growth of Earnings Instability in the U.S. Labor
  Market, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 217-72.

Gottschalk, P., and Spolaore, E., 2002, “On the Evaluation of Economic Mobility,” Review
  of Economic Studies, 69(1): 191-208.

Hart P.E., 1981, “The Statics and Dynamics of income Distributions: A Survey,” in Klev-
  market, N. A., Lybeck, J. A., and Tieto, C., eds.The Statics and Dynamics of Income.

Heathcote, J., Storesletten, K., and G. Violante, 2009, “Quantitative Macroeconomics with
  Heterogeneous Households,” Annual Review of Economics 1: 319-354.

Hnatkovska, Viktoria, Amartya Lahiri, and Sourabh Paul, 2012, “Castes and Labor Mobil-
  ity.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(2): 274-307

Huggett, M., 1993 “The Risk-Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agent Incomplete-Insurance Economies,”
  Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 17: 953-969.

Instituto Nacional de Estadistica y Geografia (INEGI), 2000, “Documento Metodologico de
   la Encuesta Nacional de Empleo Urbana,” Mexico.

Krebs, T., 2003, “Human Capital Risk and Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 118: 709-744.

Krebs, T., 2007, “Job Displacement Risk and the Cost of Business Cycles,” American Eco-
  nomic Review 97: 664-686.



                                            27
Kuznets, S., 1955, “Economic Growth and Income Inequality,” American Economic Review,
  45(1): 1-28.

Levine, D. and Zame, W., 2002, “Does Market Incompleteness Matter?”, Econometrica 71:
   1695-1725.

Lillard, Lee A. and Willis, R. J., 1978 “Dynamic Aspects of Earnings Mobility” Economet-
    rica, 46: 985-1012.

Lucas, R., 2003, “Macroeconomic Priorities,” American Economic Review, 93: 1-14.

Luttmer, E., 2002, “Measuring Economic Mobility and Inequality: Disentangling Real Events
  from Noisy Data,” Mimeo, World Bank, Washington DC.

Markandya, A., 1982, “Intergenerational Exchange Mobility and Economic Welfare,” Euro-
  pean Economic Review, 17: 307-324.

Markandya, A., 1984, “The Welfare Measurement of Changes in Economic Mobility,” Eco-
  nomica, 51: 457-471.

Meghir, C., and L. Pistaferri, 2011, “Earnings, Consumption, and Life-Cycle Choices,” Hand-
  book of Labor Economics

Shorrocks, A. F., 1978a, “Income Inequality and Income Mobility,” Journal of Economic
   Theory, 19: 376-393.

Shorrocks, A. F., 1978b, “The Measurement of Mobility,” Econometrica, 46(5): 1038-1024.

Shorrocks, A., 1993, “On the Hart measure of Income Mobility,” in M. Casson and J. Creedy,
   (eds.), Concentration and Inequality: Essays in Honour of Peter Hart (Edward Elgar,
   Aldershot, UK).

Solon, G., 2001, “Mobility Within and Between Generations” in Welch, F., ed., The Causes
   and Consequences of Increasing Inequality, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.




                                            28
                                                          Figure 1: Variance of Unpredicted Part of Earnings vs. Age (1987-2003)
                                                     .8
     Age effects in variance of Mincer’s residuals
                                                     .7
                                                     .6
                                                     .5
                                                     .4
                                                     .3
                                                     .2




                                                          20             30            40              50          60              70
                                                                                                 age

                                                                         Variance            Upper bound             Lower bound




Note: Variance is the coefficient on age from a regression of the Mincer residual squared on age and year dummies. Estimates
from Mexican Urban Employment Survey using individuals age 20-65. 5% confidence intervals




                                                                                            25
Figure 2: Covariance of Unpredicted Part of Earnings across 5 Quarters vs. Age (1987-2003)
                                                       .4
     Age effects in covariance of Mincer’s residuals
                                                       .35
                                                       .3
                                                       .25
                                                       .2
                                                       .15
                                                       .1




                                                             20    30          40               50     60             70
                                                                                         age

                                                                  Covariance             Upper bound    Lower bound




Note: Covariance is the coefficient on age from a regression of the covariance of the Mincer residual in quarter 1 vs. quarter
5 on age and year dummies. Estimates from Mexican Urban Employment Survey using individuals age 20-65. 5% confidence
intervals.




                                                                                    26
                                  Table 1: Summary Statistics: 1987-2003

                                            Mean       Std Deviation         Min     Max


                            Age             36.271          10.626            20       65

                            Schooling       10.624          5.460             0        22

                            Sex             0.737           0.440             0        1


Note: Based on the Mexican Monthly Urban Employment Survey, 1987-2003 using individuals between 20 and 65 years of age.
Age and schooling in years.
                                                Table 2: Mincer Regression

                                                 Coef      Sd         t       p > |t|
                                        Cons     3.699    0.009    422.450    0.000
                                        Sex       0.310   0.002    191.140    0.000
                                        Sch      0.077    0.001    143.160    0.000
                                        Sch2     -0.001   0.000    -45.380    0.000
                                        Age
                                        21       0.044    0.005     8.730     0.000
                                        22       0.088    0.005    17.540     0.000
                                        23       0.127    0.005    25.740     0.000
                                        24       0.173    0.005    34.570     0.000
                                        25       0.208    0.005    41.530     0.000
                                        26       0.242    0.005    47.780     0.000
                                        27       0.268    0.005    52.450     0.000
                                        28       0.288    0.005    56.510     0.000
                                        29       0.309    0.005    60.240     0.000
                                        30       0.328    0.005    64.350     0.000
                                        31       0.348    0.005    66.740     0.000
                                        32       0.360    0.005    68.540     0.000
                                        33       0.370    0.005    71.270     0.000
                                        34       0.382    0.005    71.890     0.000
                                        35       0.389    0.005    73.360     0.000
                                        36       0.391    0.005    73.160     0.000
                                        37       0.407    0.005    75.150     0.000
                                        38       0.422    0.005    77.940     0.000
                                        39       0.421    0.005    76.910     0.000
                                        40       0.426    0.006    77.270     0.000
                                        41       0.442    0.006    76.630     0.000
                                        42       0.451    0.006    77.750     0.000
                                        43       0.448    0.006    76.700     0.000
                                        44       0.459    0.006    74.430     0.000
                                        45       0.455    0.006    74.150     0.000
                                        46       0.450    0.006    70.690     0.000
                                        47       0.452    0.007    66.900     0.000
                                        48       0.441    0.007    64.660     0.000
                                        49       0.430    0.007    61.210     0.000
                                        50       0.434    0.007    60.680     0.000
                                        51       0.431    0.008    56.920     0.000
                                        52       0.430    0.008    54.200     0.000
                                        53       0.423    0.008    52.360     0.000
                                        54       0.420    0.009    48.510     0.000
                               55                          0.398    0.009    44.750     0.000
                               56                          0.400    0.009    42.730     0.000
                               57                          0.393    0.010    39.600     0.000
                               58                          0.367    0.011    34.870     0.000
                               59                          0.356    0.011    32.000     0.000
                               60                          0.322    0.011    28.640     0.000
                               61                          0.307    0.012    24.860     0.000
                               62                          0.302    0.014    22.000     0.000
                               63                          0.286    0.015    19.640     0.000
                               64                          0.309    0.016    19.460     0.000
                               65                          0.247    0.016    15.360     0.000
                               Year and wave dummies                        Yes
                               N                                          782179
                                R2 Adj                                     0.595

Note: Regression of log income on sex, age as a dummy variable, schooling, schooling square and a year time specific dummy
and a dummy for whether the data correspond to the first period or the fifth. Data are pooled across all years. Based on the
Mexican Monthly Urban Employment Survey, 1987-2003, using individuals between 20 and 65 years of age.
                                  Table 3: Estimation of Mobility Parameters


                                                             Full Sample          Restricted


                                   ρ                           0.977***            0.976***
                                                               (0.0019)            (0.0037)
                                   σω2                         0.104***            0.104***
                                                               (0.0038)            (0.0068)
                                   σ2                         0.015***            0.016***
                                                               (0.0008)            (0.0016)
                                   ση2                         0.203***            0.217***
                                                               (0.0039)            (0.0073)


                                   Time Dummies                   Yes                 Yes
                                   R2                             0.13                0.13
                                   N                             387460              99570

Note: Estimation using Non-linear SUR estimation. Dependent variables: Eq 1 variance, Eq 2 covariance. Variance calculated
as the square of the residual of the mincer regression. Covariance as the covariance of the residual in the first quarter observed
with that of the fifth quarter. ρ represents the autoregressive coefficient or convergence parameter. σω2 represents the variance of

the initial distribution of income. σ2 represents the variance of permanent shocks. ση2 represents the variance of the transitory or
measurement error component of income. A complete and separate set of time dummies is included in each equation. Estimates
using the Mexican Monthly Urban Employment Survey, 1987-2003, using individuals between 20 and 65 years of age. Column
1 uses all observations. Column 2 just those beginning Q1 of each year. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗
p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                             Table 4: Mobility Analysis

                                                                    Time Span (years)
                                                                    1     10     25

                                   Computed Mobility             0.674      0.763     0.846
                                   % ∆ if:
                                   ρ=0                           -0.77       -5.2       -8.6
                                   σ2 =0                         -1.2       -6.6       -7.4
                                   ση2 =0                        -89.7      -45.7      -23.3


Note: Table shows the percentage decline in residual income mobility as component parameters are individually set to zero
relative to actual mobility calculated from equation (7) using parameters estimated in Table 3 based on the Mexican Monthly
Urban Employment Survey, 1987-2003. ρ represents the autoregressive coefficient or convergence parameter. σ2 represents
the variance of permanent shocks. ση2 represents the variance of the transitory or measurement error component of income.
Mobility is calculated by using estimated income parameters in (7) across a span, t, of 1, 10 and 25 years.




                                              Table 5: Welfare Analysis

                                                  σ2 = 0 ρ = 1 σ2 = 0 and ρ = 1

                               % Change

                               β   = 0.96         12.56       -8.04               10.5
                               β   = 0.95         10.64       -5.82               8.91
                               β   = 0.94          9.21       -4.45               7.72
                               β   = 0.90          5.87       -2.05               4.93

Note: Table shows the percentage change in welfare calculated measured as a percent of lifetime consumption as σ2 , the variance
of permanent shocks, is set to 0 (no income risk) and ρ, the convergence parameter, is set to one (no convergence). β is the
annual discount factor. Welfare is calculated using equations (11) and (14) and the estimated values in Table 3 using the
Mexican Monthly Urban Employment Survey 1987-2003.
