                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        CHECK UP BEFORE YOU CHECK OUT:
                     RETAIL CLINICS AND EMERGENCY ROOM USE

                                        Diane Alexander
                                          Janet Currie
                                         Molly Schnell

                                      Working Paper 23585
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23585


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                             July 2017, Revised July 2018




We thank participants in seminars at Princeton University, the University of Chicago, the 2017
Highland Health Economics Symposium, and the 2018 American Society of Health Economists
Annual Meeting for helpful feedback. We also thank the staff at the New Jersey Department of
Health for their assistance in accessing the data used in this paper. The Center for Health and
Wellbeing at Princeton University provided generous financial support. All views expressed are
those of the authors and cannot be attributed to the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal
Reserve System, the New Jersey Department of Health, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Diane Alexander, Janet Currie, and Molly Schnell. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Check Up Before You Check Out: Retail Clinics and Emergency Room Use
Diane Alexander, Janet Currie, and Molly Schnell
NBER Working Paper No. 23585
July 2017, Revised July 2018
JEL No. I11

                                         ABSTRACT

The retail clinic is an innovation that has the potential to improve competition in health care
markets. Given concern about inefficient use of the emergency room (ER) increasing health care
costs, we use all ER visits in New Jersey from 2006-2014 to examine the impact of retail clinics
on ER usage. We find that people residing close to an open clinic are 4.1-12.3 percent less likely
to use an ER for preventable conditions and for minor acute conditions. Our estimates suggest
annual cost savings of over $70 million from reduced ER usage if retail clinics were readily
available across New Jersey.

Diane Alexander                                 Molly Schnell
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago                 Princeton University
11th floor                                      Department of Economics
230 S. LaSalle St.                              Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Chicago, IL 60604                               Princeton, NJ 08544
dalexander@frbchi.org                           mollyks@princeton.edu

Janet Currie
Department of Economics
Center for Health and Wellbeing
185A Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
jcurrie@princeton.edu
1. Introduction

The U.S. health care market is often viewed as one in which competition does not work well: it is

increasingly concentrated (Gaynor and Townsend, 2011); prices are not transparent; and many

studies highlight imperfections and asymmetries in the information available to providers,

patients, and insurers. These shortcomings are thought to entail large efficiency and welfare

losses both from unnecessary procedures and delayed interventions, including costly emergency

room (ER) visits that could have been avoided with proper preventive care.

        Policy makers have long sought to increase competition in health care markets. For

example, a joint commission of the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and the Department of

Justice (DOJ) recommended adopting measures to increase competition including increasing

transparency in pricing and lowering barriers to entry into primary care for allied health

professions (FTC and DOJ, 2004). In fact, expanded scope of practice laws allowing nurse

practitioners to practice outside a doctor’s office are thought to have been a key policy leading to

the rise of retail clinics (Carton et al., 2016). In turn, retail clinics have been leaders in promoting

price transparency.1

        Retail clinics first appeared in 2000 and have since grown rapidly, with over 2,000 clinics

operating in 41 states and Washington D.C. in 2015 (NCSL, 2017). Retail clinics are generally

located within retail stores, such as pharmacies or “big-box” outlets like Wal-Mart. They offer a

limited range of services and are staffed by nurse practitioners or physician assistants. Retail

clinics are typically open seven days a week, have extended hours in the evenings, and do not

require appointments. Prices are posted on line and may be a quarter to a third less expensive


1
  The commission recognized that competition is not a panacea. They state that “Competition cannot provide its full
benefits to consumers without good information and properly aligned incentives. Moreover, competition cannot
eliminate the inherent uncertainties in health care, or the informational asymmetries among consumers, providers,
and payers. Competition also will not shift resources to those who do not have them” (FTC and DOJ, 2004).


                                                                                                                  3
than the price a doctor would charge for the same services (Mehrotra et al., 2009; Tu and Cohen,

2008; Thygeson et al., 2008). Thus, retail clinics compete with doctors’ offices for basic primary

care services by offering lower and more transparent prices, shorter waiting times, and

convenience (Ahmed and Fincham, 2010; Wang et al., 2010).

         In this paper, we use the universe of visits to ERs in New Jersey between 2006 and 2014

to examine the impact of retail clinics on ER use. We focus on ER use because it is thought that

many cases that end up in the ER reflect inefficient allocations of medical care, and reducing the

unnecessary use of emergency services has long been a focus on public policy.2 Lowering the

monetary and time costs of care might result in higher consumption of primary care and

subsequent improvements in health which could be reflected in fewer ER visits. Retail clinics

may also divert some patients from ERs, particularly for relatively minor conditions that arise

outside of normal office hours when doctors’ offices are typically closed, resulting in cost

savings. On the other hand, professional physician organizations have expressed fears that retail

clinics might sell unnecessary services or products, provide lower quality, or disrupt continuity

of care, leading to higher costs and worse health outcomes including additional ER visits (AMA,

2007; AAP, 2014; AAFP, 201). In light of these concerns, the American Medical Association

has called for greater regulation of store-based clinics.

         In order to identify the effects of retail clinics on ER usage, we use a difference-in-

difference framework. In particular, we compare ER visits among residents living 0 to 2 miles

from any site where a clinic ever operated (“near”), to those among residents who live 2 to 5



2
  For example, Kellermann and Weinick (2012) discuss Washington state’s attempt to reduce Medicaid costs by
restricting the use of ERs for non-urgent care. They argue that the policy ultimately failed because inappropriate use
of ERs reflected lack of access to other sources of primary care. This is exactly the sort of deficiency that retail
clinics could possibly remedy.



                                                                                                                     4
miles from such a site (“far”), when the clinic is operating and when it is not.3 Our identifying

assumptions are therefore that those who live closest to a clinic are most likely to use it, and that

ER visits would have shown similar trends in both distance bands in the absence of the opening

and/or closing of a retail clinic. We exclude patients who live further than 5 miles away from

sites where a retail clinic ever operated over our sample period because patients in unserved

areas are quite different than those in areas where retail clinics locate. To absorb any time-

invariant differences across neighborhoods, all of our specifications include a fixed effect for

each retail clinic location.

           We consider three classes of conditions: (1) conditions that frequently result in ER visits

but which could have been prevented by adequate primary care; (2) relatively minor conditions

which could nevertheless lead to an ER visit in the absence of an open or convenient doctor’s

office or retail clinic; and (3) a control group of conditions that are normally only treated in the

ER and cannot be prevented by improved primary care. The first category of conditions—severe

yet preventable conditions—includes ER visits for influenza and complications of diabetes.

These conditions are common reasons for ER visits and both flu shots and routine diabetes care

are explicit foci of retail clinics. The second category—relatively minor conditions—includes

sprains and strains, urinary tract infections, conjunctivitis, upper respiratory tract infections, ear

infections, and sore throat. Finally, placebo conditions that cannot be treated in a retail clinic

include fractures, poisonings, and childbirth.

           We find that residents who live close to an open clinic are 12.3 percent less likely to go to

the ER for influenza and 4.1 percent less likely to use the ER for complications of diabetes. They

are also between 4.7 and 11.4 percent less likely to go to the ER for relatively common, minor



3
    Results are robust to using 0 to 1 vs. 1 to 3 mile bands.


                                                                                                         5
conditions. As predicted, retail clinics do not have any statistically significant effect on ER visits

for fractures, poisonings, or childbirths.

         Our estimates suggest that retail clinics result in annual cost savings of $817,492 per

100,000 people from reduced ER use alone. Scaled to the population of New Jersey in 2010

(8,791,894), these estimates suggest a potential cost savings from ER visits of over $70 million

annually. The bulk of these savings come from reductions in visits for the two preventable

conditions we consider: Influenza and diabetes.

         Two previous studies have suggested that retail clinics may increase health care costs by

encouraging more primary care visits outside of the ER (Sussman et al., 2013; Ashwood et al.,

2016). 4,5 It is unclear whether cost savings from reduced ER visits completely offset increases

in health care cost from additional visits to retail clinics. Since New Jersey does not have an “all

payer claims” data base, it is in fact impossible to ask how outpatient visits have changed over

time. However, we calculate that it would take over 700,000 annual visits to retail clinics in New

Jersey, costing $100/visit, to offset the estimated savings from reduced ER usage. Furthermore,

to the extent that preventing illness is socially beneficial, even when such illnesses do not result

in an interaction with the healthcare system, the fact that retail clinics reduce the burden of

preventable diseases may swing the balance of welfare calculations in favor of regulatory

changes that promote competition from retail clinics.


4
  One recent paper from the medical literature also looks at the effect of retail clinics on low acuity emergency room
visits, and finds little to no effect (Martsolf et al., 2017). Our analysis differs from Martsolf et al. (2017) in a number
of ways that could explain the discrepancy. For example, Martsolf et al. (2017) focus on the ratio of low acuity ER
visits to other ER visits. If ER visits for both low acuity visits and other preventable conditions fall (as we argue),
then they could find no effect or even a positive effect of retail clinics, as both the numerator and the denominator
are affected by retail clinics. In contrast, we look at ER visits per capita. Our data are also richer, including both a
finer level of geographical detail. Finally, we include ER visits that result in an admission to hospital which are
excluded in Martsolf et al.
5 Using a similar identification strategy to Martsolf et al. (2017), Hollingsworth (2014) shows that the number of

retail clinics within 5 miles of a Florida hospital in 2012 is associated with fewer ER visits for bronchitis in 2012
relative to 2006.


                                                                                                                         6
        Our paper improves on previous work in four ways. First, we consider the universe of

patients who ever use an ER rather than a subset of patients who are covered by a particular

insurance plan. This feature of our data ensures that we capture all of the changes in ER

utilization that occur as a result of retail clinic operation. Second, we consider ER visits for an

immunization preventable disease (influenza), a prevalent chronic condition (diabetes), low

acuity conditions like sprains and strains, as well as a range of placebo conditions that are not

treated in retail clinics and should therefore be unaffected, like childbirth.6 This range of

conditions allows us to obtain a more complete picture of the impact of retail clinics on ER usage

than previous work. Third, given the length of our panel, we are able to exploit both openings

and closings of retail clinics. This rich variation in timing allows us to distinguish the effects of

retail clinics from underlying trends in ER use. Finally, our difference-in-difference framework

does not require us to match patients on observables. Our estimates are therefore not subject to

the selection biases that result when matching does not perfectly control for differences between

those who use retail clinics and those who do not.

        This paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we provide additional background on retail

clinics and discuss the categories of conditions that we consider. Section 3 introduces a

conceptual framework that highlights the predicted impacts of retail clinic expansion on ER

visits for preventable and non-preventable conditions of different severities. We discuss the

datasets used in our analysis in Section 4. Section 5 outlines our empirical specification, and

results are provided in Section 6. Section 7 discusses and concludes.




6
 Ashwood et al. (2016) note that it may be important to consider conditions that can be prevented through adequate
primary care rather than only treatment for minor illnesses, but they do not do this.


                                                                                                                 7
2. Background

Retail clinics are highly concentrated among just a few retailers: CVS MinuteClinics and

Walgreen’s Healthcare Clinics make up 75 percent of the market nationwide (market shares of

50 and 25 percent, respectively) with Kroger, Wal-Mart, and Target accounting for most of the

rest (NCSL, 2016).7 In recent years, Wal-Mart and Target began to exit the retail clinic business;

at the end of 2015, CVS acquired all of Target's pharmacies and in-store clinics for $1.9 billion.

In New Jersey, ShopRite closed all six of its locations between 2008 and 2012, while CVS

opened at least two new stores in every year between 2011 and 2014.

           Retail clinics are predominately staffed by nurse practitioners (NPs). Under New Jersey’s

scope of practice laws, NPs must be supervised by a doctor both to practice and to prescribe

medication. However, the supervising doctor is not required to be on site. In practice, NPs adhere

to a manualized practice handbook outlining protocols and refer to their supervising physician

only when a situation requires further guidance. The use of NPs is a key difference between

retail clinics and urgent care clinics. The later can be difficult to distinguish from traditional

doctors’ offices, since they are staffed by doctors and often take appointments in advance. In

fact, for regulatory purposes urgent care clinics are treated as doctor’s offices.

           Prices charged by retail clinics are on average between 25-33 percent less expensive than

the prices charged by physicians’ offices for the same services (Mehrotra et al., 2009; Tu and

Cohen, 2008). These cost savings are likely to be salient to consumers as retail clinics are used

primarily by younger adults and families who are more likely to be uninsured and to pay out of

pocket than those using other health care providers (ICPSR, 2010). However, most retail clinic




7
    CVS owns and operates all of its clinics while Walgreens outsources clinics to health care groups.


                                                                                                         8
visits are still covered by insurance, with about 70 percent of retail clinic customers being

insured (compared to 90 percent for patients visiting primary care physicians).

         Despite lower and more transparent prices, patients cite convenience (i.e. time costs) as

the main reason for using retail clinics (Weinick et al., 2010). Almost all New Jersey retail

clinics are open on weekends and weekday evenings, and every retail clinic in New Jersey has a

pharmacy on site (see Table 1). Patients are generally seen on a first come, first served basis,

although some clinics allow patients to make an appointment or “get in line” online before

arriving at the clinic.

         Retail clinics are very transparent about the types of medical care they can and cannot

provide. Services include treating minor illnesses such as urinary tract infections, ear infections,

conjunctivitis, and sore throat (see http://www.cvs.com/minuteclinic/services/minor-illnesses/N-

d8Z3a3jkZd5); minor injuries such as sprains and strains; immunizations including influenza;

and health screenings such as diabetic glucose screenings. Retail clinics do not have imaging

equipment or intravenous drips and are not equipped to handle fractures, childbirth, or life-

threatening emergencies such as poisonings.

         In what follows, we examine the impact of retail clinics on ER visits for three sets of

conditions: (1) emergent, preventable; (2) primary care treatable; and (3) emergent, not

preventable. These three severity categories are in the spirit of those used in Billings et al. (2000)

and Taubman et al. (2014). Our classification focuses on diagnoses that are both known to be

treated in retail clinics and where there is little ambiguity in severity class.8 An overview of these

condition categories and how their treatment relates to the services provided by retail clinics is


8
 The Billings et al. (2000) classification algorithm starts with very detailed medical records to determine what
percentage of each diagnosis would fall into each severity category. The algorithm then applies this information to
discharge records, where individual cases are classified probabilistically based on the percentage of cases with each
discharge diagnosis that fell into each category in the more detailed data.


                                                                                                                    9
given below.

Emergent, Preventable Conditions

The first group of conditions that we consider includes ER visits for influenza and complications

of diabetes. We refer to this group as “emergent, preventable” since these conditions can be

prevented with adequate primary care but often result in ER visits once they develop.

         While visits for influenza represent a relatively small fraction of ER visits in New Jersey

(0.21 percent; see Table 2), they are particularly important from a public health perspective. For

each person whose influenza is sufficiently severe to be treated at a hospital, there are many

more cases that result in visits to doctors’ offices and an even larger number of cases that did not

result in contact with health care providers but may have caused days missed from work or

school.9 Moreover, there is a non-trivial risk of death from influenza. According to the Centers

for Disease Control (CDC), annual U.S. deaths related to influenza ranged from 12,000 to 56,000

between 2010 and 2014 (CDC, 2018).

         Retail clinics are particularly well placed to increase influenza vaccination rates and in

turn to decrease the severity of seasonal outbreaks. One of the most common reasons adults give

for foregoing the vaccine is that they forgot or “didn't get around to it” (Harris et al., 2010).

When adults do get immunized, they receive the vaccination from many different sources,

suggesting that convenience plays an important role.10 Located within high foot traffic stores,

retail clinics are convenient and advertise to remind their shoppers to get a flu shot. According to

one large retailer, over half of those immunized did not intend to get a flu shot when they entered



9
  It is estimated that for every flu hospitalization there are approximately 5.6 ER visits, 66 cases which sought
medical care, and around 149 cases total (Kostova et al., 2013; Uscher-Pines and Elixhauser, 2013).
10
   According to the CDC (2012), while most children receive flu shots at doctors’ offices or health centers (65
percent and 19 percent, respectively), more adults get vaccinated at pharmacies, stores, and workplaces than at a
doctor's office.


                                                                                                                    10
the store (Sifferlin, 2013). Anecdotal evidence further suggests that NPs routinely offer flu shots

to retail clinic patients at the end of each visit. According to Uscher-Pines et al. (2012), vaccines

were administered in 40 percent of visits to retail clinics from 2007 to 2009, with 95 percent of

the vaccinations being for influenza.11

         In addition to offering immunizations, retail clinics are increasingly advertising that they

can provide monitoring for common chronic conditions, such as diabetes. Unlike influenza,

complications of diabetes make up a large share of ER visits. In New Jersey, 8.74 percent of ER

visits had diabetes listed as either a primary or secondary diagnosis (see Table 2). If properly

managed, diabetes should not result in ER visits, and thus a reduction in ER visits for diabetes

represents evidence of an improvement in primary care.

         According to the U.S. National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus,12 recommended care

for diabetics includes two to three visits per year to monitor blood pressure, weight, and blood

glucose levels (using A1C tests) and to check for any infections or loss of feeling in the feet.

Diabetics must also monitor cholesterol and check for protein in the urine. The necessity for

frequent visits for routine monitoring, combined with the many supplies (insulin, other drugs

such as metformin, needles, testing strips) that must be purchased from pharmacies, make

diabetics a natural market for retail clinics.

Primary Care Treatable Conditions

The second set of conditions that we consider includes the following minor conditions: urinary

tract infection, conjunctivitis, upper respiratory tract infections, sore throat, ear infection, and



11
   55 percent of the vaccinations were administered to adults aged 18 to 64. Patients who visit retail clinics
specifically to receive influenza vaccinations are older and less likely to be black or Hispanic relative to the retail
clinic patient population as a whole (Lee et al., 2009). This pattern likely reflects national differences in vaccination
rates between racial and ethnic groups: vaccination rates for non-Hispanic whites are much higher than for blacks or
Hispanics.
12
   Available at https://medlineplus.gov/ency/patientinstructions/000082.htm; last accessed July 2018.


                                                                                                                      11
sprains and strains. We chose these six categories because they together account for the largest

share of ER visits among minor illnesses and injuries (12.36 percent of ER visits in New Jersey

over our sample period; see Table 2) and are all explicitly listed online as treated at CVS

MinuteClinics (the majority of retail clinics in New Jersey; see Table 1).

Emergent, Non-Preventable Conditions

The third set of conditions that we examine are placebo conditions that retail clinics do not treat

and that are not likely to be prevented by routine preventive care: fractures, childbirth, and

poisonings. On their list of services, CVS MinuteClinics specifically tell patients with suspected

poisonings not to seek care at their clinics. Furthermore, conversations with NPs at CVS

MinuteClinics in New Jersey suggest that practitioners immediately send patients who arrive

with a suspected broken bone to the ER. Finally, while retail clinics do provide limited family

planning services, it is unlikely that retail clinics affect aggregate fertility patterns.13 We

therefore do not expect retail clinics to have any impact on the use of ERs for these services.



3. Conceptual Framework

In this section, we consider where patients choose to receive care. This decision depends on both

the availability of different treatment options (ER, doctor's office, retail clinic) and the severity

of the patient's condition. We start by assuming that there are no retail clinics, and ask how the

availability of a primary care doctor influences ER usage. We then introduce retail clinics to ask

how ER usage is affected by the presence of this new treatment option, both when a primary care

doctor is available and when a primary care doctor is unavailable.



13
  While a short-term prescription for birth control can be obtained at a retail clinic, retail clinics are not intended to
be a regular source of care for reproductive health. Anecdotal evidence suggests that NPs in New Jersey advise
patients to follow up with an OB-GYN whenever a prescription for birth control is administered.


                                                                                                                        12
         All of the intuition presented below can be displayed graphically using value functions

that depict the net benefit of care (benefit - cost) as a function of the patient's severity. In

drawing these curves, we make three sets of assumptions. First, we assume that the value of

treatment is weakly increasing in the severity of the patient's condition. Second, as there are

bounds on both the costs and benefits of treatment, we assume that the value function is either

concave or S-shaped.14 Finally, we assume that retail clinics are the most valuable treatment

option (in terms of benefit minus costs) for patients with low-severity conditions, doctors' offices

are the most valuable treatment option for patients with mid-severity conditions, and ERs are the

most valuable treatment option for patients with high-severity conditions.15


Without retail clinics

In the absence of retail clinics, ER usage is determined by both the availability and the relative

costs and benefits of receiving emergency versus primary care. When a primary care doctor is

not available, either because it is after hours or because appointments are limited, patients will go

to the ER only if the net value of receiving emergency care is greater than zero.16 Since the value

of receiving care is weakly increasing in the severity of the patient's condition, only patients with

severities exceeding some threshold will find it beneficial to go to an ER. This result is displayed




14 As drawn below, we assume that there is an inflection point in the value function for care received in either an ER
or a doctor's office: while the marginal value of treatment is increasing at an increasing rate from low-severity to
mid-severity conditions, the marginal value of treatment is increasing at a decreasing rate from mid-severity to high-
severity conditions.
15 These relative values derive from underlying assumptions about the relative costs and benefits of receiving care in

each location. In terms of costs, the evidence suggests that retail clinics are the lowest cost option, either because of
direct monetary costs or time costs, whereas ERs are the most expensive option. In terms of benefits, since retail
clinics only treat low-severity conditions, the benefits of receiving treatment for more severe conditions are greater
at doctors' offices and ERs. Finally, since many high-severity conditions require emergency care, ERs are the most
beneficial option for high-severity conditions.
16
   Recent work by Bruni et al. (2016) in Italy suggests that extending hours of primary care availability alone can
generate significant reductions in the use of the ER.


                                                                                                                      13
graphically in Figure 1: When neither a retail clinic nor a primary care doctor is available, only

patients with severities exceeding d will go to the ER (case 1).

         When a primary care doctor is available but there is no retail clinic (case 2 in Figure 1),

two things change: (1) more patients receive care and (2) fewer patients go to the ER. More

patients receive care because it is beneficial for patients with relatively low-severity conditions

to receive primary care but not emergency care (“market expansion”; patients with severities

between b and d in Figure 1). If some of these patients receive preventive care, such as flu shots,

then ER visits will also decline in the future from fewer patients developing high-severity

conditions (“prevention”; some fraction of severities greater than d in Figure 1). Finally, as it is

more valuable for mid-severity patients to receive primary care than emergency care, even

though mid-severity patients would go to an ER in the absence of available primary care, fewer

patients go to the ER in the current period (“substitution”; patients with severities between d and

f in Figure 1).17 Note that since the value of receiving emergency care exceeds the value of

receiving primary care for high-severity conditions, high-severity patients will go the ER

regardless of whether primary care is an option (patients with severities exceeding f in Figure 1).



With retail clinics

How do retail clinics affect who receives treatment and in which health care setting the treatment

is received? The impacts of retail clinics on the market when a primary care doctor is either

unavailable or available are depicted in cases 3 and 4 of Figure 1, respectively. As with the




17
  Providing evidence of this substitution, Buchmueller et al. (2006) find that hospital closures in LA shifted some
care to doctors’ offices.



                                                                                                                  14
introduction of a primary care doctor discussed above, retail clinics affect the market through

three mechanisms: market expansion, prevention, and substitution.

          Since retail clinics are more valuable than doctors' offices and ERs for low-severity

conditions, more patients will receive care in the current period when a retail clinic is present (in

Figure 1, patients with severities between a and b if a primary care doctor is available or between

a and d if a primary care doctor is unavailable). If some of these patients receive preventive care,

then a fraction of these patients will avoid developing high-severity conditions that would

require emergency care in the future.

          Finally, the entrance of a retail clinic will cause substitution between different types of

health care providers. If a primary care doctor is available, low-severity patients will substitute

from doctors' offices to retail clinics (patients with severities between b and c). If a primary care

doctor is unavailable, mid-severity patients will substitute from ERs to retail clinics (patients

with severities between d and e). Note that since the value of receiving treatment from a doctor's

office or ER exceeds the value of receiving care at a retail clinic for more severe conditions, the

presence of retail clinics does not affect the provision of care for these patients.

          The theoretical framework outlined above delivers three testable predictions about ER

visits:

1. Prevention: Fewer visits to ERs for emergent, preventable conditions. ER visits for high-

    severity conditions that can be prevented through adequate primary care should decrease

    when a retail clinic opens if retail clinics effectively expand consumption of preventive care.

2. Substitution from ERs for primary care treatable conditions: ER visits for low-severity

    conditions that can be treated at either an ER, a doctor's office, or a retail clinic should

    decrease when a retail clinic opens.




                                                                                                        15
3. No substitution from ERs for emergent, non-preventable conditions: ER visits for high-

   severity conditions that cannot be prevented by primary care and are not usually treated in a

   doctor’s office or retail clinic should stay the same when a retail clinic opens.

       In addition to predictions about the number of ER visits for conditions of various types,

our theoretical framework delivers predictions on the average severity of conditions that continue

to be treated in an ER in the presence of a retail clinic. Since patients with relatively low-severity

primary care treatable conditions will substitute from ERs to retail clinics when a retail clinic

opens, we expect the remaining primary care treatable cases that are seen in the ER to be of

higher severity than before the retail clinic opened. However, since there is no reason to believe

that increased prevention will affect the severity of patients who nevertheless develop emergent

conditions, we do not expect the remaining emergent, preventable cases that are seen in the ER

to be of a systematically different severity than before the clinic opening. Similarly, since ER

cases for emergent, non-preventable conditions should be unaffected by the presence of a retail

clinic, the average severity of these cases treated in an ER should remain the same after a retail

clinic opens.



4. Data

Data for this study come from two main sources: (1) The location and operation dates of retail

clinics in New Jersey from 2006 to 2014 are from Merchant Medicine, and (2) data on all visits

to New Jersey ERs over the same time period are from the New Jersey Department of Health.

We supplement these data with information from the 2010 Census and the five-year pooled

(2008-2012) American Community Survey (ACS).

       The data from Merchant Medicine include the geocoded locations of all retail clinics in




                                                                                                    16
New Jersey and each clinic’s opening and/or closing dates. A total of 55 retail clinics operated in

New Jersey at some point over our sample period: two clinics opened before 2006 and 53 opened

between 2006 and 2014. By 2014, 18 retail clinics had closed. The majority of clinic openings

occurred in 2006, 2007, 2008, and 2011, and there was an increase in closures during the great

recession (Figure 3).18 There is a seasonal pattern to openings and closings, with openings

frequently occurring towards the end of the year and closings concentrated in March. Figure 2

shows the locations of all the clinics in these data, whether they opened or closed during our

sample period, and the ownership of the pharmacies. The clustering of locations along the I-95

corridor reflects the distribution of New Jersey’s population.

         The hospital discharge data come from the New Jersey Uniform billing records. These

records are compiled by the state from information that all general medical and surgical hospitals

are required to submit about every individual encounter with a patient. We include all records

where there is an ER revenue code on the billing record; some of these visits resulted in

admission to the hospital whereas others did not.19 In most cases, the patient was seen in the ER

and then sent home. Importantly, these data include the address of each patient. We use this

information to extract each patient’s residential census block group using ArcGIS.

         We create a panel at the retail clinic-week level by linking the retail clinic and ER data

geographically. For each retail clinic in these data, we create two distance groups: (1) a near

(“treated”) group that consists of census block groups with centroids within 2 miles of the retail

clinic and (2) a far (“control”) group that consists of census block groups with centroids between



18
   In interviews with retail clinic staff, we were told that some retail clinics closed over this time period because of
difficulties retaining practitioners. The high demand for NPs outside of retail clinics, combined with the requirement
that practitioners work nights and weekends, makes it difficult for some clinics to retain their providers.
19
   Some ER discharge data only includes information on ER visits resulting in admission. Our data includes all ER
visits regardless of whether the visit resulted in an admission.


                                                                                                                     17
2 and 5 miles from the retail clinic.20,21 The ER data are then collapsed into retail clinic-week-

distance group cells so that for each retail clinic-week we have the number of ER visits per

100,000 people residing within 0 to 2 and 2 to 5 miles of the clinic.22 Patients who reside more

than 5 miles from a retail clinic are not considered in our analysis. As there is no obvious choice

for how to define the distance bands, for robustness we replicate our results using distance bands

of 0 to 1 miles for “near” and 1 to 3 miles for “far.”

        As can be seen in the first panel of Table 3, the demographic characteristics of those

living more than 5 miles from a retail clinic location are different than those living in the other

two distance groups. In particular, the population of the areas more than 5 miles from a clinic are

poorer, older, and more rural than either of the other two distance groups, and thus we do not

think these areas serve as a good control group for the areas closest to where clinics are opening.

The second panel of Table 3 shows that in the first quarter of our data (when only two retail

clinics were operating in New Jersey) the block groups more than 5 miles from a retail clinic also

had more weekly ER visits per 100,000 residents across diagnosis groups. By dropping these

areas from our analysis, we create a control group that is more similar to the treatment group.

Figure 4 displays the resulting distance groups geographically.

        Despite being more similar than block groups 5 or more miles away, the treatment and

control groups are not entirely identical.23 The treatment block groups are wealthier, more

densely populated, and have a lower fraction of black residents than the control groups. To



20
   Some households fall within the catchment area of two retail clinics. In these cases, households are counted in
both retail clinic groups.
21
   An alternative “treated” group would be visits occurring outside of normal business hours. Unfortunately, we do
not observe the exact time stamp in the discharge data.
22
   Population is from the 2010 Census and is aggregated from the census block group level. We note that intercensal
population estimates are not available at the block group level.
23
   Table 3 further highlights that there is no difference in average distance to the closest ER across treatment and
control groups.


                                                                                                                 18
control for remaining differences in local demographics, we take the population-weighted

average across block group-level demographics from the ACS within each distance group. We

include these local demographic measures in all of our regressions and explore the key

assumption of parallel pre-trends across the treatment and control groups using event study

graphs.

          As introduced in Section 2, our primary outcome measures are the number of ER visits

for conditions within three categories: (1) emergent, preventable; (2) primary care treatable; and

(3) emergent, not preventable. The particular conditions included in each category are chosen

based on conditions that are actually treated in retail clinics (urinary tract infections,

conjunctivitis, upper respiratory tract infections, pharyngitis, otitis externa/media, sprains and

strains, influenza, and diabetes), and conditions that are never treated in retail clinics and thus

serve as controls (fractures, poisonings, and births). The ICD-9 codes used to define each

diagnosis category are provided in Table 2.

          All visits are categorized based on the primary diagnosis code with the exception of

diabetes. In order to capture complications associated with poor disease management, we include

visits with diabetes listed in any diagnosis field when coding diabetes visits (up to nine diagnoses

can be listed for each visit).24 We treat diabetes differently from the other diagnoses because it is

a chronic disease with a high comorbidity burden that often complicates the management of

other conditions. While diabetes can be controlled in an outpatient setting with adequate primary

care, unstable diabetes is associated with a wide range of conditions that can result in

hospitalizations.


24 In contrast to the other conditions we consider, diabetes is most often recorded as a secondary—rather than a
primary—diagnosis (see Figure A.1). For example, even if diabetes is the underlying cause of a person’s heart
failure, heart failure is usually listed as the primary diagnosis with diabetes listed as a secondary diagnosis. Table
A.1 lists the most common primary diagnoses for visits in which diabetes is listed as a secondary diagnosis.


                                                                                                                         19
         For influenza, we look at both the total number of visits and the number of visits by

patients in different age groups (ages 0-4, 5-17, 18-44, 45-64, and 65+). Age is particularly

important to consider when studying influenza, as there are important differences across age

groups in both the riskiness of the disease and in vaccination rates.25 Despite the CDC’s

recommendation that everyone aged six months and older get an annual flu vaccination, prime-

aged adults are much less likely to be vaccinated than other age groups, with vaccination rates

around 30 percent versus over two thirds for young children and older adults (CDC).

         In addition to the number of ER visits, we further consider the average severity of

individuals arriving at the ER within each diagnosis category. Our main proxy for severity is the

total list charges reported for each patient.26 List charges come from a hospital’s charge master—

a list of charges for all billable items—and are not the prices paid by either insurers or patients

but rather the starting point for negotiations between hospitals and insurers. As such, list charges

are the same for all patients who receive particular services at a given hospital whereas actual

amounts paid vary depending on the individual’s insurance (with the actual price generally being

a negotiated fraction of the list price). Total list charges incurred during a visit therefore measure

how much was done to a patient and are a proxy for severity.

         Total list charges are an imperfect proxy, however, since hospitals could respond to retail

clinic entry by changing their charge master. We think it is unlikely that hospitals respond in this

way, immediately. Nevertheless, we consider the number of diagnoses recorded as an alternative

severity proxy; cases with more comorbidities are on average more complicated and difficult to




25
   Very young children and the elderly are both the most likely to die from influenza and the most likely to be
vaccinated.
26
   In principle we could also use admission to the hospital as another proxy for severity. However, for the conditions
we consider very few cases result in admission, so there is little meaningful variation in this measure.


                                                                                                                   20
treat.27 As many primary care treatable conditions only have one diagnosis recorded, however,

the number of diagnoses is a much less sensitive measure compared to total list charges. For each

severity proxy, we create an average at the retail clinic-distance group-week level for visits in

each diagnosis category.



5. Empirical Specification

Our difference-in-difference strategy compares the number of ER visits among residents living in

areas near a retail clinic to those among residents living slightly farther away, both before and

after a retail clinic opened or closed. For each retail clinic c, there are two observations per week:

(1) the number of ER visits or average severity of patients who live within 2 miles of the retail

clinic and (2) the same outcomes for patients living between 2 and 5 miles from the retail clinic.

The second group provides a counterfactual for the group of people living near the retail clinic.

Note that we use all locations where a retail clinic ever operated over our sample period when

defining observations, whether the retail clinic was currently operating or not.

         Two assumptions must hold for this research design to identify the causal effect of retail

clinics on ER use. First, it must be true that conditional on being within a 5 mile radius of a

clinic, people who live closer to a retail clinic are more likely to use it. Survey evidence supports

this assumption. According to the 2010 Health Tracking Household Survey, 76 percent of

families using retail clinics said the fact that “the location was more convenient than another

source of care” was either a major (49 percent) of minor (27 percent) factor in choosing to use a

retail clinic. In addition, Tu and Boukus (2013) report that the rate of retail clinic use was 40


27 As illnesses and injuries tend to be more severe for older patients, we also experimented with the average age of

patients and the fraction of patients over 80 years old. Since most visits for primary care treatable diagnoses are
made by relatively young patients, there is unfortunately little meaningful variation in this measure for these
conditions.


                                                                                                                   21
percent higher for patients living less than 1 mile from a retail clinic relative to those living 1 to

5 miles away in 2010.28

        Since it is unclear exactly how far a typical consumer is willing to travel to use a retail

clinic, we repeat our main analysis using distance groups of 0 to 1 and 1 to 3 miles in place of

our primary groups of 0 to 2 and 2 to 5 miles.29 The wider distance band definitions (0 to 2 and 2

to 5 miles around a retail clinic) draw larger areas into both treatment and control groups,

reducing noise in our estimates of ER visit rates. However, if only people within 1 mile are

actually more likely than people further away to use retail clinics, then using the wider distance

band definition will lead us to underestimate the true treatment effect of retail clinics on ER use

by included untreated areas in the treatment group. Alternatively, and perhaps more likely, if the

true treated population decays with distance but is not zero by 2 miles away from the clinic,

some of the population in the “far” distance group in our main specification are also treated. If

some of the control group is in reality treated, our results will again underestimate the effects of

retail clinics on ER use.

        The second assumption we need to make for our research design to identify a causal

effect is that the treatment and control groups would have shown similar trends in ER use in the

absence of a retail clinic opening or closing. In order to probe this assumption, Figures 5 through

7 plot the average number of ER visits per 100,000 people for the near (treatment) and far

(control) groups for primary care treatable conditions (Figure 5); emergent, preventable

conditions (Figure 6); and emergent, non-preventable conditions (Figure 7). Both clinic openings

and closings are considered events (with closings treated as the negative of openings with respect


28 The Tu and Boukus (2013) study is based on a very small sample, so exact magnitudes should be interpreted with
caution.
29 Figure A.2 demonstrates the distance bands used in both our primary analysis and robustness exercises for a

specific example: a retail clinic located in North Arlington (near Newark).


                                                                                                              22
to event time), and month, year, and retail clinic fixed effects are first removed from the data.

The trends in ER visits between the near and far distance groups are reasonably similar before a

clinic opens (or after it closes), suggesting that the parallel trends assumption is justified. Note

that our “near” and “far” definitions refer to distance to a retail clinic, which is uncorrelated with

the distance to the nearest ER so it is perhaps unsurprising that there are similar pretrends in ER

use in the two groups.30

         We estimate regressions of the following form:


     (1) ER Visits/Popctd = b0 + b1I[near]cd + b2I[clinic open]ct + b3(I[near]cd* I[clinic open]ct) +

         bXcd+ lc + lmonth + ectd.

where ER Visits/Popctd denotes the number of ER visits for a given diagnosis in week t per

100,000 residents who live within distance group d of retail clinic c. In some specifications, this

dependent variable is replaced by average list charges. The variable I[clinicopen]ct is an indicator

equal to one if retail clinic c is operating in week t and zero otherwise for both distance groups

associated with a clinic. The indicator I[near]cd is equal to one for observations from the near

category, regardless of whether the retail clinic is currently operating. Equation (1) further

includes month by year and retail clinic location fixed effects to flexibly account for trends in

hospital visits over time and differences across space. We also control for demographic

characteristics in each retail clinic-distance group by including Xcd, a vector of population-

weighted averages of block group demographic characteristics from the ACS.31 We further




30
  At the block group level, the correlation between the distance to the nearest open retail clinic and the nearest
hospital-based emergency room is 0.036.
31 Demographic controls include population density, fraction black, a quadratic in median household income, and

the fraction of the population in detailed age bins (5-9, 10-14,15-17, 18-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64, 65-74, 75+).


                                                                                                                   23
control for the distance from each retail clinic to the nearest hospital.32 Standard errors are

clustered by retail clinic, and all of our regressions are population weighted.33

         The parameter of interest in Equation (1) is β3, the coefficient on the interaction term

I[near]cd * I[clinic open]ct. This coefficient captures the differential impact of an open retail

clinic on locations near the clinic relative to those further away. Given that our models include

retail clinic fixed effects, β3 is identified by changes in the operating status of a clinic (i.e., clinic

openings and closings).



6. Results

Figures 5 and 6 show suggestive evidence of decreases in ER visits for influenza, diabetes, and a

range of primary care treatable conditions in the treatment groups relative to the control groups

in the months after a retail clinic opens. For diabetes and primary care treatable conditions, we

see a widening of the gap between the near and far distance groups after a retail clinic opens. For

influenza, the relationship between the near and far distance groups actually reverses: after a

retail clinic opens, the near distance group switches from having more ER visits to having fewer

ER visits relative to the far group. Reassuringly, Figure 7 demonstrates that no such pattern

emerges among our placebo conditions.34

         To more formally examine the impact of retail clinics on ER use, we estimate Equation

(1). Results for the full sample are provided in Table 4. As can be seen in the first row, we do


32
   The distance between the retail clinic and the nearest hospital is time varying because of hospital closings. In
principle we could run the analysis separately on areas that are near versus far from an ER, but unfortunately there is
little variation in distance to the nearest hospital across population centers in New Jersey.
33
   The qualitative patterns and statistical significance of our results are unaffected by weighting. Unweighted
regression results are available upon request.
34
   The null results for the placebo conditions tell us two things: (1) trends in underlying health are not changing
differentially in the treatment and control groups and (2) other changes in the provision of care that occurred over a
similar time period, such as the expansion of urgent care centers and walk-in physician clinics, do not bias our
results (as these types of clinics do treat some of the placebo conditions).


                                                                                                                    24
not find a statistically significant main effect of a retail clinic being open for any condition. The

main effect of being within 0-2 miles of a retail clinic is also statistically insignificant except for

childbirth, confirming that the near and far groups have very similar patterns of ER use prior to

clinic openings.

        The coefficient of interest, the interaction term “Open*Near,” behaves as predicted in our

conceptual framework. Looking first to the results for emergent, preventable conditions, we see

that ER visits for influenza fall by 13.6 percent and ER visits for diabetes fall by 3.6 percent

among those near an open retail clinic (bottom panel of Table 4; columns 1 and 2). This later

estimate is only significant at the 90 percent level of confidence, however. This pattern is in

accordance with the prediction that ER visits for emergent, preventable conditions should

decrease when a retail clinic opens due to increased use of preventive services.

        Recall that ER visits for primary care treatable conditions are likewise predicted to fall

among the near group when a retail clinic opens. As seen in the top panel of Table 4, we find

significant negative interactions for all of the primary care treatable conditions we examine,

indicating that people substitute away from ERs when a retail clinic is available. The reductions

in ER visits for these minor conditions range from 5.7 percent (for urinary tract infections and

sprains and strains) to 12 percent for sore throat. Finally, as predicted, we do not find any

statistically significant effect of being near an open retail clinic on the placebo conditions of

fractures, poisonings, and childbirth.

        Table 5 probes the results for influenza further by estimating separate regressions by age.

The results suggest that the largest effect (a 17 percent reduction in ER visits) is among adults

aged 18-44, the group that previous work suggests is the most likely both to have low

vaccination rates and to obtain a flu shot from a retail clinic. We also find large reductions in




                                                                                                     25
visits among children, suggesting either that they too get flu shots at retail clinics or that they

benefit from reduced transmission among people their parents’ age.

        Figures 8, 9, and 10 show event study graphs for average list charges—our preferred

proxy for severity. While average list charges are very similar in the near and far groups prior to

the opening of a retail clinic for primary care treatable conditions, average list charges in the near

areas are higher than those in the far areas after an opening (Figure 8). This finding provides

suggestive evidence that the simplest cases in each primary care treatable condition substitute

away from ERs to retail clinics, leaving the more complicated cases in the ER.

        Perhaps unsurprisingly, Figure 9 provides little evidence of substitution for influenza.

While increased vaccination should prevent flu cases from occurring in the first place, the

serious flu cases that do emerge likely require hospital care, and thus there is no reason to believe

that increased vaccination will affect the severity of the marginal patient who becomes infected

and visits the ER. However, there is again suggestive evidence of some substitution away from

ERs for the simplest diabetes cases starting around one year after the opening of a retail clinic.

Finally, Figure 10 shows that for placebo conditions like fractures and childbirth, charges remain

roughly the same in both near and far areas before and after clinic openings and closings.

        Table 6 provides estimates of the effects of being near an open retail clinic on list charges

for ER visits estimated in a regression similar to Equation (1). The results here are somewhat

inconclusive. The interaction term “Open*Near” is uniformly positive, but it is only marginally

statistically significant for urinary tract infections and otitis (ear ache). There is therefore some,

albeit inconclusive, evidence that patients with less severe cases in these categories substitute




                                                                                                      26
from ERs to retail clinics to receive treatment.35


Robustness

The estimated effects of retail clinics on the number of ER visits when we instead use distance

bands of 0-1 miles (near) and 1-3 miles (far) are provided in Table A.4. These estimates are

somewhat noisier than those discussed above because there are many fewer people in the “near”

band, but they show the same qualitative patterns. In particular, among those who live near an

open retail clinic, we see reductions in ER visits for both influenza and a range of primary care

treatable conditions. Our results are therefore robust to the use of alternative distance bands.

         Qualified pharmacists in New Jersey have been able to administer vaccines to adults

since 2004.36 However, in May 2014, New Jersey pharmacists gained the ability to administer

the influenza vaccine to patients aged 7-17 with the permission of their parents or legal guardian

and to patients under 12 with a prescription from an authorized provider (NJ Board of Pharmacy,

2015). All of our results are robust to including an indicator for the time period during which

pharmacists were allowed to administer the flu vaccine to children or to dropping the last eight

months of our sample. Furthermore, since we find the largest effect of retail clinics on ER flu

visits for adults, we do not think that this change in the scope of practice of New Jersey

pharmacists is confounding our main results.

         A potential limitation of our work is that we have been unable to obtain information on

the openings and closings of urgent care centers in New Jersey. As discussed above, urgent care


35
   Since the distribution of list charges is very skewed to the right, Table 6 is based on data that trims the top 0.1
percent of charges. Table A.2 shows estimates from regressions using untrimmed list charges. As an alternative
approach to mitigating outliers, Table A.3 shows estimates from regressions in which list prices are first residualized
from hospital fixed effects and an indicator denoting whether the patient was admitted. In both tables we again see
suggestive evidence that less severe primary care treatable cases substitute away from ERs when a retail clinic is
available.
36 Unfortunately, our hospital data does not go back far enough to look at the effect of allowing pharmacists to

provide vaccinations on ER usage.


                                                                                                                    27
centers differ from retail clinics in that they are staffed, run, and often owned by doctors, and

price levels tend to be similar to doctor’s offices (Mehotra et al., 2009). They also compete more

directly with ERs in that they often offer services such as imaging and intravenous drips and can

treat conditions such as simple fractures and poisonings. Like retail clinics, however, they offer

patients convenience via walk-in appointments.

       The key issue for our analysis is whether patients who live within 2 miles of a retail clinic

are also more likely to live closer to an urgent care center than those who live 2-5 miles from a

retail clinic. An analysis of the locations of urgent care centers in 2017 suggests that this is not

the case: the number of urgent care centers per square mile is quite similar in the near and far

distance bands (the locations of both are plotted in Figure A.3). Furthermore, if urgent care

centers were opening in similar locations to retail clinics at similar times, we would find

“effects” of retail clinics on fractures (which can be treated in urgent care centers but not retail

clinics), which we do not. We therefore do not believe that the presence of urgent care centers

biases our results regarding the impact of retail clinics.




7. Discussion and Conclusions:

Our study shows that retail clinics reduce ER visits both for minor conditions and for conditions

like influenza and diabetes that are preventable given adequate primary care. These findings

suggest that encouraging competition in the form of retail clinics, with their transparent prices

and convenient access, has the potential to be welfare improving. Indeed, if Figure 1 is cast in

terms of social benefits and social costs, then all of the visits between points a and b represent

clear welfare improvements because these visits have positive value but would not have taken

place in the absence of retail clinics. Likewise, the visits between points b and d have positive



                                                                                                       28
social value but would not have taken place when doctor’s offices were closed in the absence of

retail clinics. On the other hand, visits that are diverted from physicians’ offices to retail clinics

represent a transfer from one group to another and may be neutral in terms of welfare

consequences. If, however, the net social cost of treatment (including costs due to congestion) is

higher in the ER than elsewhere, then visits diverted from ERs to retail clinics (visits between

points d and e in Figure 1) are likely to also be socially beneficial.

        The difficulty that arises in making welfare calculations is that insured health care

consumers do not pay the full cost of their care, so the private value (benefit minus cost for the

patient) of the visit often exceeds the social value. This distortion in valuation means that

patients may consume too much health care from a social perspective, and making consumption

cheaper and easier should increase the size of this distortion.

        Using our results, we can provide estimates of some of the costs and benefits of retail

clinics on the healthcare system. First, we can compute the cost savings implied by the

reductions in ER use that we observe. To do so, we use the cost data shown in Tables A.4 and

A.5. As there is some evidence that visits for primary care treatable conditions that substitute

from ERs to retail clinics are less severe, we use the 25th percentile of costs to evaluate cost

savings for these conditions. However, because improved preventive care should prevent visits

for both minor and severe emergent, preventable conditions, we use mean costs for influenza

visits and diabetes. Finally, because list prices overstate the actually amounts paid, we use an

approximate cost-to-charge ratio drawn from Medicare of one third to deflate the estimated cost

savings.

        Combining these assumptions about cost with the estimated reductions in ER visits from

Table 4, we estimate that an open retail clinic reduces spending on ER visits by at least $15,721




                                                                                                     29
per week per 100,000 people with convenient access to a clinic. This implies annual cost savings

of $817,492 per 100,000, or $8.80 per person. Of this amount, $7.60 is accounted for by

reductions in costs for ER visits due to influenza and diabetes.

         This is likely an underestimate of the cost savings attributable to retail clinics for three

reasons. First, we only consider two important preventable conditions that are easy to track in

our data. However, increased access to primary care through retail clinic expansion likely

reduces the burden of other emergent, preventable conditions. For example, there might well be

important cumulative effects on conditions such as heart disease and stroke from more frequent

monitoring of blood pressure and cholesterol levels. Second, we only consider the effect of retail

clinics on ER visits. To the extent that we are missing savings in doctors’ offices from better

preventive care, as well as savings downstream from hospital visits such as those generated when

patients are discharged into skilled nursing facilities or to home health care, the cost benefits of

retail clinics will be greater.37 Third, as discussed above, to the extent that there is error in

drawing the boundary between “near” and “far” areas, the estimated effects of residing near an

open retail clinic will be attenuated. Further, Spetzl et al. (2013) argue that the costs of treating

patients at retail clinics could be reduced further by loosening scope of practice laws that

currently limit the services nurse NPs are allowed to provide.

         According to Ashwood et al. (2016), retail clinics cause an increase in the number of

visits for “low-acuity” conditions (conditions that we refer to as primary care treatable) that cost

an additional $14 per person after netting out reductions in ER visits for these conditions.38 Our

results suggest that over half of this increased spending ($7.60) is offset by reductions in


37
   Around 1 percent of influenza and 9 percent of diabetes related ER visits are discharged to skilled nursing
facilities.
38
   Ashwood et al. (2016) do not include sprains and strains in their measure of primary care treatable conditions, and
so the increased spending of $14 is not net of savings from substitution away from ERs for these conditions.


                                                                                                                   30
preventable ER visits. Are these costs savings enough to overcome the costs of increased use?

While we cannot provide a definitive answer to this question, the fact that retail clinics appear to

improve preventive care and prevent disease suggests that competition from retail clinics may

well be welfare enhancing. To the extent that preventing sickness is socially beneficial, even

when illness does not result in doctor visits, such considerations may swing the balance of

welfare calculations in favor of policies promoting competition from retail clinics.




References

Ahmed, A. and J.E. Fincham. “Physician Office vs. Retail Clinic: Patient Preferences in Care
Seeking for Minor Illnesses.” Annals of Family Medicine, 2010, 8(2): 117-123.

American Academy of Family Physicians. “Retail Clinics.” Technical report, 2014. URL
http://www.aafp.org/about/policies/all/retail-clinics.html?cmpid=_van_587.

American Academy of Pediatrics. “AAP Principles Concerning Retail-Based Clinics.” Technical
Report, March 2014.

American Medical Association. “AMA Calls for Investigation of Store-Based Health Clinics.”
PR Newswire, June 2007. URL http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/ama-calls-for-
investigation-of-store-based-health-clinics-58310997.html.

Ashwood, J.S., M. Gaynor, C.M. Setodji, R.O. Reid, E. Weber, and A. Mehrotra. “Retail Clinic
Visits For Low-Acuity Conditions Increase Utilization And Spending.” Health Affairs, 2016,
35(3): 449-455.

Billings, J., N. Parikh, and T. Mijanovich. “Emergency Room Use: The New York Story.”
Commonwealth Fund, New York, 2000.

Bruni, M., I. Mammi, and C. Ugolini. “Does the Extension of Primary Care Practice Opening
Hours Reduce the Use of Emergency Services?” Journal of Health Economics, 50: 144-155.

Buchmueller, T.C., M. Jacobson, and C. Wold. “How Far to the Hospital?: The Effect of Hospital
Closures on Access to Care.” Journal of Health Economics, 2006, 25(4): 740-761.

Carthon, J.M.B., T. Sammarco, D. Pancir, J. Chittams, and K.W. Nicely. “Growth in Retail-
Based Clinics after Nurse Practitioner Scope of Practice Reform”. Nursing Outlook, 2016.

Cooper, Z., F. Scott Morton, and N. Shekita. “Surprise! Out-of-Network Billing for Emergency
Care in the United States.” NBER Working Paper No. 23623, 2017.


                                                                                                  31
Gaynor, M. and R. Town. “Provider Competition,” in Handbook of Health Economics, Volume
2, Borras, P., T. McGuire, and M. Pauly, eds., Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2011.

Harris, K.M., J. Maurer, L. Uscher-Pines, A.L. Kellermann, and N. Lurie. “Seasonal Flu
Vaccination: Why Don’t More Americans Get It?” Technical Report, RAND Corporation, 2010.

Hollingsworth, A. “Retail Health Clinics: Endogenous Location Choice and Emergency
Department Diversion.” Indiana University School of Public and Environmental Affairs
Working Paper, 2014.

Kellermann, A. and R. Weinick. “Emergency Departments, Medicaid Costs, and Access to
Primary Care – Understanding the Link.” New England Journal of Medicine, 2012, 366: 2141-
2143.

Kostova, D., C. Reed, L. Finelli, P.Y. Cheng, P.M. Gargiullo, D.K. Shay, J.A. Singleton, M.I.
Meltzer, P.J. Lu, and J.S. Bresee. “Influenza Illness and Hospitalizations Averted by Influenza
Vaccination in the United States, 2005–2011.” PLoS ONE, 2013, 8(6).

Lee, B.Y., A. Mehrotra, R.M. Burns, and K.M. Harris. “Alternative Vaccination Locations:
Who Uses Them and Can They Increase Flu Vaccination Rates?” Vaccine, 2009, 27(32): 4252–
4256.

Martsolf, G., K.R. Fingar, R. Coffey, R. Kandrack, T. Charland, C. Eibner, A. Elixhauser, C.
Steiner, and A. Mehrotra. “Association Between the Opening of Retail Clinics and Low-Acuity
Emergency Department Visits.” Annals of Emergency Medicine, 2017, 69(4): 397-403.

Mehrotra, A., H. Liu, J.L. Adams, M.C. Wang, J.R. Lave, N.M. Thygeson, L.I. Solberg, and
E.A. McGlynn. “Comparing Costs and Quality of Care at Retail Clinics with that of Other
Medical Settings for 3 Common Illnesses.” Annals of Internal Medicine, 2009, 151(5): 321–328.

National Conference of State Legislatures. “Retail Health Clinics: State Legislation and Laws.”
Technical Report, January 2016. URL http://www.ncsl.org/research/health/retail-health-clinics-
state-legislation-and-laws.aspx.

NJ Board of Pharmacy. “NJ Board of Pharmacy Law.” Technical Report, October 2015. URL
http://www.njconsumeraffairs.gov/Statutes/pharmacylaw.pdf.

Sifferlin, A. “Flu Shots at the Pharmacy: What you Need to Know,” Time, September 2013.
URL http://healthland.time.com/2013/09/04/flu-shots-at-the-pharmacy-what-you-need-to-know/.

Spetzl, J., S. Parente, R. Town, D. Bazarko. “Scope-of-Practice Laws for Nurse Practitioners
Limit Cost Savings that Can be Achieved in Retail Clinics.” Health Affairs, 2013, 32(11): 1977-
1984.

Taubman, S.L., H.L. Allen, B.J. Wright, K. Baicker, A.N. Finkelstein. “Medicaid Increases
Emergency-Department Use: Evidence from Oregon’s Health Insurance Experiment.” Science,
2014, 343(6168): 263-268.


                                                                                                  32
Thygeson, M., K.A. Van Vorst, M.V. Maciosek, and L. Solberg. “Use and Costs of Care in
Retail Clinics vs. Traditional Care Sites.” Health Affairs, 2008, 27(5): 1284-1892.

Tu, H.T. and E.R. Boukus. “Despite Rapid Growth, Retail Clinic use Remains Modest.”
Technical Report, Center for Studying Health System Change, 2013.

Tu, H.T. and G.R. Cohen. “Checking Up on Retail-Based Health Clinics: Is the Boom Ending?”
Technical Report, Center for Studying Health System Change, 2008.

U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Flu Vaccination Coverage, National Flu
Survey.” Technical Report, 2012.

U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Estimated Influenza Illnesses, Medical Visits,
Hospitalizations, and Deaths Averted by Vaccination in the United States.” Technical Report,
2017. URL https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/disease/2015-16.htm.

U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Estimating Seasonal Influenza-Associated
Deaths in the United States.” Technical Report, 2018. URL
https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/disease/us_flu-related_deaths.htm.

U.S. Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission. “Improving Health Care: A Dose of
Competition.” Technical Report, U.S. Government Printing Office, July 2004.

Uscher-Pines, L. and A. Elixhauser. “Emergency Department Visits and Hospital Inpatient Stays
for Seasonal and 2009 H1N1 Influenza, 2008-2009.” Statistical Brief #147, Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality, 2013

Uscher-Pines, L., K.M. Harris, R.M. Burns, and A. Mehrotra. “The Growth of Retail Clinics in
Vaccination Delivery in the U.S.” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 2012, 43(1): 63–
66.

Wang, M.C., G. Ryan, E.A. McGlynn, and A. Mehrotra. “Why do Patients Seek Care at Retail
Clinics, and What Alternatives Did they Consider?” American Journal of Medical Quality, 2010,
25(2): 128-134.

Weinick, R.M., C.E. Pollack, M.P. Fisher, E.M. Gillen, and A. Mehrotra. “Policy Implications of
the Use of Retail Clinics.” Technical Report, RAND Corporation, 2010.




                                                                                              33
1        Figures

                      Figure 1: Value of Treatment by Severity of Illness and Location



                                                                                                                                   Emergency room



                                                                                                     f                             Doctor’s office
                       Value (benefit - cost)




                                                                                             e                                     Retail clinic
                                                                        c



                                                    a           b                    d
                                                0




                                                         Severity of condition
                                                    a               b       c            d       e       f
Without retail clinic
   Case 1: PC MD unavailable
   Case 2: PC MD available
With retail clinic
   Case 3: PC MD unavailable
   Case 4: PC MD available

                                                        No treatment                                         Treatment at doctor’s office
                                                        Treatment at retail clinic                           Treatment at emergency room



Notes: The top panel of the above figure depicts the value of care (benefit - cost) as a function of patient
severity at retail clinics, doctors’ offices, and ERs. The bottom panel displays in which locations patients
of different severities choose to seek care in different states of the world (a primary care MD is available or
unavailable; a retail clinic is available or unavailable).




                                                                            34
                  Figure 2: New Jersey Retail Clinics: Locations and Ownership




         Already open   Opened    Opened and closed        CVS      ShopRite   Walgreens    Other

Notes: The above maps display the location, operation status between 2006 and 2014, and ownership of all
retail clinics in New Jersey. As seen in the map on the left, two clinics were open before 2006, 53 opened
between 2006 and 2014, and 18 opened and closed between 2006 and 2014. The single retail clinic not
operated by CVS, ShopRite, or Walgreens was called Simple Simon Pharmacy.




                                                      35
           Figure 3: New Jersey Retail Clinics: Timing of Openings and Closings

                                                               By Year


                        15
                Number of Clinics
                        5
                        0  10




                                     2006   2007       2008   2009    2010    2011     2012    2013     2014

                                                        Clinic Openings              Clinic Closings




                                                              By Month
                        15
                 Number of Clinics
                5       0      10




                                     1      2      3     4    5      6    7     8       9     10   11    12

                                                        Clinic Openings              Clinic Closings


Notes: The above figures display the years and months in which retail clinics opened and closed in New
Jersey between 2006 and 2014.




                                                                     36
        Figure 4: New Jersey Retail Clinic Distance Groups: 0-2 Miles vs. 2-5 Miles




Notes: The above map displays the distance bands used in our analysis. The black block groups contain a
retail clinic. The rings of block groups are shaded lighter as one moves away from a retail clinic and depict
distances between 0 to 2 miles and 2 to 5 miles from each retail clinic.




                                                     37
Figure 5: Primary Care Treatable Conditions: Difference in ER Visits Between Near and
Far Distance Groups in Event Time

                                                                                                                      Primary Care Treatable



                                                                                              -40
                                                            Difference: ER Visits per 100,000
                                                          -80      -70      -60       -50




                                                                                                    -24   -18   -12       -6       0        6                                      12         18        24
                                                                                                                          Event time (Monthly)

                                                                                                                             Difference: Near − Far


Notes: The above figure plots the difference in ER visits per 100,000 between the near and far distance groups
in event time for a balanced panel. Coefficients from a regression of monthly ER visits on an indicator for
near, event time dummies, and event time dummies interacted with near, as well as month by year and retail
clinic fixed effects. An event is defined as either a clinic opening or closing (clinic closings are treated inversely
to clinic openings). “Primary care treatable” is the sum of ER visits for urinary tract infections, conjuctivitis,
upper repiratory tract infections, pharyngitis, otitis media, and sprains and straings. Population weighted.



                                              Figure 6: Emergent, Preventable Conditions: ER Visits in Event Time

                                                                                                    Influenza                                                                                        Diabetes
                                                                                                                                                                      -10
    Difference: ER Visits per 100,000




                                                                                                                                       Difference: ER Visits per 100,000
                                    5




                                                                                                                                                               -20
                          0




                                                                                                                                                -40    -30
              -5




                                                                                                                                         -50
   -10




                                        -24   -18   -12                      -6     0      6                    12      18      24                                          -24   -18   -12      -6     0      6       12   18   24
                                                                           Event time (Monthly)                                                                                                Event time (Monthly)

                                                                                         Difference: Near − Far                                                                                    Difference: Near − Far



Notes: The above figure plots the difference in ER visits per 100,000 between the near and far distance groups
in event time for a balanced panel. Coefficients from a regression of monthly ER visits on an indicator for
near, event time dummies, and event time dummies interacted with near, as well as month by year and
retail clinic fixed effects. An event is defined as either a clinic opening or closing (clinic closings are treated
inversely to clinic openings). Population weighted.


                                                                                                                                38
   Figure 7: Emergent, Non-Preventable Conditions (Placebo): ER Visits in Event Time

                                                                         Emergent, Not Preventable




                                                        0
                      Difference: ER Visits per 100,000
                           -15     -10 -20    -5




                                                            -24   -18   -12   -6       0        6       12   18   24
                                                                              Event time (Monthly)

                                                                               Difference: Near − Far


Notes: The above figure plots the difference in ER visits per 100,000 between the near and far distance groups
in event time for a balanced panel. Coefficients from a regression of monthly ER visits on an indicator for
near, event time dummies, and event time dummies interacted with near, as well as month by year and
retail clinic fixed effects. An event is defined as either a clinic opening or closing (clinic closings are treated
inversely to clinic openings). Population weighted. “Emergent, Not Preventable” is the sum of ER visits for
fractures, births, and poisonings.




                                                                                   39
                                          Figure 8: Primary Care Treatable Conditions: List Charges in Event Time

                                                                                                                      Primary Care Treatable




                                                                                             1500
                                                            Difference: Average List Charges
                                                                  0       500 -500 1000




                                                                                                    -24   -18   -12       -6       0        6                                      12         18        24
                                                                                                                          Event time (Monthly)

                                                                                                                             Difference: Near − Far


Notes: The above figure plots the difference in average monthly list charges between the near and far distance
groups in event time for a balanced panel. Coefficients from a regression of average monthly list charges
on an indicator for near, event time dummies, and event time dummies interacted with near, as well as
month by year and retail clinic fixed effects. An event is defined as either a clinic opening or closing (clinic
closings are treated inversely to clinic openings). “Primary care treatable” includes ER visits for urinary
tract infections, conjuctivitis, upper repiratory tract infections, pharyngitis, otitis media, and sprains and
straings. Population weighted.



                                              Figure 9: Emergent, Preventable Conditions: List Charges in Event Time

                                                                                                    Influenza                                                                                        Diabetes
     Difference: Average List Charges




                                                                                                                                         Difference: Average List Charges
                        5000 10000




                                                                                                                                                            2000 4000
                   0




                                                                                                                                                       0
  -10000 -5000




                                                                                                                                       -4000 -2000




                                        -24     -18   -12                     -6     0      6                   12      18      24                                          -24   -18   -12      -6     0      6       12   18   24
                                                                            Event time (Monthly)                                                                                               Event time (Monthly)

                                                                                          Difference: Near − Far                                                                                   Difference: Near − Far



Notes: The above figure plots the difference in average monthly list charges between the near and far distance
groups in event time for a balanced panel. Coefficients from a regression of average monthly list charges on
an indicator for near, event time dummies, and event time dummies interacted with near, as well as month
by year and retail clinic fixed effects. An event is defined as either a clinic opening or closing (clinic closings
are treated inversely to clinic openings).


                                                                                                                                40
Figure 10: Emergent, Non-Preventable Conditions (Placebo): List Charges in Event Time

                                                                              Emergent, Not Preventable




                                                     1000 2000
                             Difference: Average List Charges
                       -3000 -2000 -1000       0




                                                                 -24   -18   -12   -6       0        6       12   18   24
                                                                                   Event time (Monthly)

                                                                                    Difference: Near − Far


Notes: The above figure plots the difference in average monthly list charges between the near and far distance
groups in event time for a balanced panel. Coefficients from a regression of average monthly list charges on
an indicator for near, event time dummies, and event time dummies interacted with near, as well as month by
year and retail clinic fixed effects. An event is defined as either a clinic opening or closing (clinic closings are
treated inversely to clinic openings). “Emergent, Not Preventable” includes ER visits for fractures, births,
and poisonings.




                                                                                        41
2   Tables

              Table 1: New Jersey Retail Clinics: Summary Statistics

                                    (1)      (2)   (3)      (4)     (5)
                                    All     CVS ShopRite Walgreens Other
        Open Saturdays              0.96    0.98       0.83          1.00       1.00
        Open Sundays                0.95    0.98       0.83          1.00       0.00
        Pharmacy on Site            1.00    1.00       1.00          1.00       1.00
        Clinics Shut Down           0.33    0.23       1.00          0.25       1.00
        Weekday Open Time          08:32   08:30      09:20         08:00       08:00
        Weekday Close Time         07:33   07:30      08:00         07:30       08:00
        Saturday Open Time         09:02   09:00      09:00         09:30       09:00
        Saturday Close Time        05:25   05:30      05:00         05:00       06:00
        Sunday Open Time           09:48   09:55      09:00         09:30         .
        Sunday Close Time          05:18   05:25      04:24         05:00         .
        Clinics                      55      44          6            4           1
       Notes: The above table summarizes characteristics of all retail clinics in opera-
       tion in New Jersey at some point between 2006 and 2014. The “Other” category
       is Simple Simon Pharmacy.




                                              42
                        Table 2: Overview of Condition Categories

Diagnosis group                                       ICD-9-CM                         Percent of
                                                        codes                          ER visits
Primary care treatable
  Urinary tract infection           599*, 595*                                            1.71%
  Conjunctivitis                    372*                                                  0.46%
  URTI/sinusitis/bronchitis         460*-461*, 465*-466*, 473, 490                        3.15%
  Pharyngitis                       462*-463*, 034                                        1.37%
  Otitis externa/media              380*-382*                                             1.39%
  Sprains/strains                   840*-848*                                             4.38%
Emergent, preventable
  Influenza                         487*-488*                                             0.21%
  Diabetes                          249*-250*                                             8.74%
Emergent, not preventable
  Fractures                         800*-829*                                             2.94%
  Poisonings                        909.0*, 909.1*, 909.5*, 995.2*, 960*-989*             0.53%
  Childbirth                        DRGs 372-375                                          2.20%
Notes: The above table provides an overview of the three categories of conditions used in our
analysis. For all conditions other than diabetes, we consider a visit as being for the condition in
question only if the condition is listed as the primary diagnosis. For diabetes, we consider all vis-
its in which diabetes is listed in any diagnosis field. The percent of ER visits reflects the total
share of ER visits in New Jersey between 2006 and 2014 with the corresponding ICD-9 codes.




                                                 43
 Table 3: Retail Clinic Distance Groups: Block Group Summary Statistics at Baseline

Demographics
                                      (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)
                                      All       0-1 Miles     0-2 Miles      2-5 Miles      5+ miles
 Population                          1,391        1,372          1,361          1,385         1,415
 Population density                  9,148       12,318         11,463          9,338         7,721
 Median household income            75,367       84,990         82,236         76,900        69,311
 Pct. black                          14.36         7.54         10.83           15.81        13.37
 Pct. under 18                       23.06        21.16         22.13           23.51         22.67
 Pct. aged 18-54                     50.71        54.44         52.49           51.03         49.28
 Pct. aged 55-74                     19.33        17.63         18.68           18.89         20.44
 Pct. age 75 and over                6.90          6.77          6.70            6.57         7.61
 Urgent care clinic density          0.15          0.27          0.19            0.16         0.11
 Distance to hospital                 2.93         2.38           2.36           2.37          4.20
 Block Groups                        6,320         260            894           3,499         1,927

ER Visits per 100,000 per Week
                                       (1)         (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)
                                       All      0-1 Miles      0-2 Miles     2-5 Miles      5+ miles
 Urinary tract infection             13.973       19.401        14.377         13.715         14.257
 Conjuctivitis                        4.400        3.513         3.808          4.371          4.730
 Upper repiratory infection          38.250       28.266        31.919         37.756         42.116
 Pharyngitis                         14.459       10.807        12.479         14.174         15.906
 Otitis                              15.293       10.951        12.240         15.461         16.414
 Sprain/strain                       41.032       36.823        37.608         39.512         45.416
 Influenza                           1.899         1.307        1.632           1.894         2.033
 Diabetes                            73.206       62.932        67.636         70.834         80.151
 Fracture                            26.119       24.701        24.767         25.973         27.020
 Poisoning                           4.130         3.376        3.987           4.091         4.269
 Births                              21.735       25.080        21.483         21.860         21.623
 Block Groups                         6,320         260           894           3,499          1,927
Notes: The above table provides baseline demographic information and outcomes for block groups in
different distance bands around retail clinics in New Jersey. Observations are at the block group level.
Baseline weekly ER visits per 100,000 are the weekly rates averaged over the first quarter of our sample.
Data is taken from both the 2010 Census and the 2008-2012 ACS.




                                                   44
                              Table 4: Retail Clinics and ER Visits

                                                 Primary Care Treatable
                        (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)                  (6)
                        UTI       Conjunct.       URI    Pharyngitis Otitis             Sprain/strain
 Open                  0.117         0.228        1.077         0.189         0.251          1.104
                      (0.308)       (0.146)      (0.841)       (0.490)       (0.325)        (0.693)
 Near                  -0.041        0.151        -0.064        0.082         -0.138         1.738
                      (0.455)       (0.200)      (1.032)       (0.566)       (0.497)        (1.088)
 Open*Near            -0.890∗∗      -0.402∗∗     -1.597∗      -1.435∗∗       -0.715∗       -2.289∗∗∗
                      (0.390)       (0.179)      (0.879)      (0.619)        (0.421)        (0.813)
 Mean per 100k        15.615          4.011      27.152       11.942          12.140        39.662
 Mean Pop.            175,121       175,121     175,121       175,121        175,121        175,121
 R-Squared             0.521         0.454       0.732         0.661           0.642         0.679
 Observations         51,480         51,480     51,480         51,480        51,480          51,480

                         Emergent, Preventable             Placebo: Emergent, Not Preventable
                             (1)        (2)                  (3)         (4)           (5)
                         Influenza   Diabetes              Fracture   Poisoning      Births
  Open                     0.028            -0.321          0.216           0.053            -0.267
                          (0.120)          (1.183)         (0.327)         (0.102)          (0.301)
  Near                     0.102            0.816           0.706           0.054          -0.668∗∗
                          (0.078)          (1.937)         (0.560)         (0.136)         (0.282)
  Open*Near               -0.251∗∗∗        -2.526∗          -0.555          -0.117           0.548
                           (0.088)         (1.441)         (0.439)         (0.102)          (0.425)
  Mean per 100k            1.878           76.390           27.495         5.064            20.804
  Mean Pop.               175,121         175,121          175,121        175,121          175,121
  R-Squared                0.502           0.790            0.458          0.401            0.616
  Observations            51,480           51,480          51,480          51,480          51,480
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Observations are at the retail clinic-distance band-week level. The independent variable in each
regression is the number of ER visits for a given condition. All regressions include month byyear and
retail clinic fixed effects and are population weighted. Additional retail clinic-distance group controls
include population density, fraction black, a quadratic in median household income, distance to nearest
hospital, and the age structure. Standard errors are clustered by retail clinic. “UTI” denotes urinary
tract infections; “URTI” denotes upper respiratory tract infections.



                                                     45
            Table 5: Retail Clinics and ER Visits for Flu by Patient Age

                       (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)
                    All Visits Ages 0-4 Ages 5-17 Ages 18-44 Ages 45-64 Ages 65+
Open                  0.028        -0.002      -0.038        0.051          0.044         -0.026
                     (0.120)      (0.582)     (0.270)       (0.105)        (0.050)       (0.066)
Near                  0.102       0.594∗      0.272∗         0.057          -0.008        -0.013
                     (0.078)      (0.334)     (0.157)       (0.102)        (0.039)       (0.060)
Open*Near           -0.251∗∗∗     -0.818∗     -0.369∗∗     -0.325∗∗∗        -0.080        0.051
                     (0.088)      (0.420)     (0.176)       (0.107)        (0.065)       (0.089)
Mean per 100k 1.878                5.655       2.734          1.942         0.864        0.929
Mean Pop.     175,121             11,781       30,037        66,860        46,345        22,901
R-Squared      0.502               0.333        0.355         0.460         0.351        0.358
Observations  51,480              51,480       51,480        51,480        51,480        51,480
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Observations are at the retail clinic-distance band-week level. The independent variable
in each regression is the number of ER visits for influenza. All regressions include month by year
and retail clinic fixed effects and are population weighted. Additional retail clinic-distance group
controls include population density, fraction black, a quadratic in median household income, dis-
tance to nearest hospital, and the age structure. Standard errors are clustered by retail clinic.




                                                46
                       Table 6: Retail Clinics and Average ER List Charges

                                                    Primary Care Treatable
                         (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)             (6)
                         UTI        Conjunct.        URTI        Pharyngitis       Otitis      Sprain/strain
 Open                  -330.317       35.972         79.040         90.786         9.320           47.755
                      (230.307)      (50.100)       (83.881)       (76.526)       (58.924)        (89.175)
 Near                  -458.965       -68.730    3.980             -28.656         -23.843        -20.575
                      (279.216)      (107.253) (154.260)          (105.415)       (95.942)       (104.054)
 Open*Near            847.679∗        165.461   427.660            234.627       327.419∗         247.593
                      (504.357)      (214.460) (294.260)          (217.165)      (191.895)       (210.771)
 Mean per 100k 12,794.461 1,220.547 3,899.715                     1,788.249      1,829.747       2,667.661
 Mean Pop.      175,121    175,121   175,121                       175,121        175,121         175,121
 R-Squared        0.087      0.130    0.129                         0.153          0.103           0.383
 Observations    51,480     51,480    51,480                        51,480        51,480          51,480

                           Emergent, Preventable               Emergent, Not Preventable (Placebo)
                              (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)               (5)
                          Influenza          Diabetes          Fractures       Poisonings           Births
  Open                     -214.543           -388.686          -347.490          27.087           91.058
                          (997.012)          (362.217)         (340.134)        (429.094)         (464.000)
  Near                    -2,119.802          -427.187          -457.786         -625.744          -266.211
                         (1,315.987)         (414.853)         (318.818)        (427.497)         (221.921)
  Open*Near               1,827.985           764.090           467.331          886.099           389.109
                         (1,246.891)         (642.152)         (455.722)        (624.454)         (379.694)
  Mean per 100k           7,996.014         33,997.848         17,587.116      15,256.463        23,120.788
  Mean Pop.                175,121           175,121            175,121         175,121           175,121
  R-Squared                 0.037              0.404              0.137           0.064             0.569
  Observations             51,480             51,480             51,480          51,480            51,480
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Observations are at the retail clinic-distance band-week level. The independent variable in each re-
gression is the average total list charges of ER visits for a given condition. Hospital visits with list charges
at or above the 99.99th percentile across all ER visits for a given condition are excluded. All regressions in-
clude month, year, and retail clinic fixed effects and are population weighted. Additional retail clinic-distance
group controls include population density, fraction black, a quadratic in median household income, and the
age structure. Standard errors are clustered by retail clinic. “UTI” denotes urinary tract infections; “URTI”
denotes upper respiratory tract infections.

                                                      47
                Table 7: Retail Clinics and ER Visits: 0-1 Miles vs. 1-3 Miles

                                                  Primary Care Treatable
                        (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)             (5)             (6)
                        UTI       Conjunct.       URTI       Pharyngitis       Otitis      Sprain/strain
 Open                  -0.011         0.296       1.057          -0.038        0.255           1.230
                      (0.432)        (0.214)     (0.930)        (0.639)       (0.371)         (0.899)
 Near                  0.327         0.337∗      1.650∗          0.253         0.576          2.117∗∗
                      (0.430)        (0.190)     (0.985)        (0.611)       (0.415)         (1.000)
 Open*Near             -0.663      -0.541∗∗      -2.576∗         -1.421       -0.979∗∗        -2.203∗
                      (0.660)      (0.225)       (1.381)        (0.864)       (0.485)         (1.158)
 Mean per 100k         15.080         3.733       25.141        11.000         10.988          39.391
 Mean Pop.             79,154        79,154       79,154        79,154         79,154          79,154
 R-Squared             0.386          0.352        0.648         0.564          0.506           0.580
 Observations          51,480        51,480       51,480        51,480         51,480          51,480

                          Emergent, Preventable             Emergent, Not Preventable (Placebo)
                              (1)            (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)
                          Influenza        Diabetes         Fractures       Poisonings          Births
  Open                      -0.248           -0.853           0.303            0.017             0.143
                           (0.154)          (1.450)          (0.445)          (0.158)           (0.271)
  Near                     0.171∗∗           1.798            0.556            0.181           -0.730∗∗
                           (0.084)          (2.315)          (0.449)          (0.131)          (0.288)
  Open*Near                -0.305∗           -0.180           -0.171           0.030             0.706
                           (0.153)          (2.625)          (0.448)          (0.163)           (0.438)
  Mean per 100k              1.803            75.452         27.523            4.990            19.199
  Mean Pop.                 79,154            79,154         79,154            79,154           79,154
  R-Squared                  0.162             0.727          0.304            0.238             0.226
  Observations              51,480            51,480         51,480            51,480           51,480
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Observations are at the retail clinic-distance band-week level. In contrast to our primary analy-
sis, the near (far) group is within 0-1 (1-3) miles of a retail clinic; residents living further than 3 miles
from a retail clinic are excluded. The independent variable in each regression is the number of ER visits
for a given condition. All regressions include month, year, and retail clinic fixed effects and are popula-
tion weighted. Additional retail clinic-distance group controls include population density, fraction black,
a quadratic in median household income, and the age structure. Standard errors are clustered by retail
clinic. “UTI” denotes urinary tract infections; “URTI” denotes upper respiratory tract infections.

                                                       48
                   Appendix
A                          Supplementary Figures

                                       Figure A.1: Diagnosis Number of Diabetes and Influenza
                                            Diabetes                                                             Influenza
            800000




                                                                                       80000
                  600000




                                                                                             60000
 Number of Visits




                                                                              Number of Visits
    400000




                                                                                40000
            200000




                                                                                       20000
            0




                                                                                       0

                           1   2   3      4       5     6    7   8   9                               1   2   3   4       5     6    7   8   9
                                          Diagnosis Number                                                       Diagnosis Number


Notes: The above figures depict the frequency of all observed diagnosis positions for diabetes and influenza.
That is, each figure considers all ER visits in which the diagnosis in question was recorded and displays
the position in which the diagnosis appeared (i.e., “1” denotes the first diagnosis, “2” denotes the second
diagnosis, etc.).




                                                                         49
       Figure A.2: Retail Clinic Distance Group Example: North Arlington (Newark)




Notes: The above picture displays a close-up of the distance bands used in both our primary analysis and
robustness exercises for the retail clinic located in North Arlington, New Jersey. The black block group
contains the North Arlington retail clinic. The rings of block groups are shaded lighter as one moves away
from the retail clinic and depict distances of 0-1 miles, 1-2 miles, 2-3 miles, and 3-5 miles from the retail
clinic.




                                                     50
                       Figure A.3: Locations of Urgent Care Clinics in 2017




                                          Retail clinics    Urgent care clinics

Notes: The above map displays the locations of all retail clinics in our data (triangles) and the locations of all
urgent care clinics in 2017 (circles). The urgent care clinic locations in 2017 were collected by scraping google
search results, and following up with each urgent care clinic’s website to identify locations of all branches.




                                                           51
B    Supplementary Tables

          Table A.1: ER Visits for Diabetes: Most Common Primary Diagnosis
                                                     Frequency Percent Cumulative
 Diabetes mellitus (250)                              285,743   8.43      8.43
 Respiratory system/other chest symptoms (786)        160,203   4.73     13.16
 General symptoms (780)                               110,206   3.25     16.41
 Other chronic ischemic heart disease (414)           107,351   3.17     19.58
 Heart failure (428)                                   99,258   2.93     22.50
 Other abdomen/pelvis symptoms (789)                   74,681   2.20     24.71
 Other cellulitis/abscess (682)                        74,015   2.18     26.89
 Other urinary tract disorder (599)                    65,540   1.93     28.83
 Cardiac dysrhythmias (427)                            62,913   1.86     30.68
 Other & unspecified back disorder (724)               57,266   1.69     32.37
 Complications peculiar to certain spec. proc. (996)   53,709   1.58     33.96
 Acute myocardial infarct ion (410)                    50,227   1.48     35.44
 Pneumonia, organism unspecified (486)                 50,044   1.48     36.91
 Chronic bronchitis (491)                              45,409   1.34     38.25
 Asthma (493)                                          447,66   1.32     39.58
 Septicemia (038)                                      38,190   1.13     40.70
 Fluid/electrolyte disorder (276)                      36,838   1.09     41.79
 Symptoms involving head/neck (784)                    35,801   1.06     42.85
 Osteoarthrosis & allied disorders (715)               35,629   1.05     43.90
 Acute renal failure (584)                             33,229   0.98     44.88
 Cerebral artery occlusion (434)                       32,516   0.96     45.84
 Renal/ureteral calculus (592)                         29,667   0.88     46.71
 Essential hypertension (401)                          29,252   0.86     47.57
 Cataract (366)                                        28,985   0.86     48.43
 Other soft tissue disorders (729)                     27,886   0.82     49.25
 GI system symptoms (787)                              27,513   0.81     50.06
Notes: The above table displays the most common primary diagnoses for hospital visits with any dia-
betes diagnosis recorded. Each row lists the description; the corresponding ICD-9 code is provided in
parentheses.




                                                 52
         Table A.2: Retail Clinics and Average ER List Charges: Untrimmed Prices

                    Primary Care Treatable Emergent, Preventable Emergent, Not Preventable
                              (1)                       (2)          (3)                     (4)
                            Combined                Influenza      Diabetes                Combined
Open                           10.096                -287.840       -320.411                 0.569
                              (73.543)              (980.343)      (350.802)               (328.006)
Near                          -104.187              -2,170.106 -489.617                     -402.278
                             (180.333)             (1,317.644) (430.300)                   (322.448)
Open*Near                    474.526∗               1,863.661   824.956                     412.784
                             (282.555)             (1,238.487) (667.641)                   (449.641)
Mean per 100k                4,030.004              8,047.146 34,139.164                   19,637.637
Mean Pop.                     175,121                175,121   175,121                      175,121
R-Squared                      0.484                  0.037     0.394                         0.547
Observations                   51,480                 51,480    51,480                       51,480
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Observations are at the retail clinic-distance band-week level. The independent variable in each regres-
sion is the average total list charges of ER visits for a given condition. All regressions include month, year, and
retail clinic fixed effects and are population weighted. Additional retail clinic-distance group controls include
population density, fraction black, a quadratic in median household income, and the age structure. Standard
errors are clustered by retail clinic.




                                                      53
          Table A.3: Retail Clinics and Average ER List Charges: Residualized Prices


                                                     Primary Care Treatable
                          (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)             (6)
                          UTI         Conjunct.        URTI        Pharyngitis        Otitis      Sprain/strain
 Open                   -280.392        29.458        154.586         52.962          54.008           -6.126
                       (197.169)       (69.217)      (133.758)       (79.129)        (78.472)         (85.581)
 Near                 -677.494∗∗∗ -82.697   -131.861                  -144.213       -104.856         -112.172
                       (223.223) (111.229) (153.679)                 (108.170)      (112.123)        (114.621)
 Open*Near             952.289∗∗       161.852 615.495∗∗              305.274        346.609          274.012
                       (397.480)      (208.919) (302.572)            (221.984)      (222.429)        (233.502)
 Mean per 100k          -11.948          29.194       210.073          25.170        105.067           26.844
 Mean Pop.              175,121         175,121       175,121         175,121        175,121          175,121
 R-Squared               0.044           0.016          0.047           0.123          0.064           0.281
 Observations           51,476           51,477        51,473          51,477         51,473           51,474

                             Emergent, Preventable                Emergent, Not Preventable (Placebo)
                                 (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)
                             Influenza          Diabetes         Fractures         Poisonings            Births
   Open                      4,019.556           -22.988          -51.293            166.862            186.730
                            (2,848.726)         (436.149)        (263.449)          (429.721)          (466.919)
   Near                      -370.052            -451.070        -569.792∗           104.494            -258.234
                            (4,649.174)         (457.218)        (294.849)          (624.785)          (252.725)
   Open*Near                 -7,730.023         1,090.283         472.349            376.180            456.116
                            (5,222.984)         (914.503)        (526.075)          (810.051)          (500.814)
   Mean per 100k            -1,192.490          -152.406           -33.930           155.379            36.936
   Mean Pop.                 175,121            175,121            175,121           175,121            175,121
   R-Squared                   0.046              0.247             0.065              0.030             0.376
   Observations               51,480             51,479            51,471             51,472            51,475
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Observations are at the retail clinic-distance band-week level. The independent variable in each regres-
sion is the average total list charges of ER visits for a given condition residualized from hospital fixed effects and
an indicator for whether the patient was admitted. All regressions include month, year, and retail clinic fixed
effects and are population weighted. Additional retail clinic-distance group controls include population density,
fraction black, a quadratic in median household income, and the age structure. Standard errors are clustered
by retail clinic. “UTI” denotes urinary tract infections; “URTI” denotes upper respiratory tract infections.

                                                        54
                      Table A.4: Distribution of List Charges by Diagnosis

                                   p5      p25      p50      p75       p95        Mean       Std. Dev.      Count
 Influenza                 495 1054 1787 3348 29425 6688.63                                  25927.55       82,676
 Diabetes                   895 3258 14527 42429 116862 32402.23                             53472.52      3,389,333
 Urinary tract infection    663 1396 2934 9220 53504 11773.92                                26540.98       660,532
 Conjunctivitis            293   513   785  1193  3145  1222.62                              2364.37        178,601
 URTI/sinusitis/bronchitis 373   776  1335 2387 12420 3322.52                                9624.29       1,220,564
 Pharyngitis                352  680  1046 1659   4446  1708.13                               3428.79       528,145
 Otitis                     322  575   913   1415 6003  1728.56                               4434.3        535,466
 Sprains & strains          555 1034 1589 2378    7997  2666.38                              7047.24       1,673,502
 Poisonings                404 1086 2847 12874 64116 14797.16                                41404.47       204,605
 Fractures                  802 1477 2523 11990 78526 17611.13                               53310.2       1,120,181
 Births                    9108 15311 20730 27729 42460 22939.67                              14193.1       854,560
Notes: The above table presents summary statistics for list charges by diagnosis across hospital visits.



                              Table A.5: CVS MinuteClinic Price List
                                                             Posted price
                        General medical exams                              89
                        Minor illnesses                                  89-129
                        Minor injuries                                   89-129
                        Adeno test (viral pink eye)                        25
                        Blood sugar test                                   25
                        Flu test (A/B)                                     35
                        Strep test (rapid)                                 35
                        Diabetes monitoring                               79-99
                        Diabetes screening (glucose)                      59-69
                        Influenza vaccine (high dose)                     69.99
                        Influenza vaccine (seasonal)                      44.99
                  Notes: The above prices come from www.cvs.com/minuteclinic; last ac-
                  cessed May 2017. Minor illnesses include urinary tract and bladder in-
                  fections, upper respiratory infections, sore and strep throat, and ear-
                  aches and ear infections. Minor injuries include sprains, strains, and
                  joint pain. High dose influenza vaccines contain more antigen and are
                  intended to create a stronger immune response; these vaccines are avail-
                  able for people aged 65 years and older (CDC).




                                                     55
