                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE EMPLOYMENT EFFECTS OF MINIMUM WAGES:
                      SOME QUESTIONS WE NEED TO ANSWER

                                         David Neumark

                                       Working Paper 23584
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23584


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 2017, Revised October 2017




I am grateful to William Wascher for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by David Neumark. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Employment Effects of Minimum Wages: Some Questions We Need to Answer
David Neumark
NBER Working Paper No. 23584
July 2017, Revised October 2017
JEL No. J23,J38

                                             ABSTRACT

The literature on the employment effects of minimum wages is about a century old, and includes hundreds
of studies. Yet the debate among researchers about the employment effects of minimum wages remains
intense and unsettled. This essay discusses the key questions that have arisen in the past research that,
if we can answer them, may prove most useful in making sense of the conflicting evidence. I also
focus on additional questions we should consider to better inform the policy debate, in particular in
the context of the very high minimum wages coming on line in the United States, about which past
research is quite uninformative.


David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu
The Employment Effects of Minimum Wages: Some Questions We Need to Answer
David Neumark1

Summary

The literature on the employment effects of minimum wages is about a century old, and includes
hundreds of studies. Yet the debate among researchers about the employment effects of
minimum wages remains intense and unsettled. This essay discusses the key questions that have
arisen in the past research that, if we can answer them, may prove most useful in making sense of
the conflicting evidence. I also focus on additional questions we should consider to better inform
the policy debate, in particular in the context of the very high minimum wages coming on line in
the United States, about which past research is quite uninformative.

Keywords

minimum wage, employment effects, labor economics, econometrics, panel data, controls, trends


“[I]f you know what you believe, it makes it a lot easier to answer questions.”

                                                                            George W. Bush


Introduction

       The literature on the employment effects of minimum wages is about a century old, and

includes hundreds of studies. Some of the very earliest studies followed the adoption of a state

minimum wage in 1914 and a national minimum wage in the United States in 1938, using

empirical techniques that are not too far removed from the difference-in-differences approaches

still done today.2 Yet despite the scores of studies, the development of richer data, and the

development of more-refined empirical techniques, the debate among researchers about the

employment effects of minimum wages – and concerning not just the magnitude, but the broader

question of whether a higher minimum wage reduces employment – remains intense and

unsettled.3

       Research on the employment effects of minimum wages has already been synthesized

and reviewed extensively.4 Thus, in this essay I do not attempt to summarize or augment these



                                                 1
prior reviews. Rather, my purpose is to identify key research questions. I focus, in part, on the

key questions that have arisen in the past research that, if we can answer them, may prove most

useful in making sense of the conflicting evidence. I also focus on additional questions we

should consider to better inform the policy debate, in particular in the context of the very high

minimum wages coming on line in the United States, about which past research is quite

uninformative. Thus, my focus is on the important questions to which we do not know the

answer, rather than my views on what the prior research says about key questions in the

minimum wage literature.5 As such, my goal is to provide what I view as the most promising

suggestions and roadmap for future research on the employment effects of minimum wages.6

       My review and discussion focuses on U.S. evidence. Of course, there is growing

evidence on employment effects of minimum wages in other countries. But the U.S. experience

has dominated the literature because of the availability of significant cross-state variation in

minimum wages for nearly three decades, and the U.S. literature has by and large raised all of the

important issues. Moreover, this essay is not meant to be an exhaustive review of the literature.7

       Because I am trying to provide a roadmap for future research, I am also motivated to

focus on the United States because the very large minimum wage increases already occurring or

scheduled to occur soon, or likely to be enacted, in U.S. cities and states are likely to dominate

both research and policy debate about minimum wages in the coming years.8 Thus, it is

important to do more to ask what existing data can tell us about the likely employment effects of

these increases, and to consider how we might expand what we know from past data as well as

incorporate new data to exploit these large minimum wage increases to solidify our

understanding of the employment effects of much higher minimum wages. Whatever one thinks

of the merits of the coming minimum wage increases, they should afford an unparalleled




                                                  2
opportunity to learn more about the effects of minimum wages on employment (and other

outcomes).

       Regardless of one’s precise view of what the minimum wage literature on the whole says

about the employment effects of minimum wages, it is clear that there is variation in the

magnitude of estimated employment effects across studies. The debate is often characterized as

being about whether the elasticity for low-skilled groups is equal to (or more precisely

indistinguishable from) zero, or more likely in the range of −0.1 to −0.2, although there are

larger negative estimates in the literature (e.g., Clemens and Wither, 2014, and see Table 1

below), and occasional large positive estimates (most notably, Card and Krueger, 1994).

       Most of the existing research that debates the findings of these studies focuses on

econometric issues that may be responsible for the variation in effects across studies. However,

remarkably little attention has been given to economic factors that may explain variation in

estimated employment effects across studies. A sharper focus on these economic factors may be

particularly important in the current and pending policy environment in the United States,

because trying to predict the effects of large minimum wage increases from simple extrapolation

of reduced-form estimates of the employment effects of minimum wages, based on evidence

from much lower minimum levels and much more moderate changes, is a highly dubious

exercise. In contrast, a better understanding of the factors underlying variation in minimum

wage effects would likely enhance our ability to predict the effects of “out of sample” policy

changes. Hence, in outlining what I view as promising avenues for future research I focus on

both econometric issues and some issues of the underlying economics.

Econometric Issues




                                                 3
       Regardless of what we can or will be able to say about larger minimum wage increases,

we are still faced with contention over what the research evidence says about the employment

effects of past smaller minimum wage increases. There are two key econometric issues that have

been identified in recent research as underlying the different answers researchers have obtained.

It seems natural, then, that further research on these econometric issues could prove productive

in helping to resolve the debate.

       First, like in any attempt to estimate causal effects of policy, it is critical to choose

appropriate controls to provide a counterfactual for what would have happened absent the

minimum wage increase. But this is not always easy. The standard two-way fixed effects model

is a difference-in-differences (DD) estimator, comparing changes in low-skilled employment in

states where the minimum wage increased more to states where it increased less (or not at all).

However, recently Allegretto et al. (2011) and Dube et al. (2010) have raised the concern that

cross-state policy variation is correlated with shocks that also affect outcomes. They report

differences in estimates between panel data estimators in which all states could potentially serve

as controls – which yield “conventional” negative elasticities – versus estimators using only

geographically close areas as controls – which yield estimates closer to and statistically

indistinguishable from zero.9 The idea motivating the use of “close controls” is that the states (or

subareas of states) affected by minimum wage increases may experience the same economic

shocks to low-skill labor markets as nearby areas unaffected by these increases, and thus more

reliably identify the causal effects of minimum wages.

       This work has spurred three kinds of responses. First, research has explored the validity

of the controls used in this approach (Neumark et al., 2014a; Neumark and Wascher, 2017).10

Second, and closely related to this question, researchers have pushed further the development of




                                                  4
econometric techniques to select and construct control areas (Powell, 2016; Totty, 2015), with

Powell building on the synthetic control methods of Abadie et al. (2010). And third, a number of

studies have adopted alternative identification strategies to isolate the effects of minimum wage

increases from shocks that are potentially correlated with them.

       In this latter category, the most natural extension is to use triple-differences (DDD)

estimators that isolate the effect of the policy change by introducing another group exposed to

the same shock but not the policy change – exactly the problem that motivates Allegretto et al.

and Dube et al.

       Thompson (2009) – which predates these two papers – uses a DDD approach based on

differences in wage levels across counties within a state. This allows the inclusion of state-by-

period fixed effects, which control for state-specific shocks. Using variation generated by the

federal increases in 1996 and 1997, Thompson finds large disemployment effects in counties

where minimum wages are more binding because wages are lower and workers are lower skilled.

Clemens and Wither (2014) focus on the 2007-2009 federal minimum wage increases,

comparing changes in employment for the lowest-wage workers whose wages were differentially

affected by the federal increases (because of prior variation in state minimum wages), to changes

in employment for workers who earned wages that were low, but high enough that the federal

minimum wage had little impact on them. They estimate a large employment elasticity for

directly affected workers (of about −0.97 based on SIPP data).13

       Baskaya and Rubinstein (2015) address the same problem of shocks correlated with state

minimum wage increases. But they instead use instrumental variables (IV) to address the

potential correlation of minimum wage changes with shocks to low-skill labor markets, in

estimating the effects of minimum wage on teen employment. Their IV is the interaction




                                                 5
between the federal minimum wage and a measure of the historical propensity for each state to

let the federal minimum wage bind, which is intended to purge the estimated minimum wage

effect of bias from states endogenously choosing their minimum wage in response to shocks to

state-level economic conditions. Their IV elasticity estimates for teenagers are larger than many

past estimates (and their OLS estimates), in the range −0.3 to −0.5. Their finding that the IV

estimates are larger than the OLS estimates is consistent with policymakers raising minimum

wages when youth labor market conditions are strong (in contrast to the direction of bias implied

by the results from the close-controls approach).

       Thus, across these and related studies, a puzzle emerges. Studies using close controls

generally find very small disemployment effects usually indistinguishable from zero. But other

identification strategies – DDD estimators that control for state-specific shocks, IV estimates that

purge the minimum wage variable of correlation with these shocks, as well as the most advanced

synthetic control estimator (Powell, 2016) – tend to find larger disemployment effects. Results

across many recent studies – including those discussed above – are summarized in Table 1.

                                           [Insert Table 1 here]

       There is therefore, clearly, an important research challenge and question of figuring out

why the different strategies generate different results, and trying to determine which strategy or

strategies is most reliable. One possibility raised by Neumark and Wascher (2014b) is that

minimum wage increases within similar geographic areas are actually more endogenous with

respect to economic shocks, as other factors that differ more substantially between states in

different regions, and that provide exogenous variation – such as unionization or politics – play

less of role for close controls, implying that differences in economic conditions between

treatment states and close controls, even if smaller, may matter more for determining minimum




                                                 6
wages. However, it is clear that additional work is needed to resolve this question.

        Another issue that has been highlighted recent work – which bears some relation to the

construction of the counterfactual but not in as transparent a way – is the sensitivity of estimated

employment effects to the inclusion of state-specific time trends.15 In panel data analyses of

policy effects (based on DD estimation), it is quite standard to include linear time trends specific

to the states (or other jurisdictions) under study. This can be seen as correcting for violations of

the “parallel trends” assumption, by controlling for cross-state differences in the evolution of

outcomes both before and after minimum wage increases. The concern is of course valid. My

sense, though, is that the evidence on minimum wage effects on employment is far more

sensitive to this robustness check than in many other areas of research. The question arises, then:

How do we interpret the findings when the results are not robust?

        There are well-known problems in applying this approach, in particular when the pre-

treatment periods are short, because the identification of trends includes the post-treatment

period and hence can be hard to distinguish from actual policy effects. I am not aware of

definitive ways to avoid this problem and more reliably separate the effects of policy from the

trends, but it is an important question. Moreover, it can be hard to characterize the

counterfactual in a clear way when these trends are included. Meer and West (2016)

demonstrate this quite clearly in the context of estimating effects of minimum wages on

employment growth.18 The question remains, though, of what we should conclude when

estimates are quite sensitive to the inclusion of state-specific linear trends. It is clear to me that

the estimates including these trends are not necessarily the best ones. But how we get further

than that is an open question. One potentially interesting approach is taken in Monras (2015),

who allows for separate trends pre- and post-treatment, in an event-study design. One might also




                                                   7
want to try to estimate the trends only from the pre-treatment period, and then use these to

detrend the post-treatment data, to avoid confounding policy effects and estimation of trends.

However, this gets problematic without long pre-treatment periods before minimum wage

increase “events.” In this vein, one additional advantage of the DDD estimators discussed above

(as well as synthetic control matching) is that they obviate the need to include state-specific

trends – since each state can have an arbitrary pattern of time effects – thus sidestepping this

issue.

         Finally, it is important to recognize that evidence that estimates are sensitive to the

inclusion of trends is, ultimately, a sign of our ignorance. The appeal to including trends is

typically based on the hypothesized influence of omitted variables that underlie these trends.19

This suggests that more compelling evidence will come from expanding the variables used in

minimum wage studies to include the hypothesized omitted variables. Indeed, at least in the

literature using aggregated data, most employment equation specifications in the literature are

quite parsimonious, often including only an aggregate labor market indicator and a relative

supply variable (like the share of the young population in the total population), in addition to

state and year (or other) fixed effects (plus perhaps the trends). This is rather striking relative to

research on other topics where a much more extensive list of controls is typically included.

There is merit, of course, in replicating results using specifications utilized in earlier work. But

the sensitivity of estimates to the inclusion of trends suggests that there may be a good deal to be

learned from instead including the omitted controls that we think might affect low-skilled

employment and be correlated with minimum wages.

Economic Factors




                                                   8
       In addition to these econometric issues that may help us sort out the past research and

inform future research, there are a number of economic factors that have received relatively little

attention as potential sources of variation in estimated employment effects across studies.

Additional research on the influence of these economic factors on the employment effects of

minimum wages will also likely prove useful in better understanding the effects of much larger

minimum wage increases.

       Perhaps the economic factor of most importance in thinking about the effects of much

higher minimum wages, but one that may inform the literature more generally, is the question of

how the “bite” of the minimum wage – i.e., how much the minimum wage binds – affects the

estimated employment effects of the minimum wage. This question has received a bit of

attention in the literature, but my sense is that there is considerable scope for progress.

       One indirect approach to this question is an earlier study by Castillo-Freeman and

Freeman (1992), who estimated the effects of the minimum wage in Puerto Rico, a U.S. territory

that is bound by the U.S. minimum wage but has much lower wage levels, and hence where the

minimum wage has much more bite. They reported very large aggregate employment effects

and particularly adverse effects on low-wage industries, consistent with stronger disemployment

effects where the minimum wage binds strongly. This evidence was revisited by Krueger

(1995), who found evidence of disemployment effects from time-series data but not cross-

industry analyses, and concluded that evidence of disemployment effects was fragile. But,

surprisingly, to the best of my knowledge the evidence on Puerto Rico has not been revisited. Of

course, evidence for one jurisdiction suffers from the absence of a control group – the same

concern regarding the earlier time-series evidence for the United States that fueled the interest in




                                                  9
minimum wage research using across-state variation in state minimum wages that emerged in the

late 1980s (and which motivated the cross-industry analysis in the two Puerto Rico studies).

       A more general approach is taken in Neumark and Wascher (2002). This study adopts

techniques from the earlier market disequilibrium literature (applied to labor markets in, e.g.,

Rosen and Quandt, 1978). The paper specifies a labor demand and labor supply curve, and fits a

model that estimates the parameters of these curves as well as the probability that an observation

is on the demand curve (the short side of the market when, in the standard model, the minimum

wage is set too high), or instead at market equilibrium. The estimates of this model were used to

compute these probabilities for minimum wages studied in other research, asking, in particular,

whether some studies finding no effect of the minimum wage (in particular, Card 1992a, 1992b)

were likely using minimum wage variation in the range where the minimum wage was not

binding.20 This approach relies heavily on structural assumptions. But it can provide some

insight into the likely effects of much higher minimum wages at least in terms of estimating the

probability that a minimum wage at a given level is likely to be binding.

       However, the approach in Neumark and Wascher (2002) is based on a market for

homogeneous labor, and as such misses what is likely the key issue with regard to much higher

minimum wages – how the effect changes as the share of workers affected increases. On this

score, the most relevant approach may be that used by Card (1992a) in one of the first papers in

the new minimum wage research that emerged in the early 1990s using state minimum wage

variation. Card specified the minimum wage variable as the fraction affected by given minimum

wage increases, rather than the minimum wage level or its ratio relative to a measure of mean or

median wages (often called, not quite accurately, the “Kaitz index”).21 This approach is,

potentially, more directly useful for projecting the effects of much higher minimum wages, so it




                                                 10
may be useful for studies of the employment effects of minimum wages to go back to this kind of

specification. However, Baskaya and Rubinstein (2015) suggest that this kind of fraction

affected variable is particularly prone to endogeneity with respect to local labor market shocks,

and is procyclical and hence leads to bias against finding a disemployment effect. Thus,

incorporation of measures of the bindingness of minimum wages may not be straightforward.

       A different perspective on the bite of the minimum wage that has been explored in recent

work is not only how high the minimum wage is relative to the wage distribution, but for how

long firms expect a minimum wage increase to alter their costs. This issue has been highlighted

by Sorkin (2015), who notes that firms may have reasonably expected the kind of non-indexed,

often infrequent minimum wage increases enacted in the United States to be offset by rising

nominal wages (and prices) over time, which reduces the incentive for firms to invest in

alternative production technologies that economize on low-skilled labor.22 In contrast, indexed

minimum wages, which are becoming increasingly common in U.S. states,23 may well generate

more adverse longer-run employment effects for low-skilled workers – a question that has not

yet been explored much (although see Allegretto et al., 2011). Much larger minimum wage

increases, especially in a low-inflation environment, also seem likely to be perceived by firms as

creating longer-term (if not permanent) relative increases in the cost of low-skilled labor.

       Of course, when the variation likely to be induced by very high minimum wages is well

outside the range of sample variation, the “fraction-affected” approach (putting aside

endogeneity concerns) is also unreliable. However, in very recent years, variation in minimum

wages across states has become sufficiently strong that it should be possible, using recent data, to

start to obtain more reliable estimates of the effects of minimum wages that bind for a much

larger share of workers. It might also be promising to extrapolate results from groups of workers




                                                 11
with a high fraction affected to groups with a lower fraction affected, if we believe that aside

from how binding the minimum wage is, labor demand responses are likely to be similar across

these groups. Still, the higher minimum wages have been applied in higher-wage states, leaving

extrapolation to lower-wage states problematic. (See Figure 1.)

                                           [Insert Figure 1 here]

       There may be value in considering more structural approaches, whether using estimated

or, as in the case of Reich et al. (2015), calibrated models. The problem, of course, is that the

evidence on past minimum wage increases needed to calibrate the model is contested.24 It would

therefore surely be useful to gauge the sensitivity of these kinds of exercises to calibrations that

reflect the larger employment elasticities that many recent studies find,27 and perhaps even more

useful to push this approach further, including estimation of structural models that could at least

provide complementary evidence on predicted effects of out-of-sample minimum wage

increases.

       Closely related to the question of the bite of the minimum wage is the extent to which

studies identify the effects of minimum wages on affected workers. Neumark and Wascher

(2007), in their narrative review of minimum wage research on employment effects since the

early 1990s, argued that studies that focused on the least-skilled workers tended to find the

sharpest evidence of disemployment effects. However, this argument was based on, in some

sense, a qualitative assessment of the evidence across studies, rather than systematic empirical

evidence comparing studies.

       The most common group considered in studies of the employment effects of minimum

wages is teenagers. This is a logical group to study, as teenagers generally earn very low wages

because of their low skills, and represent a vastly disproportionate share of minimum wage




                                                 12
workers.28 Moreover, the focus on teens is to some extent a holdover from the earlier time-series

literature that used aggregate employment rates that were reported for different age groups

(Brown et al., 1982).29

       The earlier constraints posed by the available time-series data are no longer binding, and

with the micro-data now available to labor economists, it is possible to focus directly on workers

affected by the minimum wage. Examples of minimum wage studies that try to identify impacts

on affected workers, based on their wages, include Neumark et al. (2004) and, more recently,

Clemens and Wither (2014). There is, however, an important limitation of such an approach.

We can observe those currently working and whether their wages are low (say, below some

threshold just above the minimum wage). We can then estimate the effects of minimum wage

increases on the likelihood that these affected low-wage workers remain employed. However,

such evidence misses the effects of minimum wages on transitions from non-employment to

employment, which, for low-skill workers bound by the minimum wage, could become less

frequent.

       Changes in the rate of entry into employment, however, could be a quite important

channel of employment adjustments. First, low-skill workers have very high turnover.30

Second, there is evidence from data on worker flows that minimum wages lower the rate at

which workers separate from firms and also lower the rate at which workers are hired (Dube et

al., 2016; Gittings and Schmutte, 2016).31 Thus, ignoring the effects of minimum wages in

reducing the flows of workers into jobs may well miss a potentially important means by which

higher minimum wages reduce employment of low-skilled workers. Of course, standard

employment analyses of low-skill groups, such as teenagers, can help provide a fuller picture.

Research that more directly estimates the effects of minimum wages on affected workers is




                                                13
important. For example, we may find that estimated employment effects are more common

across studies when attention focuses on directly affected workers, and that that differences in

results across studies are partly attributable to differences in the share affected – comparing, for

example, studies of teenagers versus restaurant workers, or studies across periods in which the

difference between the minimum wage and the equilibrium wage for low-skilled workers varies.

Moreover, it may give us a better handle on predicting effects of much higher minimum wages

that will affect more workers.32 But our ignorance of likely offer wages for non-employed

workers poses a serious challenge. Selection-type models that predict wages for the low-skilled,

non-employed could in principle be used, although given the relatively low explanatory power of

wage regressions, it seems unlikely that such methods would accurately identify the lowest-wage

workers. Longer-term panel data can tell us something about wages workers earned on previous

jobs, which could potentially prove useful, although that information, too, may be available only

for a subset of currently non-employed workers.

       I view this as a critical challenge. At a minimum, labor economists should be using the

available micro-data to try to identify skill and demographic groups likely to be affected by

minimum wages, moving beyond just teenagers or workers in low-wage industries.33 But it may

prove more useful to think about how to use panel data with wage information, or other methods,

to directly identify workers and non-workers most affected by higher minimum wages and how

minimum wage increases affect their flows into and out of employment. One potentially large-

scale source of data that could be used is Unemployment Insurance records for the subset of

states that report quarterly hours as well as earnings, from which wages can then be estimated –

conditional on states making the data available to researchers, like in the recent study of the

Seattle minimum wage.34




                                                 14
       In addition to potentially explaining variation in effects across studies, empirical research

providing a tighter link between workers affected by the minimum wage and the employment

effects they experience can sharpen our understanding of the policy implications of higher

minimum wages. Minimum wage-employment elasticities for teenagers, for example, are often

characterized as “small” or “modest.” Although this is a vague characterization, I believe what

most economists mean by this characterization is that because estimated employment elasticities

in the range −.1 to −.2 are well below 1 in absolute value, the earnings of affected workers, on

the whole, will rise substantially when the minimum wage is raised (e.g., Freeman, 1996).

       But the fact that the existing research does not focus solely on affected workers means

that the relevant elasticity for asking how minimum wages influence the incomes of affected

workers must be larger in absolute value. For example, we can write the minimum wage

elasticity estimated for all teenagers (the most common type of estimate) as a weighted average

of the elasticity for teenagers directly affected by a change in the minimum wage and the

elasticity for teenagers currently earning above the minimum wage, or:

                                      e = eA⋅ pA + eNA⋅ (1−pA)

where e is the estimated elasticity for teenagers as a whole, eA and eNA are the minimum wage

elasticities for affected and unaffected teens, and pA is the proportion directly affected by the

change in the minimum wage. If we simplify and assume that the elasticity for unaffected

workers is zero, then the minimum wage elasticity for affected teens (eA) can be written:

                                             eA = e / p A

       It follows that the minimum wage elasticity for affected teenage workers is greater than

the elasticity estimated for teenagers as a whole.




                                                 15
       Naturally, the smaller the share of affected workers in the group studied, the less

reflective is the estimated employment elasticity of the actual impact on affected workers. Thus,

directly identifying the employment effect of minimum wages for affected workers would give

us a more accurate sense of how minimum wage increases influence the earnings of the lowest-

skill workers who are the intended “targets” of a minimum wage increase.35

       Another economic factor that can potentially help us pin down sources of variation in

minimum wage effects across studies is labor-labor substitution. In a model with workers of

different skill levels, a minimum wage that is binding for some workers is likely to generate

some substitution towards higher-skill workers. One implication is that evidence on the

employment effects of minimum wages that combine negative employment effects for the least-

skilled with positive employment effects for those who benefit from labor-labor substitution will

understate the net effects on the first group. A second implication is that such evidence will

obscure the positive impacts on those workers who benefit from labor-labor substitution. There

is some evidence of labor-labor substitution, from research on both minimum wages (Neumark

and Wascher, 2003) and on living wages (Fairris and Bujunda, 2008).36 But there is virtually no

research that tries to use information on workers across a larger swath of the skill distribution to

provide a fuller accounting of who gains and who loses from a higher minimum wage.

       Note, also, that this kind of evidence on how minimum wages affect workers at different

parts of the skill distribution – including both direct estimation of the effects of minimum wages

on the least-skilled workers, as well as labor-labor substitution – is also likely to be informative

about the effects of much higher minimum wages. Presumably, the ability to substitute away

from labor whose price is directly increased by the minimum wage is diminished as the

minimum wage affects the wages of a larger share of workers.




                                                 16
       Another issue that arises in thinking about the effects of minimum wages on workers

above the minimum wage is the extent to which wages of higher-skilled workers might be

affected by constraints on pay that require a wage gradient between the lowest-skilled workers

and those with somewhat higher skill or experience – a phenomenon first identified as “ripple”

effects (Grossman, 1983). Labor economists have studied directly how minimum wages affect

the wage distribution, mainly with this question in mind (e.g., Autor et al., 2016).37 In general,

the evidence for such effects suggests that they are somewhat limited. Still, there are two

important questions. First, do the wage effects above the minimum wage reflect labor-labor

substitution, implying that workers above the minimum experience both higher wages and higher

employment, or do they instead reflect relative wage constraints, in which case employment of

such workers might fall, with more ambiguous implications for somewhat higher-wage workers?

And second, how might these effects change with much higher minimum wages that would

otherwise flatten wages over larger range of firms’ wage distributions?

       Finally, spurred in part by the existence of studies that do not find evidence of

disemployment effects of minimum wages, and occasionally even find positive effects, minimum

wage researchers have sometimes appealed to monopsony search models as a better

characterization of the low-skill labor market (beginning with Card and Krueger, 1995, and

developed to a much greater extent in Manning, 2005). Understanding the underlying model is

obviously central to identifying economic factors that can explain variation in the employment

effects of minimum wages across studies.

       Search models can, indeed, predict a positive effect of minimum wages over some range.

This was first pointed out in Stigler (1946), albeit in the case of a textbook single-buyer

monopsony model. Brown et al. (2014) show in a fairly simple way how this result emerges in a




                                                 17
modern search model that instead generates rising marginal costs of labor from frictions. It is

possible that search-monopsony models can account for the variation in estimated employment

effects of minimum wages across studies.

       However, establishing that search-monopsony models can account for the variation in

estimated employment effects across studies requires much more than noting that these models

are consistent with such variation. As I have emphasized above, there are many reasons to

expect variation in employment effects when the neoclassical model characterizes low-skill labor

markets. I would find more convincing the claim that monopsony models can account for the

variation in estimates – and therefore also the implication that minimum wages can sometimes

increase employment – if there were evidence that directly tied variation in minimum wage

effects to the predictions of these models. Christl et al. (forthcoming) report evidence of a

nonlinear minimum wage effect – first increasing and then decreasing – which is potentially

consistent with these models. But evidence on more direct implications of these models would

be more compelling. In particular, can we find evidence that the studies that find zero or even

positive effects do this in settings where monopsony search models predict positive effects, and

similarly find negative effects when the models predict negative effects – based, perhaps, on

variation in the extent of frictions, in the level of the minimum wage, in the time frame (short-

versus longer-run), etc.?38

       Of course, by the same token, the neoclassical model should not simply be taken as the

default in the absence of more compelling evidence that the search-monopsony models can

explain the variation in employment effects across studies. In line with much of the discussion

above, the neoclassical characterization of low-skill labor markets would be enhanced by more




                                                 18
convincing evidence that variation across studies in estimated employment effects can be

explained in the context of this model.

How Do We Synthesize a Large and Conflicting Literature?

       With the accumulation of sometimes conflicting evidence on the employment effects of

minimum wages, one question that comes to the fore is how we try to draw conclusions from

this large literature.39 Neumark and Wascher (2007) used a narrative review of an extensive set

of papers, attempting to draw conclusions about what factors explain variation in estimated

effects, as well as providing an assessment – admittedly subjective – of which studies were most

reliable. An advantage of this approach – in particular the assessment – is that it can weight

more heavily the more reliable studies. There are, however, two disadvantages. First,

researchers can have different views of the reliability of different studies. And second, the

conclusions drawn about what study characteristics explain variation in estimated employment

effects are not based on systematic empirical analysis.

       An alternative approach is meta-analysis, which can summarize a literature by

essentially averaging estimates across studies, possibly weighted, and can also provide more

systematic evidence on what study factors explain variation in estimated employment effects

(Doucouliagos and Stanley, 2009; Belman and Wolfson, 2014).40 However, averaging estimates

from studies of minimum wage effects, as meta-analyses do, is problematic. First – as discussed

in more detail above – the population studied often varies, and this and other factors can

influence how binding the minimum wage is, generating variation in estimated effects that there

is no reason to simply average.

       A more fundamental problem, in my view, is the failure to account for more reliable

versus less reliable studies. In fact, it may be worse than this. Meta-analyses often assign more




                                                19
weight to estimates that are more statistically precise (e.g., Belman and Wolfson, 2014), even

though the most rigorous empirical methods are likely to be less precise. Yet it is precisely the

studies using the most rigorous methods – if valid – that that should receive the most weight – if

not all the weight. Moreover, if we think the studies using less-rigorous methods (e.g., failing to

instrument for an endogenous policy, or using a less-saturated model that does not account for

some sources of heterogeneity bias) lead to biased estimates, we should not incorporate these

studies at all in “aggregating” across the research literature.42

       My sense is that the implication of these issues is that the meta-analysis approach to

synthesizing the literature on the employment effects of minimum wages is likely uninformative.

But there may be a way to use these types of analyses to provide more definitive results –

perhaps focusing more on why results differ across studies than on arriving at a single summary

estimate.43

Conclusions

       Given all the research that has come before, how can researchers refine their

understanding of the employment effects of minimum wages, and perhaps achieve (some)

convergence of views? Although meta-analyses offer the hope of providing summary evidence,

there are significant and perhaps insurmountable challenges to existing meta-analyses of studies

of the employment effects of minimum wages. That is unfortunate, since it would, of course, be

very helpful if there were fairly straightforward ways to empirically summarize a large research

literature. But with such a large number of issues outstanding regarding how we should estimate

minimum wage effects, and how they might vary based on other economic factors, I think a more

fruitful approach is to identify and study what are likely (or plausibly) the central sources of

differences in results, in the hope that this will narrow our range of estimates for studies focused




                                                  20
on the same types of workers facing similar minimum wage increases, and enrich our

understanding of why employment effects differ across workers, minimum wage levels, and

perhaps other features of the labor market.44 Although not as alluring, perhaps, I think the

progress that needs to be made will come from additional studies sorting out the best way to

identify minimum wage effects on employment, which includes understanding why different

approaches yield different answers, and from doing a good deal more than the existing research

to recognize that there is not one minimum wage effect, and instead trying to better understand

why the employment effects of minimum wages vary across workers, labor markets, time, and

the policy environment.




                                                21
References
Aaronson, Daniel, Eric French, Isaac Sorkin, and Ted To. “Industry Dynamics and the Minimum
        Wage: A Putty-Clay Approach.” Forthcoming in International Economic Review.
Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2010. “Synthetic Control Methods for
        Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control
        Program.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 105, No. 490, February,
        pp. 493-505.
Addison, John T., McKinley L. Blackburn, and Chad D. Cotti. 2013. “Minimum Wage Increases
        in a Recessionary Environment.” Labour Economics, Vol. 23, August, pp. 30-9.
Addison, John T., and Orgul Demet Ozturk. 2012. “Minimum Wages, Labor Market Institutions,
        and Female Employment: A Cross-Country Analysis.” Industrial and Labor Relations
        Review, Vol. 65, No. 4, pp. 779-809.
Allegretto, Sylvia A., Arindrajit Dube, and Michael Reich. 2011. “Do Minimum Wages Really
        Reduce Teen Employment? Accounting for Heterogeneity and Selectivity in State Panel
        Data.” Industrial Relations, Vol. 50, No. 2, April, pp. 205-40.
Allegretto, Sylvia A., Arindrajit Dube, Michael Reich, and Ben Zipperer. 2017. “Credible
        Research Designs for Minimum Wage Studies.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
        Vol. 70, No. 3, May, pp. 559-92.
Ashenfelter, Orley, Colm Harmon, and Hessel Oosterbeek. 1999. “A Review of Estimates of the
        Schooling/Earnings Relationship, with Tests for Publication Bias.” Labour Economics,
        Vol. 6, No. 4, November, pp. 453-70.
Autor, David H., Alan Manning, and Christopher L. Smith. 2016. “The Contribution of the
        Minimum Wage to U.S. Wage Inequality over Three Decades: A Reassessment.”
        American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 8, No. 1, January, pp. 58-99.
Baskaya, Yusuf Soner, and Yona Rubinstein. 2015. “Using Federal Minimum Wages to
        Identify the Impact of Minimum Wages on Employment and Earnings across U.S.
        States.” Unpublished paper.
Belman, Dale, and Paul J. Wolfson. 2014. What Does the Minimum Wage Do? Kalamazoo, MI:
        Upjohn Institute.
Brown, Charles, Curtis Gilroy, and Andrew Kohen. 1982. “The Effect of the Minimum Wage on
        Employment and Unemployment.” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 20, No. 2, June,
        pp. 487-528.
Brown, Alessio. J. G., Christian Merkl, and Dennis J. Snower. 2014. “The Minimum Wage from
        a Two-Sided Perspective.” Economics Letters, Vol. 124, pp. 389-91.
Card, David. 1992a. “Using Regional Variation in Wages to Measure the Effects of the Federal
        Minimum Wage.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1, October, pp.
        22-37.
Card, David. 1992b. “Do Minimum Wages Reduce Employment? A Case Study of California,
        1987-1989.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1, October, pp. 38-54.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1995. Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the
        Minimum Wage. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1994. “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of
        the Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.” American Economic Review,
        Vol. 84, No. 4, September, pp. 772-93.
Castillo-Freeman, Alida, and Richard B. Freeman. 1992. “When the Minimum Wage Really
        Bites: The Effect of the U.S.-Level Minimum on Puerto Rico.” In George. J. Borjas and
         Richard B. Freeman, Eds., Immigration and the Workforce: Economic Consequences for
         the United States and Source Areas. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, pp. 177-
         211.
Choi, Sekyu, and Fernández-Blanco, Javier. 2016. “A Note on U.S. Turnover.” Unpublished
         paper.
Christl, Michael, Monika Köppl-Turnya, and Dénes Kucsera. “Revisiting the Employment
         Effects of Minimum Wages in Europe.” Forthcoming in German Economic Review.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Michael Wither. 2014. “The Minimum Wage and the Great Recession:
         Evidence of Effects on the Employment and Income Trajectories of Low-Skilled
         Workers.” NBER Working Paper No. 20724.
Doucouliagos, Hristos and T. D. Stanley. 2009. “Publication Selection Bias in Minimum-Wage
         Research? A Meta-Regression Analysis.” British Journal of Industrial Relations, Vol. 47,
         No. 2, June, pp. 406-28.
Douty, H. M. 1941. “Minimum Wage Regulation in the Seamless Hosiery Industry.” Southern
         Economic Journal, Vol. 8, No. 2, October, pp. 176-90.
Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2016. “Minimum Wage Shocks,
         Employment Flows, and Labor Market Frictions.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 34,
         No. 3, July, pp. 663-704.
Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2010. “Minimum Wage Effects across
         State Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties.” Review of Economics and
         Statistics, Vol. 92, No. 4, November, pp. 945-64.
Dube, Arindrajit., and Ben Zipperer. 2015. “Pooling Multiple Case Studies using Synthetic
         Controls: An Application to Minimum Wage Policies.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 8944.
Fairris, David, and Leon Fernandez Bujunda. 2008. “The Dissipation of Minimum Wage Gains
         for Workers through Labor-Labor Substitution: Evidence from the Los Angeles Living
         Wage Ordinance.” Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 75, No. 2, October, pp. 473-96.
Freeman, Richard B. 1996. “The Minimum Wage as a Redistributive Tool.” Economic Journal,
         Vol. 106, No. 436, May, pp. 639-49.
Gittings, R. Kaj, and Ian M. Schmutte. 2016. “Getting Handcuffs on an Octopus: Minimum
         Wages, Employment, and Turnover.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 69,
         No. 5, October, pp. 1133-70.
Grossman, Jean Baldwin. 1983. “The Impact of the Minimum Wage on Other Wages.” Journal
         of Human Resources, Vol. 18, No. 3, Summer, pp. 359-78.
Hinrichs, A. F. 1940. “Effects of the 25-Cent Minimum Wage on Employment in the Seamless
         Hosiery Industry.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 35, No. 209,
         March, pp. 13-23.
Jardim, Ekaterina, Mark C. Long, Robert Plotnick, Emma van Inwegen, Jacob Vigdor, and
         Hilary Wething. 2017. “Minimum Wage Increases, Wages, and Low-Wage Employment:
         Evidence from Seattle.” NBER Working Paper No. 23532.
Kaitz, Hyman. 1970. “Experience of the Past: The National Minimum.” Youth Unemployment
         and Minimum Wages. Bulletin 1657, U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
         Statistics, pp. 30-54.
Kreiner, Claus T., Daniel Reck, and Peer E. Skov. 2017. “Do Lower Minimum Wages for Young
         Workers Raise their Employment? Evidence from a Danish Discontinuity.” Unpublished
         paper.
Krueger, Alan B. 1995. “The Effect of the Minimum Wage When It Really Bites: A
       Reexamination of the Evidence from Puerto Rico.” Research in Labor Economics, Vol.
       14, pp. 1-22.
Liu, Shanshan, Thomas J. Hyclak, and Krishna Regmi. 2016. “Impact of the Minimum Wage on
       Youth Labor Markets.” LABOUR, Vol. 30, No. 1, March, pp. 18-37.
Manning, Alan. 2005. Monopsony in Motion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Meer, Jonathan, and Jeremy West. 2016 “Effects of the Minimum Wage on Employment
       Dynamics.” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 51, No. 2, pp. 500-22.
Moloney, John F. 1942. “Some Effects of the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act Upon Southern
       Industry.” Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 9, No. 1, July, pp. 15-23.
Monras Joan. 2015. “Minimum Wages and Spatial Equilibrium: Theory and Evidence.” IZA
       Discussion Paper No. 9460.
Neumark, David. 2016. “Policy Levers to Increase Jobs and Increase Income from Work after
       the Great Recession.” IZA Journal of Labor Policy, 5:6 (on-line).
Neumark, David, J.M. Ian Salas, and William Wascher. 2014a. “Revisiting the Minimum Wage-
       Employment Debate: Throwing out the Baby with the Bathwater?” Industrial and Labor
       Relations Review, Vol. 67, Supplement, pp. 608-48.
Neumark, David, J.M. Ian Salas, and William Wascher. 2014b. “More on Recent Evidence on
       the Effects of Minimum Wages in the United States.” IZA Journal of Labor Policy, 3:24
       (on-line).
Neumark, David, Mark Schweitzer, and William Wascher. 2004. “Minimum Wage Effects
       Throughout the Wage Distribution.” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 39, No. 2,
       Spring, pp. 425-50.
Neumark, David, Matthew Thompson, and Leslie Koyle. 2012. “The Effects of Living Wage
       Laws on Low-Wage Workers and Low-Income Families: What Do We Know Now?” IZA
       Journal of Labor Policy, 1:11 (on-line).
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2017. “Reply to Credible Research Designs for
       Minimum Wage Studies.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 70, No. 3, May,
       pp. 593-609.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2008. Minimum Wages. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Neumark, David, and William L. Wascher. 2007. “Minimum Wages and Employment.”
       Foundations and Trends in Microeconomics, Vol. 3, Nos. 1-2, pp. 1-182.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2004. “Minimum Wages, Labor Market Institutions,
       and Youth Employment: A Cross-National Analysis.” Industrial and Labor Relations
       Review, Vol. 57, No. 2, pp. 223-48.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2003. “Minimum Wages and Skill Acquisition.”
       Economics of Education Review, Vol. 22, No. 1, February, pp. 1-10.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2002. “State-Level Estimates of Minimum Wage
       Effects: New Evidence and Interpretations from Disequilibrium Methods.” Journal of
       Human Resources, Vol. 37, No. 1, Winter, pp. 35-62.
Obenauer, Marie L., and Bertha von der Nienburg. 1915. “Effect of Minimum-Wage
       Determination in Oregon.” Bureau of Labor Statistics Bulletin No. 176, United States
       Department of Labor, Washington, D.C.
Powell, David. 2016. “Synthetic Control Estimation Beyond Case Studies: Does the Minimum
       Wage Reduce Employment?” RAND Labor & Population Working Paper WR-1142.
Reich, Michael, Ken Jacobs, Annette Bernhardt, and Ian Perry. 2015. “The Proposed Minimum
        Wage Law for Los Angeles: Economic Impact and Policy Outcomes.” Center on Wage
        and Employment Dynamics Policy Brief, University of California, Berkeley.
Reich, Michael, Claire Montialoux, Sylvia Allegretto, Ken Jacobs, Annette Bernhardt, and Sarah
        Thomason. 2016. “The Effects of a $15 Minimum Wage by 2019 in San Jose and Santa
        Clara County.” Center on Wage and Employment Dynamics Policy Brief, University of
        California, Berkeley.
Rosen, Harvey S., and Richard E. Quandt. 1978. “Estimation of a Disequilibrium Aggregate
        Labor Market.” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 60, No. 3, August, pp. 371-9.
Shirley, Peter. 2017. “The Effects of the Minimum Wage on Employment: Evidence from a
        Hierarchical Bayes Framework.” Unpublished paper.
Slichter, David. 2016. “The Employment Effects of the Minimum Wage: A Selection Ratio
        Approach to Measuring Treatment Effects.” Unpublished paper.
Sorkin, Isaac. 2015. “Are There Long-Run Effects of the Minimum Wage?” Review of Economic
        Dynamics, Vol. 18, No. 2, April, pp. 306-33.
Stigler, George J. 1946. “The Economics of Minimum Wage Legislation.” American Economic
        Review, Vol. 36, No. 3, June, pp. 358-65.
Thompson, Jeffrey P. 2009. “Using Local Labor Market Data to Re-examine the Employment
        Effects of the Minimum Wage.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 62, No. 3,
        April, pp. 343-66.
Totty, Evan. 2015. “The Effect of Minimum Wages on Employment: A Factor Model
        Approach.” Institute for Research on Labor and Employment Working Paper #110-15.
Yannelis, Constantine. 2014. “The Minimum Wage and Employment Dynamics: Evidence from
        an Age Based Reform in Greece.” Unpublished paper.
Figure 1: Percent Differences between State and Federal Minimum Wages, 2017
                        Jan. 1, 2017 (30 states; average % difference
                                           = 25.8%)
                 70.0

                 60.0

                 50.0
  % difference




                 40.0

                 30.0

                 20.0

                 10.0

                  0.0




                         RI
                        CO




                        CT
                        CA
                         IL




                        WV




                        WA
                         MI
                        MO
                        MN

                        MT




                        MD



                        ME
                        NE
                         HI



                        NY
                        OR
                        AK
                        AZ
                        VT



                        MA

                        DC
                        NM




                        OH
                        DE

                        NV
                         NJ
                        AR
                         FL




                        SD
Table 1: Recent Estimates of Minimum Wage Effects on Unskilled Employment
          Authors              Employment elasticity and groups studied                            Data/approach
    Geographically-proximate designs
    Dube, Lester, and         Near zero for teens and restaurant workers              Paired counties on opposite sides of state
       Reich (2010)                                                                                    borders
    Allegretto, Dube,                    Near zero for teens                           States compared only to those in same
    and Reich (2011)                                                                              Census division
       Gittings and       Near zero for teens; larger negative elasticities in         States compared only to those in same
     Schmutte (2016)    markets with short non-employment durations (−0.1 to                      Census division
                        −0.98) and smaller positive elasticities in markets with
                             long non-employment durations (0.2 to 0.46)
      Addison et al.    Varying sign, more negative, generally insignificant for     Similar methods to Dube et al. (2010) and
          (2013)          restaurant workers and teens; stronger negative at         Allegretto et al. (2011) restricted to 2005-
                                  height of Great Recession (−0.34)                                    10 period
      Slichter (2016)                        -0.04 (teens)                            Comparisons to bordering counties and
                                                                                               other nearby counties

     Liu et al. (2016)                   −0.17 (14-18 year-olds)                       Comparisons within BEA Economic
                                                                                       Areas (EA) that cross state lines, with
                                                                                         controls for EA-specific shocks
    Other approaches
     Neumark et al.         −0.14/−0.15 for teens, −0.05/−0.06 for restaurant         States compared to data-driven choice of
     (2014a, 2014b)                             workers                                 controls (synthetic control), and state
                                                                                                       panel data
      Powell (2016)                          −0.44 for teens                          States compared to data-driven choice of
                                                                                        controls (synthetic controls, estimated
                                                                                      simultaneously with employment effect)
       Totty (2015)      −0.01 to −0.04 for restaurant workers; −0.04 to −0.7 for     States compared to data-driven choice of
                                                   teens                                       controls (factor model)
        Dube and             −0.051 (mean) and −0.058 (median) for teens              States compared to data-driven choice of
     Zipperer (2015)                                                                         controls (synthetic control)
      Baskaya and                         −0.3 to −0.5 for teens                      States, using federally-induced variation
    Rubinstein (2015)                                                                          as instrumental variable
      Clemens and         Appx. −0.97, for those directly affected by minimum          Targeted/affected workers versus other
      Wither (2014)                          wage increase                             low-wage workers in states affected by
                                                                                                   federal increases
    Thompson (2009)                 −0.3 (for teen employment share)                     Low-wage counties vs. higher-wage
                                                                                                   counties in states
Notes: The table reports my best attempts to identify the authors’ preferred estimates reported in the papers. The Thompson
estimate cannot be compared directly to other elasticity estimates, because there is no population count in the data source used.
The Clemens/Wither elasticity is based on a 6.6 percentage point decline (p. 27), divided by a 70.2 percent employment rate (or a
9.4 percent employment decline), divided by a 9.7% MW increase (50 cents, from p. 14, divided by $5.15). (These numbers are
reported in a 2016 version of the study.)
Source: Neumark and Wascher (2017, http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0019793917698429).




1
  I am grateful to William Wascher for helpful comments.
2
  See Neumark and Wascher (2008, Chapter 2) for a review of some of the earliest evidence comparing effects for different
workers after Oregon enacted a minimum wage for women (Obenauer and von der Nienburg, 1915), and comparing changes
in manufacturing firms upon adoption of the minimum wage in the lower-wage South and the higher-wage North (Douty,
1941; Hinrichs, 1940; and Moloney, 1942), and debates about this evidence.
3
  See Allegretto et al. (2017) and Neumark and Wascher (2017) for discussions of the most recent work on employment
effects.
4
  See, in particular, Brown et al. (1982), Card and Krueger (1995), and Neumark and Wascher (2007, 2008).
5
  For recent discussions of my views on recent prior research, see Neumark (2016), Neumark et al. (2014a, 2014b), and
Neumark and Wascher (2017).
6
  There are also many studies of the effects of minimum wages on other outcomes, such as poverty, training, and prices. My
review does not cover these studies, but, naturally, many of the issues I discuss regarding estimating effects of minimum
wages on employment carry over to studies of other outcomes.
7
  While this essay is not a survey, and focuses on U.S. evidence, the reader interested in evidence from other countries can
see the earlier survey in Neumark and Wascher (2007). Some newer work for European countries, where within-country
variation is typically non-existent, exploits changes in minimum wages at particular ages, in regression-discontinuity types
of analyses (see, e.g., Yannelis, 2014, and Kreiner et al., 2017).
8
  For example, California, New York State, Seattle, and Washington, DC have scheduled (or have already reached) a $15
minimum wage.
9
  Their approach parallels Card and Krueger (1994), although the two more recent studies provide a contrast between the
results using different identification strategies. Other studies that use close controls in a similar fashion to Allegretto et al.
(2011) find, not surprisingly, similar results (Addison et al., 2013; Gittings and Schmutte, 2016; and Slichter, 2016).
(Addison et al. do find stronger evidence of disemployment effects for teens during the Great Recession.) An exception is
Liu et al. (2016), who estimate a county-level fixed-effects model that includes interactions between dummy variables for
each quarter and BEA “Economic Areas,” which are supposed to delineate regionally-integrated markets. Because some of
these economic areas cross state lines, minimum wage effects can be identified from state variation within them. Liu et al.
find evidence of disemployment effects for the youngest group covered in their data (14-18 year-olds), which are diminished
only slightly – to an elasticity of −0.17 – within Economic Areas.
10
   See the response to this research in Allegretto et al. (2017).
13
   Foreshadowing the discussion below, the magnitude is likely larger than other studies because it is calculated for a more
directly-targeted group of workers (compared to teenagers or restaurant workers, only some of whom are directly affected
by the minimum wage). Indeed, the elasticity is smaller when using a treatment group that includes higher-wage workers
and hence is “less intensively” treated.
15
   See Allegretto et al. (2011, 2017), Neumark et al. (2014a), and Neumark and Wascher (2017).
18
   How minimum wages affect employment growth has not been a common question in past research on the employment
effects of minimum wages. However, recent models using a “putty-clay” approach to technology have suggested that it
might be useful to think about minimum wages having small initial effects on employment but increasing effects over time,
as new technology comes on line that uses less low-skilled labor (e.g., Sorkin, 2015).
19
   See, e.g., Allegretto et al. (2011), who refer to unmeasured changes in technology leading to teens experiencing increased
competition from adults for low-skilled jobs.
20
   A second model introduced the three regimes in the textbook “company town” monopsony model – the marginal cost of
labor curve, the labor supply curve, and the labor demand curve, and actually found some evidence that the monopsony
model fits the data better – although the textbook monopsony model is a far less plausible depiction of labor markets than
more modern monopsony models that come out of search models (Manning, 2005).
21
   The original Kaitz index (Kaitz, 1970) also took account of coverage, which is not considered an issue in more recent
decades when coverage became near universal.
22
   This is explored further in Aaronson et al. (forthcoming).
23
   See http://www.ncsl.org/research/labor-and-employment/state-minimum-wage-chart.aspx (viewed October 25, 2017).
24
   Reich and his co-authors take a particular stand, noting that their model is calibrated to “be consistent with the very small
effects that researchers find for the smaller pre-2015 increases in federal and state minimum wages” (Reich et al., 2016, p.
20). This, of course, is their interpretation of the evidence, based on studies that Reich and his co-authors have done (in
particular, Allegretto et al., 2011, and Dube et al., 2010). Perhaps not surprisingly, this leads them typically to project trivial
effects of increasing minimum wages to $15.
27
   See the summary in Neumark and Wascher (2017).
28
   For example, in 2016, teens were nearly 21 percent of workers paid hourly whose wages were at or below the federal
minimum wage, but less than 6 percent of the total of workers paid hourly. (See
https://www.bls.gov/opub/reports/minimum-wage/2016/home.htm, viewed May 10, 2017.) The representation of teens
among minimum wage workers would, of course, decline at much higher minimum wages, and is likely to be lower in states
with higher minimum wages.
29
   More recent research has turned to other potentially low-wage, low-skill groups, such as restaurant workers, in part
because of using data reported by industry but not by age group (e.g., Dube et al., 2010).
30
   See Choi and Fernández-Blanco (2016).
31
   Like with the general literature on employment effects, there is conflicting evidence on whether or not the relative
magnitudes of these two effects lead, on net, to employment declines – although there is no reason to use data on flows to
estimate net employment effects of minimum wages.
32
   Still, a potential difficulty in predicting such effects is that the impacts on affected workers may also depend on the share
of workers affected, as we might anticipate that firms find it easier to make adjustments along margins other than
employment – such as benefits, training, customer service, prices, etc. – for small changes in minimum wages than for large
changes in minimum wages. Put differently, there can be nonlinear effects of the share affected by minimum wage
increases.
33
   For example, Monras (2015) presents some evidence of negative employment effects on the share of employment or full-
time employment among those with a high school degree or less, without regard to age. (This is apparent only from de-
trended estimates, using a method described earlier.)
34
   See Jardim et al. (2017).
35
   The estimated elasticity from the usual minimum wage study will tend to understate the elasticity of demand for affected
workers for a second reason. Because some affected workers are already earning more than the old minimum wage (but less
than the new minimum wage), the size of the average wage increase associated with a higher minimum wage will be smaller
than the minimum wage increase itself. Letting ΔWA denote the average wage change of those workers whose wages are
directly affected by the change in the minimum wage, and ΔMW the legislated increase, the demand elasticity for affected
workers (that is, the elasticity with respect to the induced change in their wage) can be written as:
                                               e A = (e / p A ) /( ∆W A / ∆MW ) ,
where ( ∆W / ∆MW ) < 1.
             A

36
   Living wages were a policy that arose in many cities (and other local jurisdictions) in the United States in the mid-1990s.
Living wages typically imposed wage floors much higher than minimum wages, but limited to much narrower sets of
workers (city contractors, and firm receiving financial assistance from cities). For details and recent evidence, see Neumark
et al. (2012).
37
   Neumark and Wascher (2008, Chapter 4) review the broader evidence.
38
   The more general question of differences in the effects of minimum wages on employment in the short-run versus the
longer-run is of independent interest, aside from the validity of search models – as noted earlier with regard to Sorkin (2015)
and Meer and West (2016).
39
   This same question can, of course, be applied to other topics on which there is a large research literature with conflicting
evidence.
40
   For an example of an analysis focused on explaining variation in estimates, in a different context (the returns to
schooling), see Ashenfelter et al. (1999).
42
   Another issue taken up in meta-analyses is publication bias in the published literature on minimum wages. However, it is
very hard to distinguish between publication bias and other sources of patterns in the published evidence consistent with
publication bias. For example, meta-analyses like Doucouliagos and Stanley argue that if negative estimates of minimum
wage effects have larger standard errors, this is evidence of publication bias in favor of studies finding negative effects.
However, the same phenomenon can arise if studies using better research designs lead to “truer” estimates, which happen
to be negative, and which have larger standard errors because they demand more of the data.
43
   For an initial attempt at this, see Shirley (2017).
44
   Another example not discussed thus far is how different labor market institutions influence the employment effects of
minimum wages (Neumark and Wascher, 2004; Addison and Ozturk, 2012).
