                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          VULNERABILITY AND CLIENTELISM

                                    Gustavo J. Bobonis
                                        Paul Gertler
                                  Marco Gonzalez-Navarro
                                      Simeon Nichter

                                     Working Paper 23589
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23589


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 2017, Revised April 2019


We thank Juliana Lins, Bárbara Magalhães, and Vânya Tsutsui for assistance during fieldwork;
Márcio Thomé and the BemFam team for survey work; Tadeu Assad and the IABS team for
project management; and the ASA team for cistern construction (especially Jean Carlos Andrade
Medeiros). We are grateful for excellent research assistance by Julian Dyer, Ada Kwan, Celso
Rosa, Matthew Tudball, Farhan Yahya, and especially Lisa Stockley and Ridwan Karim at
University of Toronto. We thank numerous seminar and conference participants at Columbia,
Dartmouth, LACEA, Pittsburgh, Princeton, UC Berkeley, UC Santa Cruz, and UC San Diego for
insightful comments. IRB approval was awarded by Brazil’s Comissão Nacional de Ética em
Pesquisa (Protocol 465/2011), the University of Toronto (Protocol 27432), and Innovations for
Poverty Action (Protocol 525.11May-006). The intervention was registered in the American
Economic Association’s registry for randomized control trials (Protocol AEARCTR-0000561).
This project would not have been possible without financial support from AECID and the
leadership of Pedro Flores Urbano. We also gratefully acknowledge funding from the Canadian
Institute for Advanced Research, the Canada Research Chairs Program, the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC) under Insight Grants 488989 and 493141, and
the Ontario Work-Study program. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Gustavo J. Bobonis, Paul Gertler, Marco Gonzalez-Navarro, and Simeon Nichter. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Vulnerability and Clientelism
Gustavo J. Bobonis, Paul Gertler, Marco Gonzalez-Navarro, and Simeon Nichter
NBER Working Paper No. 23589
July 2017, Revised April 2019
JEL No. O11,O12,O54,P16

                                          ABSTRACT

This study argues that economic vulnerability causes citizens to participate in clientelism, a
phenomenon with various pernicious consequences. We employ a randomized control trial that
reduced household vulnerability through a development intervention: constructing residential
water cisterns in drought-prone areas of Brazil. This intervention significantly decreased requests
for private goods from politicians, especially among citizens likely to be in clientelist
relationships. We also link program beneficiaries to electronic voting machines, and show the
intervention decreased votes for incumbent mayors, who typically have more resources for
clientelism. Findings are observed not only during the election campaign, but also a full year
later.

Gustavo J. Bobonis                               Marco Gonzalez-Navarro
Department of Economics                          Agricultural and Resource Economics
University of Toronto                            UC-Berkeley
150 St. George St., Room 304                     207 Giannini Hall
Toronto, Ontario                                 Berkeley, CA 94720-3310
M5S 3G7, Canada                                  and University of California, Berkeley
and Centre for a New Economy                     marcog@berkeley.edu
gustavo.bobonis@utoronto.ca
                                                 Simeon Nichter
Paul Gertler                                     Political Science Department
Haas School of Business                          University of California, San Diego
University of California, Berkeley               9500 Gilman Drive
Berkeley, CA 94720                               La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER                                         nichter@ucsd.edu
gertler@haas.berkeley.edu
1       Introduction
    Many developing countries have adopted democratic forms of government with

a primary objective of heightening political representation (Acemoglu and Robinson

2006, Hagopian and Mainwaring 2005). However, democratic political institutions have

often failed to provide broad representation of poor and vulnerable citizens, who are

frequently the majority of constituents. Substantial research suggests that clientelism

— the exchange of contingent benefits for political support (Hicken 2011, Kitschelt

and Wilkinson 2007) — is an important reason why many elected politicians are nei-

ther accountable nor responsive to their constituencies (e.g., Keefer 2007, Stokes et al.

2013). Among the numerous pernicious consequences, a large literature argues that

clientelism exacerbates governmental allocative inefficiencies and undermines the func-

tioning of democratic institutions, leading to both reduced political competition as well

as the underprovision of public goods and social insurance.1

    Why would citizens participate in clientelism given such potential consequences?

Of the many factors posited, perhaps none has garnered more attention than poverty.

An extensive theoretical literature points to the decreasing marginal utility of income as

an underlying reason why impoverished citizens may place relatively greater value on

private consumption than on political preferences or public goods provision (e.g., Dixit

and Londregan 1996, Bardhan and Mookherjee 2012). But while poverty focuses on the

level of income, the uncertainty of income also warrants close attention. As shown by

Ligon and Schechter’s (2003) theoretical work, economic vulnerability – defined as en-

compassing both the level and uncertainty of income – has important effects on citizens’

well-being.

    The pervasiveness of both vulnerability and clientelism across developing coun-

tries raises two important, unexplored questions. First, is there a causal link between
1 See Piattoni (2001); Kitschelt and Wilkinson (2007); Baland and Robinson (2008); Bardhan and Mookher-
 jee (2012); Robinson and Verdier (2013); Stokes et al. (2013); and Anderson, Francois, and Kotwal (2015)
 as examples of the literature characterizing clientelist politics and its consequences.


                                                   1
economic vulnerability and citizens’ participation in ongoing clientelist relationships?

And second, if vulnerability is indeed a cause of clientelism, what are the electoral con-

sequences of reducing vulnerability? If citizens become less reliant on elected officials

as their vulnerability declines, we might expect a reduction in votes for incumbents and

thereby a mitigation of any incumbency advantage.

   The present study advances the literature on clientelism by investigating both ques-

tions in Northeast Brazil, a drought-prone region where vulnerability is prevalent. We

employ a large-scale randomized control trial that exogenously decreased vulnerability

through a development intervention. This intervention, which we designed in collabo-

ration with a Brazilian NGO, constructed private rainfed water cisterns for individual

households. Each cistern captures up to 16,000 liters of rainfall from a house’s rooftop

that can be consumed for extended periods, thereby heightening the reliability of a

household’s water supply and its resiliency to droughts. Analyses reveal that cisterns

lead to reduced vulnerability, as measured by several prominent well-being indicators

of food insecurity, depression, and self-reported health status.

   In addition to randomly assigning cisterns, we conducted a novel, longitudinal sur-

vey of a large representative sample of impoverished rural households facing water in-

security. This survey not only examines vulnerability, but also measures respondents’

interactions with local politicians before, during, and after Brazil’s 2012 municipal elec-

tions. Crucially, the data reveal which individuals are likely to have ongoing clientelist

relationships with local politicians, as well as important details about the nature of their

interactions. We establish a set of stylized facts about the relationship between vulner-

ability and clientelism. For example, our survey data show that residents of drought-

stricken municipalities are more likely to ask local politicians for private benefits, espe-

cially for water, medicine, and medical treatments. In addition, we find that citizens ex-

periencing droughts are more likely to declare support publicly for political candidates,




                                             2
a mechanism of clientelism that serves as a costly signal about how they will vote.2 As

explored in this study, such evidence sheds light on the nexus between vulnerability

and clientelism, in which many vulnerable citizens rely on clientelist relationships with

local politicians in order to cope with negative shocks.

    A key finding of our study is that in households randomly selected to receive water

cisterns, citizens are significantly less likely to participate in clientelism. The interven-

tion reduces the likelihood that citizens ask local politicians for private benefits by 3.0

percentage points, a substantial decline of 17 percent. As expected, these effects are

fully concentrated among citizens who are likely to be in ongoing clientelist relation-

ships: their requests fall by 10.9 percentage points — a remarkable 38 percent reduction

in proportional terms. By contrast, we find no effect among citizens without such re-

lationships. Furthermore, we find that the intervention decreased requests for various

types of goods, beyond water requests that are directly affected by cisterns. A novel

aspect of this study is that — unlike nearly all existing quantitative work on clientelism

(e.g., Vicente 2014, Hicken et al. 2015) — it provides evidence about the phenomenon

during both electoral and non-electoral periods. Our analyses show that the cisterns

treatment decreases citizens’ requests not only during the election campaign, but also

during the year after the election. These effects are larger when we restrict attention to

municipalities in which incumbent mayors ran for reelection.

    Given these findings, we examine whether the intervention also renders citizens

less likely to vote for incumbent politicians during their reelection campaigns. Facili-

tating this analysis is a feature of Brazil’s electoral system that provides extraordinarily

granular data on voting outcomes. Our survey links individual subjects in the cisterns

experiment to their specific electronic voting machines in the 2012 municipal election.


2 Electronicvoting undermines clientelist politicians’ ability to monitor vote choices in Brazil, so during
 election campaigns, many citizens mitigate this challenge by publicly declaring support for candidates
 with whom they have ongoing clientelist relationships (Nichter 2018). Declarations are costly signals in
 part because politicians can disfavor citizens who declared for defeated candidates, when distributing
 various post-election benefits including health care.


                                                    3
In order to measure electoral responses to the cistern treatment, we can compare votes

across machines — which have distinct, randomly assigned numbers of treated indi-

viduals — located in the same polling places. The cisterns treatment is estimated to

decrease a citizen’s probability of voting for the incumbent mayor by 29.3 percentage

points. While not dispositive, these results are consistent with the argument that water

cisterns make citizens less beholden to incumbent politicians, in that they may be less

reliant on clientelist relationships as a risk-coping mechanism.

    The findings of this study offer several important contributions to the political econ-

omy literature. Previous observational studies show correlational evidence that citi-

zens of low socioeconomic status are more likely to participate in clientelism.3 Yet it

is challenging to establish a causal relationship, in part due to the difficulty of disen-

tangling the role of poverty and risk from those of various unobserved determinants

of the phenomenon, such as voters’ beliefs, attitudes and preferences.4 Our study ad-

vances the literature by providing compelling evidence that reducing vulnerability de-

creases citizens’ participation in clientelist exchanges. Second, our electoral findings

may be interpreted as corroborating a related hypothesis of Blattman, Emeriau, and

Fiala (2017): economic independence frees the poor to express support for opposition

candidates. Third, by showing how these changes in the political equilibrium are con-

centrated among voters in ongoing relationships, our study complements research by

Finan and Schechter (2012) and Calvo and Murillo (2013), which documents how vote

buying and clientelism operate through established networks based on reciprocal, par-

tisan, or personal ties. Fourth, an innovative feature of our approach is that it empha-




3 For example, based on a cross-sectional comparison of voters in Argentina following the 2001 election,
  Brusco, Nazareno, and Stokes (2004) and Stokes (2005) show that 12 percent of low-income respondents
  reported receiving a gift from a candidate or party, which is higher than the overall incidence of seven
  percent.
4 For instance, Finan and Schechter (2012) argue that due to the limited enforceability of vote-buying

  contracts, politicians and their middlemen will target individuals who are more likely to reciprocate, an
  individual characteristic that is generally difficult to observe.


                                                    4
sizes the important role that citizens play in clientelism, a demand-side perspective that

is overlooked by most quantitative and theoretical work on the topic.

      Our project is closely related to recent work by Anderson, Francois, and Kotwal

(2015), which develops and tests a theoretical model of clientelistic insurance. In their

framework, political elites have incentives to curtail government-mandated mecha-

nisms that help poor and vulnerable households cope with shocks, precisely because

doing so enables elites to sustain clientelist arrangements. Although they do not empir-

ically examine the effects of the introduction of independent risk-coping mechanisms,

as we do with our water cisterns intervention, their framework has important impli-

cations that we test empirically. In particular, their model predicts that exogenous im-

provements in citizens’ access to public and private goods should crowd out citizens’

participation in clientelism. The present study is the first to corroborate this prediction

with compelling evidence.

      The article is organized as follows. Section 2 provides contextual information about

rural Northeast Brazil and describes the intervention. We follow with a description of

our data sources in Section 3. Section 4 discusses the experimental design and empiri-

cal methodology. Section 5 presents the central empirical results of our study and rules

out several alternative explanations involving politician responses, citizen engagement,

and credit claiming. Finally, Section 6 concludes with a discussion of findings and their

broader implications.


2     Context and Intervention

2.1     Context

      This study focuses on Brazil’s semi-arid zone, the vast majority of which is located in

the country’s Northeast region. The zone spans over one million square kilometers (see

Figure 1), and its population of over 28 million residents is disproportionately poor and




                                               5
rural.5 It is characterized by far lower average precipitation and higher rainfall varia-

tion than the rest of Brazil. In 2012, the zone’s average precipitation was just 57.2 cm,

compared to 153.1 cm in the rest of the country. A fundamental source of vulnerability

is the region’s exposure to recurring droughts; its rainfall is temporally concentrated

and evaporates quickly due to the topography and temperature (Febraban 2007, 2008).

    In this drought-prone region, many residents of rural areas are highly vulnerable

to shocks.6 Credit and insurance markets are underdeveloped, and savings constraints

often prevent citizens from procuring sufficient self-insurance. Partially due to the spa-

tial correlation of rainfall shocks, the ability of rural citizens to use informal insurance

to address their needs is often limited. Health shocks are another major issue, as inade-

quate healthcare often ranks as the top concern in opinion surveys across Brazil. Many

wealthier Brazilians possess private health insurance, but impoverished citizens are

particularly vulnerable to health shocks: the probability of experiencing catastrophic

health expenditures is over seven times higher for the poorest quintile than it is for the

richest quintile (de Barros et al. 2011).

    Given their substantial vulnerability to shocks, many Brazilians request assistance

from local politicians. Our longitudinal data reveal that 21.3 percent of survey respon-

dents asked for private goods from a mayoral or councilor candidate during the 2012

election year.7 Moreover, 8.6 percent of respondents made such requests to those politi-

cians during the following non-election year. As shown below, these demands increase

amidst adverse shocks. While not all requests involve life necessities, most do — about

5 The  semi-arid region is composed of 1,133 contiguous municipalities in nine states: Alagoas, Bahia,
  Ceará, Minas Gerais, Paraiba, Pernambuco, Piauí, Rio Grande do Norte, and Sergipe.
6 The Institute for Applied Economic Research (Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada, or Ipea) in

  Brazil classified most of the Northeast region as very vulnerable according to its 2015 Index of Social
  Vulnerability.
7 Local elections occur simultaneously nationwide every four years, with state and federal elections fol-

  lowing two years later. Mayors and city councilors are elected concurrently in each municipality. Mayors
  are elected by plurality, except in municipalities with populations above 200,000, where run-off elections
  are held if no candidate wins an outright majority. Mayors can only hold office for two consecutive terms,
  but can also be reelected again in a later election. Councilors, who do not face term limits, serve in the
  legislative branch of the municipal government and are elected by open-list proportional representation.
  Voting is compulsory in Brazil, with turnout in most elections around 80 percent.


                                                     6
a third of requests in both years involved health care, and another quarter involved

water.

       Local politicians have considerable discretion and resources to fulfill citizens’ re-

quests.8 When responding to such requests, politicians frequently mete out assistance

using political criteria, as demand often exceeds available resources. In rural Northeast

Brazil, mayors and city councilors often favor citizens with whom they have ongoing

clientelist relationships, in which material benefits are exchanged for political support

(Nichter 2018). Political clientelism and vote buying are common in much of Brazil;

for example, electoral courts have ousted over a thousand politicians since 2000 for

distributing private goods to citizens during political campaigns (MCCE 2012). Nu-

merous factors contribute to the prevalence of clientelism in Brazil. Some evidence

suggests that the electoral institution of open list proportional representation for select-

ing federal deputies, state deputies and councilors fosters clientelism; by heightening

intra-party competition, it tends to promote a focus on particularism rather than pro-

grammatic appeals (Hagopian 1996, Ames 2002). Brazil’s highly fragmented party sys-

tem also weakens the ability of many politicians to employ programmatic appeals, as a

large number of parties makes it more difficult for voters to ascertain which ones align

with their collective interests.9

       In line with the literature’s general consensus that clientelism tends to favor incum-

bents, our survey data suggest that politicians in office are more likely to engage in re-


8 As  in most Latin American countries, the provision of many public services has been decentralized to
  the local level (Garman, Haggard, and Willis 2001), and Brazil’s government expenditures are among
  the most decentralized in the world (IMF 2016). Most municipalities rely primarily on transfers from
  higher levels of government to finance expenditures (IMF 2016). The service provision responsibilities
  of municipal governments in Brazil include aspects of healthcare, education, local infrastructure, and
  natural resource management (Andersson, Gordillo, and van Laerhoven 2009).
9 In addition, Brazilian politicians who aim to influence elections illicitly may find it easier to distribute

  contingent rewards than to engage in strategies of electoral fraud, such as registering fictitious voters
  or tampering with electoral returns. To reduce such fraud before voting, Brazil employs a national
  registration database and recurring voter registration audits. Furthermore, in part to hinder fraud after
  voting, it became the first country in the world to institute fully electronic voting in 2000 (Nicolau
  2002; Mercuri 2002). Fujiwara (2015) investigates how electronic voting affected political behavior and
  enfranchisement of Brazilians of lower socioeconomic status (see also Hidalgo 2010).


                                                      7
quest fulfilling. Incumbents usually have greater financial and organizational resources

to engage in clientelism, not least because they can more easily access government cof-

fers, programs, and employees (e.g., Gallego and Wantchekon 2012, Stokes 2009). Stud-

ies suggest that the ability to control public programs and employment helps incum-

bents’ electoral performance (Schady 2000, Folke, Hirano and Snyder 2011), and exper-

imental evidence suggests that clientelism is more effective for incumbent candidates

(Wantchekon 2003). In our study’s control group, respondents were more likely to have

received private benefits from incumbent than from non-incumbent politicians. During

the 2012 municipal election year, 7.0 percent of respondents had requests fulfilled by in-

cumbent candidates, versus 5.7 percent by challenger candidates. The disparity is even

starker during the 2013 post-election year, reaching an order of magnitude: whereas 3.6

percent of respondents had requests fulfilled by politicians in office, only 0.36 percent

had requests fulfilled by politicians out of office.

2.2     Water Cisterns Intervention

      In this study we employ a prospective randomized control design, in which the in-

tervention provided rainfed water cisterns to randomly selected households. Each wa-

ter cistern consists of an enclosed structure made of reinforced concrete, capable of hold-

ing up to 16,000 liters of water (about the size of a small room). As shown in Figure 2,

each cistern is attached to a gutter and tube system that collects rainfall from the home’s

roof. The cistern is partially buried, with a manual pump on top and a small metal door

providing internal access for cleaning and maintenance. While the cistern is designed

to collect rainfall from a home’s roof, a household can also buy water from water trucks

and store it in the cistern, providing insulation from droughts. Thus, the cistern not only

serves as a reliable technology for collecting rainfall, but also provides a storage device.

      Cisterns cost approximately US$ 1,000 (R$ 1,500 in 2010) each to construct, and were

awarded free of charge to eligible households. We show below that the intervention re-

duced vulnerability, but did not significantly change household wealth. Cisterns were


                                              8
developed by our NGO partner Articulação no Semi-Arido Brasileiro (ASA, or Brazilian

Semi-Arid Articulation)10 as a strategy to help poor rural households cope with irreg-

ular rainfall. Prior to our experiment, ASA had built cisterns in Northeast Brazil since

2003. As described below, we randomized the construction of cisterns by ASA in spec-

ified municipalities, beginning in January 2012.

      Since cisterns had been constructed by ASA in the region for nearly a decade, the

intervention was well-known by the population. As such, there were no concerns

about whether households would accept cisterns or know how to use and maintain

them. With respect to existing cisterns in the region, most cisterns in wealthier house-

holds had been self-built, whereas most cisterns in poorer households had been re-

ceived from ASA. The cisterns we randomly assigned were financed by an interna-

tional development agency, but implemented through ASA. Only one minor attribute

differed between our intervention’s cisterns and those previously constructed by ASA:

each cistern’s usual plaque that displayed various logos also included the development

agency’s logo. In our study, local politicians had no input whatsoever regarding which

households were selected to participate or receive cisterns. Moreover, as a longstanding

practice, ASA does not consult with local politicians regarding the allocation of cisterns

and does not indicate to beneficiaries that the government was in any way responsible

for their receipt of cisterns.


3        Data

3.1      Study Population and Sample

      Our study’s population consists of rural households in Brazil’s semi-arid zone with-

out reliable access to drinking water. More specifically, households eligible for the study

met the following inclusion criteria: (a) they had no piped drinking water or cistern, (b)



10 See   www.asabrasil.org.br.


                                             9
they had physical space on their property to build a cistern, and (c) their roofs were at

least 40 m2 and composed of metal sheeting or tile (to facilitate rainfall collection).

      The sample selection of households involved two steps. First, 40 municipalities

were randomly selected using weights proportional to the number of households with-

out access to piped water and cisterns, according to the most recent administrative data

from the federal government’s Cadastro Único. In the second step, clusters of neighbor-

ing rural households (i.e., logradouros in the Cadastro Único) were selected at random

within the sample municipalities. Up to six eligible households were interviewed in

each cluster. In order to ensure independence of observations across neighborhood

clusters, we imposed a restriction that clusters be located at least two kilometers away

from each other. Our surveys were conducted in 425 neighborhood clusters in 40 mu-

nicipalities, located in all nine states of the semi-arid region. Our study population

and interview sample comprise all households from the ASA cisterns program in these

40 municipalities throughout our research period. Whereas the average population of

municipalities in our sample was 49,000 citizens, the average number of water cisterns

built in each municipality by our intervention was just 17. Given the minute share of

treated households in each municipality, it is unlikely that local politicians would shift

their strategies in response to our provision of cisterns; we provide corroborating evi-

dence below. So long as this condition holds, our estimates identify changes in citizens’

behavior, rather than a combination of changes in citizens’ behavior and changes in

politicians’ strategies.

3.2     Household surveys

      We conducted a face-to-face panel survey spanning nearly three years, as shown in

the timeline in Figure 3. In the localization effort for study recruitment (May-July 2011),

we identified 1,308 water-vulnerable households (i.e., households eligible for participa-

tion) in the randomly selected neighborhood clusters. Once households had been lo-

cated, we conducted an in-depth baseline household survey of 1,189 household heads


                                            10
in October-December 2011, gathering detailed household characteristics as well as in-

formation about individual family members. This first survey wave — which predated

the cistern treatment — provides a rich set of household and individual-level charac-

teristics such as water access, education, health, depression, labor supply, and food

insecurity.

      The next two waves, which enable us to capture effects of the cistern treatment, in-

volved individual-level surveys of all present household members at least 18 years of

age. These waves not only repeated many earlier questions to gather post-treatment

data on household and individual characteristics, but also provide one of the first lon-

gitudinal surveys ever fielded investigating clientelism during both election and non-

election years. In order to study political interactions around the campaign season, the

second wave was fielded in November-December 2012, immediately after the Octo-

ber 2012 municipal elections. This wave successfully contacted 1,238 households in the

sample. Given that all adults present in these households were interviewed, this second

wave totaled 2,680 individual interviews. To capture effects during a non-election pe-

riod, the third wave was fielded in November-December 2013. This wave successfully

reached 1,119 households in the sample, with a total of 1,944 individuals interviewed.

3.3     Voting data

      In order to analyze whether reduced vulnerability affects incumbents’ electoral per-

formance, we gathered the most granular voting data released by Brazil’s Superior Elec-

toral Court (Tribunal Superior Eleitoral, or TSE) for the 2012 municipal election. These

data provide electoral returns for each electronic voting machine in surveyed munic-

ipalities. We also submitted information requests to the TSE to obtain the precise ge-

ographic location of each voting machine, enabling comparisons of votes received by

mayoral candidates across different machines in the same polling location. Of the 40

municipalities in our sample, 27 mayors were in their first term and thus eligible to run

for reelection in 2012. Of these 27 mayors, 21 (77.8 percent) chose to run again, and eight


                                             11
were reelected (i.e., 38.1 percent of those who ran).11 On average, the 21 incumbent

mayors in our sample vying for reelection in 2012 received 46.9 percent of the votes cast,

whereas their top challenger received 49.1 percent of the votes cast. In our sample, 1,355

respondents resided in municipalities where the incumbent ran for reelection in 2012.

        To examine the impact of the cistern treatment on electoral results, we matched sur-

vey respondents to their voting machines. This task involved asking respondents in

Wave 2 for their electoral section number (seção eleitoral), an identification number that

Brazilians provide on various official documents (e.g., when applying for Bolsa Família).

Each section number corresponds to a unique voting machine in a municipality.12 Enu-

merators recorded respondents’ section numbers twice to ensure accuracy and asked

respondents to show their voter identification cards to confirm their section number.

We were able to collect this information for 85 percent of all respondents in the 2012

survey wave. Note that in Brazil, voters are assigned to a specific voting machine by

electoral authorities, and absentee voting is generally prohibited. In addition, voting is

compulsory for all literate Brazilians between their 18th and 70th birthdays.

        To examine incumbents’ electoral performance, we focus on voting outcomes in mu-

nicipalities where the incumbent mayor ran for reelection. Our estimation sample is

composed of 909 voting machines in polling locations where at least one survey par-

ticipant was matched to any voting machine. Given that ballot secrecy requires us to

use aggregate vote counts at the voting-machine level, this geographic breadth of sur-

vey respondents across so many voting machines facilitates our estimation of treatment

effects by increasing statistical power. These 909 voting machines were located in 189

polling locations (primarily schools), corresponding to a mean of 4.8 machines per lo-


11 In comparison, across Brazil in 2012, 74.8 percent of eligible mayors chose to run again, and those
   who ran experienced a reelection rate of 55.0 percent. See: “Mais da Metade dos Atuais Prefeitos que
   Disputaram o Segundo Mandato foram Eleitos,” Agência Brasil, October 13, 2012.
12 More specifically, it corresponds to a unique voting machine in an electoral zone, which usually (but

   not always) corresponds to a municipality. Our matching process incorporates this point: we asked
   respondents not only their voting machine number but also the name of their voting location, and thus
   could cross-check with official TSE records about respondents’ electoral zones.


                                                  12
cation. On average, each machine in our sample had 334 registered voters in 2012, of

which 257 cast a valid ballot for a candidate, 19 cast blank or invalid votes, and 58

abstained. Of all votes cast in these machines, the incumbent candidate received an

average of 117 votes (45.5 percent), and the challenger received 140 votes (54.5 percent)

—– a vote margin of 23 votes (9.0 percentage points).13

3.4        Rainfall

      To confirm the vulnerability of our household sample to droughts, we also gathered

monthly precipitation data at the municipal level for the past quarter century (1986-

2013) from the Climate Hazards Group Infrared Precipitation with Station (CHIRPS)

database.14 On average, municipalities in our sample had 40.9 cm of rainfall in 2012

and 69.3 cm in 2013. To ensure meaningful comparisons across municipalities with dif-

fering climatic conditions, rainfall shocks are measured as the difference between the

current period’s rainfall and the historical (1986-2011) mean of rainfall in the municipal-

ity during identical months, divided by the municipality’s historical monthly standard

deviation of rainfall.15


4      Empirical Methodology

4.1        Research Design

      Our sample consists of 1,308 households located across 425 neighborhood clus-

ters. Randomization was performed across these neighborhood clusters (known as

logradouros in Brazil) within municipalities. More specifically, in October 2011 clus-


13 Further  descriptive statistics for the sample are provided in Appendix Table B1.
14 Site:http://chg.geog.ucsb.edu/data/chirps/.
15 More specifically, our standardized rainfall shock measure is defined as Standardized Rain
                                                                                                          imy =
   ( Rainimy − Rainim )/σi , where Rainimy refers to rainfall in municipality i in period m (a set of calendar
   months) in year y, and Rainim refers to the average of historical rainfall in municipality i in period m,
   and σi is the historical standard deviation of rainfall in municipality i. The historical rainfall data cover
   the period 1986-2011. We then standardize this measure to have mean zero and variance equal to one in
   the estimating sample (following Hidalgo et al 2010). Results are robust to alternative rainfall measures,
   including the raw level of rainfall.


                                                      13
ters were stratified by municipality and randomly allocated into treatment and con-

trol arms. Households within neighborhood clusters often share water resources; thus,

to avoid treatment spillovers across households, all participating households in clus-

ters selected for treatment were assigned to receive their own individual cisterns. All

participating households in clusters assigned to the control group were designated to

receive nothing from our intervention throughout the study. We allocated 615 house-

holds in 189 clusters to the treatment group and 693 households in 236 clusters to the

control group. The reason for the modestly larger control group was the possibility that

other cistern-building entities in Northeast Brazil might provide cisterns to some con-

trol households. For ethical reasons, we would not inhibit households from obtaining

cisterns by other means.

   Experimental compliance is shown in Appendix Table A1. In Wave 2 of the survey

in November-December 2012, 67.5 percent of households assigned to treatment had

received a cistern. This percentage increased to 90.8 percent by Wave 3 in November-

December 2013. Some of the noncompliance stems from the fact that our partner, ASA,

is an umbrella NGO coordinating many small associations at the municipal level or be-

low. In some cases, we learned ex-post that certain local associations had less human

resources to organize construction than initially expected.

   With regards to compliance among households assigned to the control group, 20.2

percent of households had a cistern by Wave 2, which increased to 65.3 percent by Wave

3. Treatment among those assigned to the control group mainly resulted from an un-

foreseen expansion of federal funds for cistern construction after our study was de-

signed and fielded. At the beginning of our study, ASA was the predominant builder

of cisterns in the region; this budget expansion led other contractors to ramp up cistern

construction. It deserves emphasis that this differential take-up rate between treatment

and control groups enables us to identify causal effects on our key outcome variables.

Our experiment is well-powered; for example, power calculations reveal that in analy-



                                           14
ses of citizen requests, it can detect a 2.5 percentage point effect at the 5% significance

level.

   Following the usual approach in experimental studies, we address imperfect com-

pliance by focusing on intention-to-treat effects (ITT). That is, analyses compare those

we intended to treat (respondents assigned to the treatment group) to those we in-

tended not to treat (respondents assigned to the control group). In addition, we provide

LATE estimates from instrumental variable models in the appendix as detailed below.

4.1.1    Baseline balance

   Baseline balance is presented in Appendix Table A2. Mean values for the treatment

and control groups are shown, as well as differences in means and standard errors of

these differences. Slightly over half of individuals in our sample are female. On aver-

age, respondents are 37 years old and have six years of education (i.e., they completed

primary school). Household size is just over four members, and about 63 percent of

households have at least one neighbor with a cistern. Only the latter characteristic had

a small but significant difference of 6 percentage points between the treatment and con-

trol groups.

   The table also shows balance between the two groups for various other indicators,

including: expenditures and wealth per capita, age of the household head, homeown-

ership, electricity, migration, land ownership, land size, number of children and polit-

ical participation. An F-test reported in the last row of the table fails to reject the joint

hypothesis that all coefficients are zero. This test implies that our randomization was

successful at achieving statistically similar treatment and control groups at baseline.

4.1.2    Attrition

   We observe a low level of household attrition across survey rounds. Appendix Table

A3 shows that from the 1,308 households identified for study participation, 9.1 percent

were not successfully interviewed during the baseline survey (Wave 1). During the



                                             15
election year survey (Wave 2), the attrition rate was lower, at 5.4 percent of households

identified for study participation. In the post-election survey (Wave 3), attrition in-

creased to 14.5 percent of households identified for study participation. Furthermore,

the attrition of households is uncorrelated with treatment status, as shown in the last

row of the table. Overall, we find that the correlation between attrition and treatment

is small, negative, and statistically indistinguishable from zero (p-value = 0.64).

4.2     Empirical strategy

      Our main empirical analyses focus on outcomes obtained from household surveys

as well as from official electoral results. The type of data informs the regression models

used in each analysis. We describe each main specification below.

4.2.1    Requests for private goods

      We first estimate the overall effects of the cistern treatment on individuals’ requests

for private goods from local politicians. We do so by estimating equation (1), where

the dependent variable is a dummy indicating whether individual i in household h,

cluster c, and municipality m requested private goods from a politician during the 2012

municipal election year or during the 2013 post-election year. Our main specifications

pool the data from both survey rounds and include survey wave fixed effects (γt ). Mu-

nicipal fixed effects (αm ) are also included because treatment assignment was stratified

by municipality (neighborhood clusters were randomly assigned to treatment within

each municipality). Dcm is a dummy indicating whether cluster c in municipality m

was assigned to treatment. The coefficient of interest is β 1 :



                             yihcmt = αm + γt + β 1 · Dcm + eihcmt .                      (1)

      Because households within a given cluster are neighbors and may share common

shocks, we allow for arbitrary intra-cluster correlation of the error term eihcmt by using

clustered standard errors at the neighborhood cluster level cm.


                                               16
     To test the hypothesis that the cisterns intervention reduces requests for private

goods by citizens in clientelist relationships, we also estimate:

             yihcmt = αm + γt + β 1 · Dcm + β 2 · Rihcm + β 3 · Dcm · Rihcm + eihcmt ,             (2)

where Rihcm is an indicator for the individual being in a clientelist relationship (dis-

cussed below), and the other variables remain as previously defined. With regards to

equations (1) and (2), we also report results separately by survey wave, thereby dis-

tinguishing between requests made during 2012 and 2013. These specifications provide

evidence about treatment effects distinguishing between electoral and non-electoral pe-

riods.

     The extant literature lacks a well-established marker for whether citizens are in-

volved in ongoing clientelist relationships, so we tackle this issue by employing two

alternative measures. Our primary marker is whether the respondent conversed at

least monthly with a local politician before the 2012 electoral campaign began. This

measure, which is balanced across treatment and control groups (see Figure 4), builds

on the intuition that such frequent interactions facilitate the face-to-face exchanges be-

tween citizens and elites that are a hallmark of ongoing clientelist relationships.16 Of

course, even though substantial fieldwork in Northeast Brazil (Nichter 2018) – as well

as our own piloting – suggests that these frequent interactions typically reflect clien-

telist relationships, some citizens may converse regularly with local politicians for other

reasons. Thus, we also show robustness to a more restrictive marker: having both con-

versed with a politician at least monthly before the 2012 electoral campaign and having

publicly declared support for a candidate during that campaign. As discussed below,

many rural Brazilians involved in contingent exchanges declare support on their homes

and bodies in order to send a costly signal about how they will vote.



16 All
     analyses are robust to using alternative markers of clientelism employing different frequencies of
  conversations with politicians.


                                                  17
    Within our sample, 18.4 percent of survey respondents have our primary marker of

being in an ongoing clientelist relationship, while 12.0 percent have the more restrictive

secondary marker. We prefer our primary marker because conversations with politi-

cians are uncorrelated with adverse shocks; by contrast, declared support increases

amidst shocks such as drought (see below). As discussed in Section 5, estimates and

significance of results are robust when using either marker of citizens’ involvement in

clientelist relationships. In the appendix, Table A4 shows that neither marker is corre-

lated with the cisterns treatment,17 and Appendix Tables A5 and A6 show that they do

not merely serve as a proxy for economic vulnerability or other important characteris-

tics. For example, citizens with these markers are no more (or less) vulnerable – using

any of the measures discussed below – and their expenditures and wealth per capita

are statistically indistinguishable from other citizens.18

4.2.2   Electoral outcomes

    To test the hypothesis that the cisterns intervention undermines the electoral perfor-

mance of incumbent mayors during their reelection campaigns, we examine the most

granular data released by Brazil’s electoral authorities for the 2012 municipal election.

As described above, we are able to link survey respondents to the specific electronic

voting machines to which they are assigned by electoral authorities. Given that voting

data are publicly available at the voting machine level, we estimate:



                   yslm = αlm + γ1 · TV slm + γ2 · EV slm + γ3 · RV slm + eslm ,                      (3)

    where yslm is the number of votes for the incumbent mayor in electronic voting ma-

chine (i.e., “electoral section”) s, in voting location l, in municipality m. The regressor

17 We  also asked survey respondents about conversations with politicians during the 2013 non-election
   year. We find no effect of the cisterns treatment on these conversations, on average and even among the
   subset of citizens who frequently conversed with politicians before the 2012 campaign.
18 As shown in Appendix Tables A5 and A6, citizens with these markers are more likely to vote, have all

   household members voting for the same candidate, and/or have campaign visits to their homes. Such
   behaviors are consistent with being in a clientelist relationship.


                                                   18
of interest is TVslm , the number of treated individuals in our study assigned by electoral

authorities to vote in that particular machine. Other controls in the regression are EVslm ,

the overall number of individuals in our study assigned to that machine; αlm , a voting

location fixed effect to control for differential voting patterns across voting locations in a

municipality; and RVslm , the total number of registered voters assigned to that machine

(regardless of whether they are in our study sample) to control for any possible system-

atic relationship between citizens’ electoral behavior and the size of voting machines.

Recall that for a given voting machine, the proportion of voters from the experimental

sample who are assigned to the treatment condition is assigned randomly. Further-

more, within a given polling place, citizens are assigned to a specific voting machine by

electoral authorities.19 Therefore, once we condition on the total number of individuals

in the study registered to vote in the machine, we can identify γ1 – the effect of an ad-

ditional person assigned to the cisterns treatment on votes for the incumbent mayor.20

    The analysis in Equation (3) compares electoral outcomes across voting machines

within each polling location, so we test for balance in survey participant characteristics

across machines within locations. Such testing provides assurance that differences in

electoral outcomes correlated with the cisterns treatment are not due to the composi-

tion of voters across machines. Appendix Table B2 shows specifications in which mean

survey participant characteristics (age, years of education, gender, and marker of clien-

telism) for a given voting machine are regressed on the number of treated individuals

assigned to that machine by electoral authorities. Reassuringly, coefficients are small

and statistically insignificant, suggesting that results do not stem from the composition

of the electorate.


19 Ouridentification strategy is robust to any influence citizens may have regarding their polling place.
20 Additional specifications are employed to show robustness. Some employ a more recent measure of
 registered voters per machine: from 2012, instead of from the prior municipal election in 2008. Other
 specifications include an additional control variable — the change in registered voters between 2008 and
 2012 — which could influence the number of votes received by an incumbent. More generally, this latter
 design is similar to those used to measure spatial (direct and external) treatment effects, as in Miguel
 and Kremer (2004).


                                                  19
    Section 5.5 shows that the cisterns treatment significantly reduces votes for the in-

cumbent mayor, without conducting any adjustments. However, further consideration

is needed because specifications about electoral outcomes (but not about requests) in-

volve aggregate data: TVslm and EVslm sum how many treatment and overall study

participants are assigned by their voter identification cards to vote in a particular ma-

chine in a given polling location. Accurately measuring treatment effects on electoral

outcomes with these aggregate data requires attention to three potential issues: (a) treat-

ment effects on voting by non-interviewed members of treated households (as regis-

tered voters in sampled households were only interviewed if present during our home

visits); (b) spillover effects on neighbors’ voting behavior (e.g., due to sharing water

with ineligible, neighboring households); and (c) peer effects on neighbors’ voting be-

havior.21 Failing to address the possible undercounting of other treated household

members, as well as positive spillover and peer effects, could bias upward our esti-

mates of treatment effects (in absolute terms). Therefore, we adjust TVslm and EVslm to

incorporate estimates of: (a) how many non-interviewed individuals live in sampled

households, (b) how many live in other households in the neighborhood cluster with-

out a cistern at baseline (i.e., those potentially affected by spillover or peer effects of the

cisterns treatment), and (c) the probabilities that these individuals are assigned by their

voter registration cards to vote in the same locations and same voting machines as our

interviewees. This procedure improves estimation of the magnitude of treatment ef-

fects on electoral outcomes; as mentioned, the statistical significance of findings is also

robust without any such adjustments.

    To conduct appropriate inference about electoral outcomes, two points require con-

sideration. First, sampling error of the adjusted regressors must be taken into account.

And second, because we allow the errors to be correlated across voting machines and lo-


21 Studiessuch as Nickerson (2008), Giné and Manzuri (2018), and Fafchamps, Vaz, and Vicente (in press)
  find evidence of substantial positive peer effects on electoral behavior in voter education campaigns in
  the U.S., Pakistan, and Mozambique, respectively.


                                                   20
cations within a municipality, our sample is composed of 21 “clusters” – that is, munic-

ipalities in which the mayor is running for reelection. To address both points, we report

p-values from a wild cluster bootstrap-t procedure. This procedure not only addresses

the fact that we have a limited number of clusters (Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller 2008),

but also takes into account sampling error of the adjusted regressors through boot-

strapped sampling of the data used to construct estimates (Horowitz 2001). Appendix B

provides a detailed description of all procedures used to construct adjusted regressors

and estimate p-values.

    Examining electoral outcomes at the voting-machine level provides an extraordi-

narily granular level of official data. However, given ballot secrecy, it is only possible

to obtain a single observation per machine (i.e., total votes cast for the incumbent). This

aggregation limits power in regressions of electoral outcomes compared to those of

citizen requests described above. Despite this limitation, we not only examine average

effects for individuals assigned to the cisterns treatment using our primary specification

in Equation (3), but also analyze heterogeneity across our markers for citizens likely to

be in clientelist relationships. As expected, these specifications further deteriorate the

signal-to-noise ratio; for example, less than a fifth of citizens conversed frequently with

politicians, and less than a tenth of voting machines have any treated citizens who meet

this criterion.


5    Results
    This section first examines the vulnerability and political interactions of study par-

ticipants, and then implements the empirical strategy described above to investigate

the cistern intervention’s effects on citizens’ participation in clientelism and on electoral

outcomes.




                                             21
5.1     Vulnerability

      In order to document the vulnerability of study participants, Table 1 reports means

of a set of well-being indicators and their relationship with rainfall shocks. More specif-

ically, it reports bivariate regression coefficients of each indicator against the rainfall

shock measure defined in Section 3.4. Given that the latter is calculated at the mu-

nicipal level, the identification of coefficients in this descriptive exercise stems from

cross-municipality variation in rainfall shocks. If rural households in our sample were

not vulnerable to rainfall shocks – for example, if they could simply self-insure against

droughts, or if the state provides effective social insurance – then we would expect no

correlation between precipitation and each well-being indicator. But much to the con-

trary, bivariate regression coefficients in Table 1 suggest that citizens exhibit substantial

vulnerability.

      More specifically, the first measure is based on the conventional CES-D scale (Radloff

1977), which is employed internationally to identify symptoms of depression using self-

reported questions. The five-item scale reflects an average across items regarding how

often respondents experienced five depressive symptoms and is coded here such that

lower values correspond to more depression (to facilitate comparisons with other mea-

sures). A one standard deviation decrease in rainfall increases depression by 0.04 units,

or about 0.07 standard deviations of the depression scale. The second measure is the

Self-Reported Health Status (SRHS) index, which indicates how healthy respondents

believed they were (higher values indicate better self-reported health). In this case, a

one standard deviation decrease in rainfall decreases self-reported health on this four-

point scale by 0.04 units, or about 0.08 standard deviations on the SHRS scale. The third

measure is the Child Food Security Index, a five-point scale summing binary responses

from five questions about whether any child in the household encountered limited food

over the past three months (lower measures correspond to less food security). A one




                                             22
standard deviation decrease in rainfall worsens children’s food security by 0.06 units or

about 0.07 standard deviations of child food security.

      Also indicative of citizens’ vulnerability to water shortages in this rural setting, neg-

ative rainfall shocks are associated with lower household expenditures over the 30 days

preceding the survey. A one standard deviation decrease in rainfall reduces household

expenditures by R$ 24.40 (representing about 7 percent of average household expendi-

tures) — more specifically, it cuts R$ 13.33 from expenditures on food and R$ 11.54 from

other expenditures such as health, gas, and electricity.22 Overall, this evidence suggests

that the rural Brazilians in our sample are vulnerable to rainfall shocks.

5.2     Effects of Cisterns Treatment on Vulnerability

      An important first step in our analysis is to confirm that the cisterns treatment re-

duced vulnerability. Using measures of vulnerability collected at the household level,

we estimate:



                                       yhcm = αm + β 1 · Dcm + ehcm ,                       (4)

where yhcm is a vulnerability indicator for household h in cluster c, in municipality m.

Dcm is a dummy indicating whether the cluster was assigned to treatment, and αm is

a municipal fixed effect. Table 2 provides estimates of the intervention’s effect on var-

ious measures of household vulnerability. As shown in column 1, with respect to the

adapted CES-D scale of depressive symptoms described above, survey respondents ex-

perience an improvement of 0.09 units in 2013. This finding is significant at the .05

level and equivalent to 0.14 standard deviations in the CES-D scale. Column 2 shows

that another measure of vulnerability described above, Self-Reported Health Status,

also improves by 0.08 units among treated households (significant at the .05 level), rep-

resenting 0.14 standard deviations on the SRHS scale. In column 3, the Child Food


22 These   figures are in 2011 Brazilian Reais.


                                                    23
Security Index also shows an improvement of similar magnitude (0.08), though this es-

timate is imprecisely estimated. An overall index that standardizes and adds these three

components as in Kling, Liebman and Katz (2007) suggests there is a substantial 0.13

standard deviation reduction in vulnerability caused by the cistern (significant at the

.01 level; column 4). By contrast, Appendix Table A7 shows that the cistern treatment

has no significant effect on wealth as measured by the value of owned durable goods,

livestock, property and net liquid savings. Overall, this analysis confirms that the cis-

terns program reduced the vulnerability of study participants, but had no discernible

effect on wealth.23

5.3     Vulnerability and Clientelism

      Thus far, we have established the vulnerability of study participants, as well as its

exogeneous decrease through our cisterns intervention. To set up our primary experi-

mental analyses, we now provide descriptive evidence about clientelism and its link

to citizens’ vulnerability. Our underlying premise is that many citizens in ongoing

clientelist relationships request help from local politicians in order to cope with their

vulnerability.

      First, Table 3 provides contextual information about citizens’ interactions with politi-

cians. Recall that our primary marker of clientelism is whether a respondent had at least

monthly conversations with a local politician before the 2012 campaign began. While

these frequent interactions do not definitively identify contingent exchanges, citizens

exhibiting such behavior are more likely to be in clientelist relationships than those

who do not. As shown, 18.4 percent of survey respondents have this marker, and citi-

zens do not appear to form these relationships in response to negative rainfall shocks.

The bivariate regression coefficients in the right column reveal no significant association

between this clientelism marker and rainfall shocks.


23 Unlikethe wealth measures in Table A7, the expenditure data in Table 1 were only collected in the 2011
 localization survey.


                                                  24
   Citizens tend to interact most often with candidates for city council, and these re-

lationships might also be expected to yield political support for a councilor’s allied

mayoral candidate: 71.8 percent of respondents reported voting for a mayor and coun-

cilor of the same political group or coalition. In addition, there are likely to be spillover

effects of such relationships on voting behavior within households, as 77.3 percent of

respondents report that all family members vote for the same mayoral candidate. Cit-

izens exposed to negative rainfall shocks are more likely to indicate that all household

members vote for the same mayoral candidate. During local electoral campaigns, may-

oral candidates employ an extensive network of operatives to canvass citizens’ homes.

Over the course of the 2012 municipal campaign, 69.6 percent of respondents reported

receiving at least one home visit from representatives of a mayoral candidate. While

operatives’ reasons for such visits are often multifaceted, their reach to so many poor,

isolated households suggests the presence of an extensive political network, which is

typically a prerequisite for clientelism.

   As mentioned above, declared support is a key mechanism of clientelism, by which

citizens transmit a costly signal that they will vote for a particular candidate. Nearly

half of our survey respondents engaged in at least one form of declared support during

the campaign, either on their bodies, on their homes, or at rallies. Furthermore, Table

3 reveals that citizens are more likely to engage in each form of declared support when

they experience negative rainfall shocks. More specifically, a one standard deviation fall

in rainfall increases the prevalence of declarations by 7.1 percentage points (p <0.001).

This observation is consistent with our broader argument about the link between vul-

nerability and citizens’ participation in clientelism.

   In order to cope with vulnerability, citizens often turn to politicians for assistance.

As shown in Table 4, during the 2012 election year, 21.3 percent of survey respondents

asked for private benefits from a mayoral or councilor candidate, and 8.6 percent made

requests of those politicians during the 2013 non-election year. The composition of de-



                                             25
mands during both years reveals that many requests are motivated by vital needs such

as medicine, medical treatments, and water. Just as analyses in Section 5.1 suggest that

rainfall shocks increase vulnerability, Table 4 also shows that rainfall shocks increase

requests for assistance from politicians. Bivariate regression coefficients suggest that

a one standard deviation decrease in rainfall increases overall requests by 3.9 percent-

age points in 2012. Nearly 60 percent of this increase in requests involves water (2.3

percentage points), and nearly 30 percent involves medicine or medical treatments (1.1

percentage points). Table 4 also shows that politicians fulfill approximately half of such

requests, and are more responsive to demands for water and health care than to de-

mands for construction materials. When asked about hypothetical scenarios involving

urgent needs, about a quarter of all respondents in 2012 indicated they would first turn

to a local politician for help, even before family, friends and municipal offices. Dur-

ing our fieldwork, numerous local politicians explained that councilor candidates often

serve as brokers for allied mayoral candidates, and thus fulfill requests on their behalf.24

    If such patterns are orthogonal to citizens’ relationships with politicians, they may

merely reflect constituency service based exclusively on need, rather than clientelism.

But citizens with either marker of clientelism described in Section 4.2.1 are dispropor-

tionately likely to ask for private goods and to have fulfilled requests. First, consider our

primary clientelism marker among respondents in the control group. Approximately

28.5 percent of citizens with our primary marker requested private benefits from politi-

cians in 2012 or 2013, versus only 15.3 percent of those without the marker, a difference

of 13.2 percentage points (standard error = 0.028). In addition, citizens with the marker

were more than twice as likely as those without the marker to receive benefits by request

(16.7 vs. 7.6 percent) in either year, a difference of 9.0 percentage points (standard error

= 0.021). Similar patterns are observed when employing our more restrictive marker

of clientelism – having at least monthly conversations with a politician before the 2012

24 Beyond Brazil, evidence suggests that city councilors also serve as brokers in Argentina and the
 Philippines (Stokes et al. 2013, Ravanilla, Haim and Hicken 2017).


                                               26
electoral campaign and having declared support publicly for a candidate during that

campaign.25

5.4     Effects of Cistern Treatment on Requests

      Turning to our primary experimental analyses, we now explore whether cisterns re-

duced citizens’ requests for assistance from politicians, and inquire whether this effect

was concentrated among citizens who are likely to be in ongoing clientelist relation-

ships. Following the empirical strategy in Section 4.2, Table 5 presents estimates of the

causal impacts of the cistern intervention on citizen requests for private goods from

local politicians. Column 1, which pools data across survey waves, employs as its de-

pendent variable a dummy for whether the respondent requested any private good

from a politician. It shows that the intervention reduced the likelihood that citizens re-

quested such benefits by 3.0 percentage points (17 percent of the control group mean;

significant at the 5 percent level). Most strikingly, column 2 shows that these effects

are fully concentrated among citizens with our primary marker of being in a clien-

telist relationship — having at least monthly conversations with a politician before the

2012 electoral campaign began. Among such citizens, we estimate a 10.9 percentage

point (38 percent) reduction in requests (significant at the 1 percent level). By contrast,

among respondents without this marker, we estimate an insignificant 1.2 percentage

point reduction in requests (column 2). Columns 3 and 4 of Table 5 show that similar

patterns hold when estimating the specification separately for the 2012 electoral year

and the 2013 post-electoral year. Across all citizens, the treatment effect on requests

is significant at the 10 percent level in 2012, and significant at the 5 percent level in

2013. Importantly, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the effects for both years are

equivalent. Across citizens likely to be in clientelist relationships, the treatment effect

is significant at the 1 percent level and remarkably similar during both years (10.2 and

25 Citizens with this more restrictive marker were significantly more likely to request private goods (28.1
  vs. 16.4 percent, p < 0.001) and have fulfilled requests (16.9 vs. 8.3 percent, p < 0.001), when compared
  to citizens without the marker.


                                                    27
11.8 percentage points, respectively). The fact that this reduction in requests is of the

same magnitude outside of the electoral period suggests that the effect is persistent and

has longer-term effects on relationships between citizens and politicians, rather than

just short-term effects around campaigns.26

    In Table 5, columns 5-8 show analogous regressions ignoring requests for water,

which are expected to be directly affected by the cistern treatment. Results are broadly

similar in significance, though estimated coefficients are mechanically smaller given the

exclusion of water requests. Appendix Table A9 disaggregates findings by the type of

good requested, revealing that requests for water fall by 3.9 percentage points, requests

for construction materials fall by 3.7 percentage points, and requests for medicine or

medical treatments fall by 2.3 percentage points (though the latter is imprecisely esti-

mated).

    In order to heighten comparability with analyses of electoral outcomes in Section

5.5, we also estimate the aforementioned models using only the subsample of munici-

palities in which the incumbent mayor runs for reelection (Table 6). We find that citizen

requests fall by 4.4 percentage points across both waves (significant at the 1 percent

level). As above, coefficients are of similar magnitude when estimated separately by

year (column 3), and effects are substantial and concentrated among the subsample of

citizens with markers of being in ongoing clientelist relationships (columns 2 and 4).27

    Another important line of inquiry involves the cistern treatment’s impact on the ful-

fillment of requests. Appendix Table A12 employs as the dependent variable a dummy

coded 1 if the individual requested a private good from a local politician and that good

was received. Individuals with our primary marker of being in a clientelist relationship


26 Appendix   Table A8 also shows that results are robust to the inclusion of basic individual characteristics
   such as age, gender and education, as well as controlling for the only variable unbalanced at baseline
   (whether neighbors had a cistern).
27 For completeness, we also estimated these models using an instrumental variable approach in which

   assignment to treatment is employed as an instrument for actually receiving a cistern. As expected,
   the estimated coefficients are amplified in proportion to the degree of compliance. The statistical
   significance remains unchanged from our main results. See Appendix Tables A10 and A11.


                                                     28
are 6.1 percentage points less likely to ask and receive any private good (significant at

the 5 percent level). When estimating separately by year, the corresponding coefficients

are significant at the 5 percent level for 2012 and 10 percent level for 2013 (column 4).

Again, treatment effects are similar when exclusively examining municipalities with

incumbent mayors running for reelection (Appendix Table A13).28

    While these analyses have focused on requests for private goods, they leave open

the question of whether individuals substituted requests of private goods for that of

public goods. To investigate further, we also consider requests for public goods. More

specifically, we classify requests as involving public goods if they ask for community

water infrastructure, investments in public roads, improvements to local health clinics,

improvements to local schools, or improvements to the electricity infrastructure (e.g.,

public lighting). Analogous to analyses for private goods, Table 7 presents estimates

that employ requests for public goods as the outcome variable. We do not find evi-

dence of a substitution of requests towards public goods. The estimated coefficients are

very small and cannot be distinguished from zero.29

    Altogether, these analyses indicate that the cisterns treatment reduced requests of

local politicians by citizens likely to be in clientelist relationships, during both election

and non-election years. Moreover, this decrease in requests actually contributed to a fall

in the prevalence of private benefits delivered to citizens by local politicians. In addi-

tion, the reduction in requests was observed across various private goods that citizens

typically request. As shown in Appendix Tables A17 - A21, all findings in this section

are robust when employing our more restrictive marker for clientelism – having at least


28 For  completeness, Table A14 reports results on request fulfillment by type of good requested that was
   actually received. In addition, given that some members of the control group ended up obtaining
   cisterns from other sources, we investigated whether there are heterogeneous effects based on the
   cross-municipality degree of non-compliance in the control group. Appendix Table A16 shows findings
   for requests using a triple interaction regression which adds a fully interacted dummy variable for
   whether the municipality had above median non-compliance levels among those assigned to control.
   As expected, negative effects are no greater in municipalities with above median non-compliance.
29 Results are similar in Appendix Table A15, in which the dependent variable is an indicator for having

   requested and received a public good.


                                                   29
monthly conversations with a politician before the 2012 electoral campaign and having

declared support publicly for a candidate during that campaign.

5.5     Effects of Cistern Treatment on Electoral Outcomes

      Thus far, results suggest that the cisterns intervention reduced vulnerability and

clientelism, during both electoral and non-electoral years. Given these findings and

incumbents’ greater access to resources to engage in clientelism, we now follow the

empirical strategy in Section 4.2.2 to investigate whether the cisterns treatment under-

cut the performance of incumbent mayors during their reelection campaigns. Recall

that Brazil provides extraordinarily granular data on electoral outcomes at the elec-

tronic voting machine level, and our survey links individual subjects in the cisterns

experiment to their specific voting machine in the 2012 municipal election. To measure

electoral responses to the cistern treatment, we can thus compare votes across machines

— which have distinct, randomly assigned numbers of treated individuals — located

in the same polling places.

      Table 8 presents our main results estimating the effect of the cisterns intervention

on incumbents’ votes and other electoral outcomes. Panel A provides unadjusted es-

timates and reveals that the cisterns treatment significantly reduces votes for the in-

cumbent mayor. Given the important considerations elaborated in Section 4.2.2, Panel

B employs adjusted regressors to improve estimation of the magnitude of treatment

effects. These adjusted regressors account for potential upward bias of estimated treat-

ment effects resulting from voting by non-interviewed members of treated households,

as well as from spillover and peer effects on voting by neighbors excluded from the

study. The discussion of results below focuses on our preferred estimates in Panel B;

as mentioned, Panel A shows that the statistical significance of findings is also robust

without any such adjustments.

      More specifically, columns 1 and 2 of Panel B report primary findings about the cis-

terns treatment’s effects on electoral outcomes. First, column 1 reveals that for every


                                             30
additional respondent assigned to the treatment condition, the incumbent receives 0.29

fewer votes (bootstrap p-value = 0.038).30 By contrast, the overall number of individuals

in our study assigned to the voting machine has no effect statistically distinguishable

from zero; the coefficient on this control variable is positive and small in magnitude.

These findings are consistent with our argument that reducing vulnerability through

the cisterns intervention significantly reduces votes for the incumbent mayor.

    Next, column 2 examines heterogeneity across our primary marker for citizens likely

to be in clientelist relationships. While estimates are statistically indistinguishable from

zero, patterns observed are consistent with our broader argument. The estimated coef-

ficient on treated individuals with the clientelism marker is -0.47, over two times larger

than the coefficient on treated individuals without the clientelism marker (-0.19).31 To

be sure, this specification is hindered by low power, given that it employs variation in

the shares of citizens in clientelist relationships across voting machines. Nevertheless,

the finding corroborates our overall argument, as the reduction in votes for incumbents

appears to be primarily from effects among citizens in such relationships.32

    We next investigate whether treatment effects, which suggest a fall in incumbent

votes, translate to an increase in votes for mayors’ challengers. Adapting our preferred

specification (column 1 in Panel B), we examine as the dependent variable the total

number of votes received by any challenger in the 2012 mayoral race. As shown in col-

umn 3, we estimate a coefficient of very close magnitude – but with the opposite sign –

as the estimate for incumbents’ votes. For every additional respondent assigned to the

treatment condition, votes for challenger candidates increase by 0.20 (p-value = 0.138).

We also report treatment effects on voter turnout (column 4), as well as blank and null

votes (column 5). Although imprecisely estimated, our estimate on the treatment effect


30 The  coefficient in Panel A is larger but does not account, for example, for treatment effects on voting by
   non-interviewed members of treated households.
31 Again, the coefficient in Panel A is larger but does not account for non-interviewed individuals plausibly

   affected by the cisterns treatment.
32 Appendix Table A22 shows comparable results employing the alternative clientelism marker.



                                                     31
on voter turnout – a reduction of 0.09 citizens casting a ballot per additional respondent

assigned to treatment – is consistent with the possibility that the intervention reduces

turnout. In contrast, the effect on blank and null votes is both small and statistically

indistinguishable from zero.

5.6     Robustness Checks

      Thus far, the findings of this study provide substantial evidence that the cisterns

intervention reduced citizen requests, especially by citizens likely to be in clientelist

relationships. Furthermore, the intervention undercut the performance of incumbent

mayors during their reelection campaigns. We now conduct additional analyses to

confirm the robustness of these findings and to rule out several potential alternative

explanations.

5.6.1    Politician Responses

      Our interpretation of the experimental findings is that exogenously allocating cis-

terns caused a decline in citizens’ requests for private goods from local politicians.

However, one might be concerned that this decline in requests may be partially reflec-

tive of local politicians changing their clientelist strategies in response to the assignment

of cisterns. After all, the literature on clientelism suggests that elites have a wide arse-

nal of strategies in their toolkit, such as vote buying and turnout buying (e.g., Hicken

2011, Nichter 2008, Vicente 2014).

      At the outset, it should be emphasized that even though our intervention substan-

tially reduced the vulnerability of recipient households, it was minuscule in the context

of the overall municipality. As mentioned, whereas the population of the 40 municipal-

ities in our sample averaged 49,000 citizens, our intervention constructed an average of

only 17 cisterns in each municipality. Although such a limited intervention makes it un-

likely that local politicians would adapt their municipal-level strategies, it is still worth




                                             32
investigating whether households with cisterns were approached differently than those

without cisterns. Such findings would change how we interpret our primary results.

   Table 9 examines whether any differences can be detected between politicians’ ac-

tions towards citizens assigned to the treatment versus control groups. Columns 1 and

2 show that politicians and their representatives were no more or less likely to visit

the homes of treated subjects during the 2012 political campaign. Column 3 suggests

that during those visits, handouts were not significantly more or less likely to be dis-

tributed to households assigned to the treatment condition, when compared to those

assigned to the control condition. Furthermore, column 4 shows no significant differ-

ence in such handouts received by citizens likely to be in clientelist relationships who

were assigned to treatment versus those assigned to control. We also inquired of all re-

spondents whether a politician had offered them a handout in exchange for their votes,

and if so, whether they had accepted that offer. Columns 5-8 show that respondents

assigned to the cisterns treatment were not more or less likely than those assigned to

the control group to answer affirmatively to either question. More broadly, we find

no evidence that politicians responded differently to citizens depending on their treat-

ment assignment, corroborating our interpretation that findings reflect citizens’ (rather

than politicians’) responses to the cistern intervention. To be clear, we do not claim

that politicians’ strategies would necessarily remain unchanged when overall vulnera-

bility in their districts declines. Rather, we argue that our intervention was so small in

the context of the overall municipality that it was unlikely to have changed politicians’

strategies. The data are consistent with this argument.

5.6.2   Citizen Engagement

   Our main findings show that citizens likely to be in clientelist relationships with

politicians were more responsive to the cisterns treatment. We employed frequent con-

versations with a local politician before the 2012 campaign as our primary marker for

clientelistic relationships. As discussed in Section 4.2.1, this marker is not associated


                                           33
with various socioeconomic characteristics. One might be concerned, however, that

these frequent interactions could potentially reflect citizens’ general engagement with

politics rather than their clientelist relationships with specific politicians. To counter

this alternative explanation, we undertake a two-pronged approach. First, as discussed

above, Appendix Tables A17 - A22 show that all findings are robust to a more restrictive

marker of being in a clientelist relationship: having both conversed with a politician at

least monthly outside of campaign season and having declared support for a candidate

during the campaign. Given that declared support is a mechanism employed to sustain

ongoing clientelist relationships in Brazil, citizens who meet both criteria are particu-

larly likely to be in clientelist relationships. As a second approach, we directly control

for measures of citizen engagement and their interactions with treatment. More specif-

ically, these measures are: (a) whether the respondent is a member of a community as-

sociation, (b) whether the respondent is the president of a community association, and

(c) whether the respondent voted in the 2008 municipal election. Table A23 reports our

main clientelism specification controlling for these different community engagement

measures separately (columns 1-3) as well as jointly (column 4). The estimated coeffi-

cients on the interaction term (β 3 ) are practically unchanged from the corresponding

coefficient in Table 5 (column 2). Similarly, columns 5-8 repeat this exercise limiting

attention to the subset of municipalities in which incumbent mayors ran for reelection.

Again, the coefficients on the interaction are practically identical to the corresponding

coefficient in Table 6 (column 2). These findings suggest that controlling for community

engagement measures does not significantly change our results.

5.6.3   Credit Claiming and Political Alignment

   Another potential concern involves credit claiming. Even though our intervention

randomly assigned cisterns with no input from politicians, one possibility is that in-

cumbent mayors claimed credit for respondents’ receipt of cisterns and that such be-

havior affected electoral outcomes. Our main results counter such an interpretation:


                                           34
the cisterns intervention does not increase, but rather decreases votes for the incumbent

mayor. However, another form of credit claiming could potentially involve political

alignment with higher levels of government. After all, numerous studies have em-

phasized the effects of political alignment across different levels of government (e.g.,

Brollo and Nannicini 2012, Dell 2015, Durante and Gutierrez 2015). Perhaps mayoral

candidates who were copartisans with Brazil’s then-president Dilma Rousseff were es-

pecially likely to engage in credit claiming behavior – or otherwise benefit electorally

– from the cisterns treatment. To consider this possibility, we examined whether treat-

ment effects on electoral outcomes differ between mayoral candidates who were and

were not affiliated with Rousseff’s Workers’ Party (Partido dos Trabalhadores, or PT). As

shown in Appendix Table A24, we find no evidence of such differences. Furthermore,

treatment effects on requests and fulfilled requests do not differ between municipalities

with and without PT mayors (see Appendix Tables A25 and A26). These results are

unsurprising, given that the cisterns intervention involved in this study was financed

by an international development agency and not the federal government. Overall, our

findings do not point to credit claiming or misattribution.

5.6.4   The Role of Rainfall

   Given that rainfall provides a source of water for the cisterns, we also investigate

whether precipitation reinforces the effects we documented for clientelism. To this end,

we employ the rainfall shock variable defined in Section 3.4 and estimate a fully inter-

acted triple differences specification. These results are shown in Table A27. Columns 1

and 4 include a TreatmentXRainfall control. Columns 2 and 5 add the triple interaction

between treatment, rainfall and our primary clientelism marker, whereas columns 3 and

6 show the fully saturated model by also including the RainfallXClientelist Relationship

regressor. Across specifications, the coefficient on TreatmentXRainfall is negative as ex-

pected, but the coefficient is insufficiently large to be statistically significant. The lower

portion of Table A27 shows that the treatment effect is estimated to be significantly


                                             35
different from zero and of similar magnitude as in our main specification even if the

rainfall shock is zero (i.e., under normal rainfall conditions). A similar pattern emerges

in Appendix Table A28, which reports findings for fulfilled requests for private goods

from local politicians. It thus appears that overall rainfall plays the expected role – it

amplifies the reduction in requests when a household has a cistern – but effects are not

particularly strong. A likely reason is revealed by ultrasonic sensors we installed in a

subsample of constructed cisterns. Approximately half of the water that flowed into

cisterns was not from rainfall, but instead from water truck deliveries.33 By serving as

a water storage device, cisterns can thus reduce vulnerability even in the absence of

rainfall.


6      Conclusion
      This paper has investigated the relationship between economic vulnerability and

citizens’ participation in clientelism. It is based on a dedicated longitudinal dataset of

a representative sample of impoverished rural households in Northeast Brazil. Unlike

previous studies, this panel survey enables the measurement of multiple dimensions

of vulnerability as well as interactions with local politicians over a three-year period.

We combine these data with a large-scale randomized control trial of a development in-

tervention which reduced household vulnerability through the construction of private

water cisterns. The experiment yields several important findings. First, the cisterns

treatment decreased citizens’ demands for private benefits, especially among respon-

dents who are likely to be in clientelist relationships. Second, we show evidence of

the persistence of treatment effects, given that findings are observed not only during

the election campaign, but also a full year later. Third, our analysis of election results,

which examines granular electronic voting machine outcomes, reveals that the cisterns

treatment undercut the number of votes received by incumbent mayors during their

33 Rainfall   appears in the cisterns’ water level data as relatively gradual increases, whereas water truck
    fillings appear as a rapid surge in the cisterns’ water level.


                                                     36
reelection campaigns. Overall, these findings are consistent with the argument that

cisterns – by reducing vulnerability – undermine clientelist relationships and thereby

impinge on the electoral performance of incumbents. More broadly, our results also

suggest that vulnerability may be a first-order determinant of clientelism in contexts

with limited formal mechanisms of social insurance.

   The findings of this study are relevant for policy, especially because they can inform

efforts to reduce clientelism. Numerous studies explore anti-clientelism campaigns,

which often attempt to dampen citizens’ acceptance of vote-buying offers. Such re-

search provides various insights, but often suggests mixed results of these campaigns

(e.g., Vicente 2014; Hicken et al. 2015). While further investigation is needed in other

contexts, our study contributes by underscoring another modality to fight clientelism.

The experimental results provide rigorous evidence that improving citizens’ livelihoods

can undercut their willingness to participate in contingent exchanges. Further research

should explore whether reduced vulnerability leads citizens to abandon these ties alto-

gether, as well as whether centrally mandated insurance mechanisms can therefore curb

clientelism in developing countries. Another important avenue for research is how the

scaling up of such policies might affect the behavior of both citizens and politicians in

clientelist relationships.

References
Acemoglu, D., & Robinson, J. A. (2006). Economic origins of dictatorship and democracy.
  Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Ames, B. (2002). The deadlock of democracy in Brazil. Ann Arbor, MI: The University of
 Michigan Press.
Anderson, S., Francois, P., & Kotwal, A. (2015). Clientelism in Indian villages. American
 Economic Review, 105(6), 1780–1816.
Andersson, K., Gordillo de Anda, G., & van Laerhoven, F. (2009). Local government and
 rural development: Comparing lessons from Brazil, Chile, Mexico, and Peru. University of
 Arizona Press.
Baland, J.-M., & Robinson, J. A. (2008). Land and power: Theory and evidence from
  Chile. American Economic Review, 98(5), 1737-1765.


                                           37
Bardhan, P., & Mookherjee, D. (2012). Political clientelism and capture: Theory and
  evidence from West Bengal, India. UNU-WIDER Research Paper, 97.
Barros, A. J., Bastos, J. L., & Dâmaso, A. H. (2011). Catastrophic spending on health
  care in Brazil: Private health insurance does not seem to be the solution. Cadernos de
  Saúde Pública, 27, s254–s262.
Blattman, C., Emeriau, M., & Fiala, N. (2017). Do anti-poverty programs sway voters?
  Experimental evidence from Uganda. Working paper.
Brollo, F., & Nannicini, T. (2012). Tying your enemy’s hands: The politics of federal
  transfers in Brazil. American Political Science Review, 106(4), 742-761.
Brusco, V., Nazareno, M., & Stokes, S. C. (2004). Vote buying in Argentina. Latin
  American Research Review, 39(2), 66–88.
Calvo, E., & Murillo, M. V. (2013). When parties meet voters: Assessing political link-
  ages through partisan networks and distributive expectations in Argentina and Chile.
  Comparative Political Studies, 46(7), 851–882.
Cameron, A. C., Gelbach, J. B., & Miller, D. L. (2008). Bootstrap-based improvements
  for inference with clustered errors. Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3), 414-427.
Dell, M. (2015). Trafficking networks and the Mexican drug war. American Economic
 Review, 105(6), 1738-1779.
Dixit, A., & Londregan, J. (1996). The determinants of success of special interests in
  redistributive politics. The Journal of Politics, 58(4), 1132–55.
Durante, R., & Gutierrez, E. (2015). Political alignment, inter-jurisdictional cooperation
 and crime in Mexico. Working paper.
Fafchamps, M., Vaz, A., & Vicente, P. C. (in press). Voting and peer effects: Experimen-
  tal evidence from Mozambique. Economic Development and Cultural Change.
Federação Brasileira de Bancos (Febraban). (2007). Projeto cisternas transformando
  possibilidades em realidade. Report.
Federação Brasileira de Bancos (Febraban). (2008). Participação da Febraban no projeto
  cisternas: Programa de formação e mobilização para a convivência com o semi-àrido.
  Report.
Finan, F., & Schechter, L. (2012). Vote-buying and reciprocity. Econometrica, 80(2), 863-
  881.
Folke, O., Hirano, S., & Snyder, J. M. (2011). Patronage and elections in U.S. states.
  American Political Science Review, 105(3), 567–585.
Fujiwara, T. (2015). Voting technology, political responsiveness, and infant health: Evi-
  dence from Brazil. Econometrica, 83(2), 423-464.
Gallego, J., & Wantchekon, L. (2012). Experiments on clientelism and vote-buying. In


                                           38
  D. Serra & L. Wantchekon (Eds.), New advances in experimental research on corruption.
  Bingley: Emerald Group Publishing.
Garman, C., Haggard, S., & Willis, E. J. (2001). Fiscal decentralization: A political theory
 with Latin American cases. World Politics, 53(2), 205-236.
Giné, X., & Mansuri, G. (2018). Together we will: Experimental evidence on female
  voting behavior in Pakistan. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 10(1), 207-
  235.
Hagopian, F. (1996). Traditional politics and regime change in Brazil. New York, NY:
 Cambridge University Press.
Hagopian, F., & Mainwaring, S. (2005). The third wave of democratization in Latin America:
 Advances and setbacks. Cambridge University Press.
Hicken, A. (2011). Clientelism. Annual Review of Political Science, 14, 289–310.
Hicken, A., Leider, S., Ravanilla, N., & Yang, D. (2015). Temptation in vote-selling:
  Evidence from a field experiment in the Philippines. Working paper.
Hidalgo, D. (2010). Digital democratization: Suffrage expansion and the decline of
  political machines in Brazil. Working paper.
Hidalgo, D., Naidu, S., Nichter, S., & Richardson, N. (2010). Economic determinants of
  land invasions. Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(3), 505-523.
Horowitz, J. L. (2001). The bootstrap. In J. J. Heckman & E. Leamer (Eds.), Handbook of
 econometrics (Vol. 5, p. 3159 - 3228). Elsevier.
IMF Country Report. (2016, November). Brazil: Selected issues. Report.
Keefer, P. (2007). Clientelism, credibility, and the policy choices of young democracies.
  American Journal of Political Science, 51(4), 804–821.
Kitschelt, H., & Wilkinson, S. I. (2007). Patrons, clients and policies: Patterns of democratic
  accountability and political competition. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Kling, J. R., Liebman, J. B., & Katz, L. F. (2007). Experimental analysis of neighborhood
  effects. Econometrica, 75(1), 83–119.
Ligon, E., & Schechter, L. (2003). Measuring vulnerability. The Economic Journal,
  113(486), C95–C102.
Mercuri, R. (2002). A better ballot box? IEEE spectrum, 39(10), 46–50.
Miguel, E., & Kremer, M. (2004). Worms: Identifying impacts on education and health
 in the presence of treatment externalities. Econometrica, 72(1), 159-217.
Nichter, S. (2008). Vote buying or turnout buying? Machine politics and the secret
  ballot. American Political Science Review, 102, 19-31.
Nichter, S. (2018). Votes for survival: Relational clientelism in Latin America. Cambridge


                                              39
  University Press.
Nickerson, D. W. (2008). Is voting contagious? Evidence from two field experiments.
  American Political Science Review, 102(1), 49-57.
Nicolau, J. M. (2002). A participação eleitoral no Brasil. Centre for Brazilian Studies,
  University of Oxford.
Piattoni, S. (2001). Clientelism, interests, and democratic representation: The European expe-
  rience in historical and comparative perspective. New York, NY: Cambridge University
  Press.
Radloff, L. S. (1977). The CES-D scale: A self-report depression scale for research in the
  general population. Applied Psychological Measurement, 1(3), 385–401.
Ravanilla, N., Haim, D., & Hicken, A. (2017). Brokers, social networks, reciprocity, and
  clientelism. Working paper.
Robinson, J. A., & Verdier, T. (2013). The political economy of clientelism. The Scandi-
  navian Journal of Economics, 115(2), 260–291.
Schady, N. R. (2000). The political economy of expenditures by the Peruvian social fund
  (FONCODES), 1991-95. American Political Science Review, 289–304.
Stokes, S. C. (2005). Perverse accountability: A formal model of machine politics with
  evidence from Argentina. American Political Science Review, 99(03), 315–325.
Stokes, S. C. (2009). Pork, by any other name ... building a conceptual scheme of distributive
  politics. (Paper presented at the American Political Science Association Conference,
  Toronto, Canada.)
Stokes, S. C., Dunning, T., Nazareno, M., & Brusco, V. (2013). Brokers, voters, and clien-
  telism: The puzzle of distributive politics. New York City: Cambridge University Press.
Vicente, P. C. (2014). Is vote-buying effective? Evidence from a field experiment in
  West Africa. Economic Journal, 124(574), 356-387.
Wantchekon, L. (2003). Clientelism and voting behavior: Evidence from a field experi-
 ment in Benin. World Politics, 55(3), 399–422.




                                             40
Figures and Tables

    Figure 1: Brazil’s Semi-Arid Region, Sample Municipalities, and Rainfall Levels




Notes: Brazil’s semi-arid region consists of 1,133 municipalities in 9 states, as circumscribed by a black
line in the figure. Red dots indicate the location of the 40 sample municipalities. Background colors reflect
average rainfall levels (1986-2013) specified in the legend (darker colors represent more rainfall).




                                                     41
                                           Figure 2: Cistern




Notes: The ASA cistern, shown on left, stores up to 16,000 liters of water and is made of reinforced concrete.



                                           Figure 3: Timeline




                                                     42
Figure 4: Frequency of Conversations before 2012 Election Campaign, by Treatment
Status

                                                          .6




                                   Share of Respondents
                                                          .4




                                                          .2




                                                          0
                                                               At Least Daily   At Least Weekly   At Least Monthly At Least Occasionally   Never

                                                                                              Treatment                  Control




                                                          Table 1: Vulnerability and Rainfall Shocks
                                                                      Table 1: Vulnerability and Rainfall Shocks

                                      Variable                                                          Mean             Relationship with Rainfall Shocks
         -(CES-D Scale)                                                                                 3.331                        0.044***
                                                                                                       [0.642]                        (0.016)

         Self-Reported Health Status (SRHS) Index                                                       2.828                               0.039**
                                                                                                       [0.531]                              (0.017)

         Child Food Security Index                                                                     -0.309                               0.060**
                                                                                                       [0.914]                              (0.025)

         Total Household Expenditure                                                                  367.845                              24.398***
                                                                                                     [200.070]                              (6.671)

         Total Household Food Expenditure                                                             239.146                              13.331***
                                                                                                     [133.477]                              (4.507)

         Total Household Non-Food Expenditure                                                         133.619                              11.543***
                                                                                                     [130.256]                              (3.694)


 Notes: Column       1 presents
         Notes: Column            the mean
                              1 presents   theofmean
                                                 each ofvulnerability     measure
                                                           each vulnerability        and its while
                                                                                  measure,    standard
                                                                                                     columndeviation   in brackets.
                                                                                                                 2 reports the       Column 2
reports coefficients from regressing each vulnerability measure on standardized rainfall shocks, with standard errors
         coefficients from regressing each of the vulnerability measures on rainfall shocks. Standard
clustered at the neighborhood level in parentheses. As defined in Section 3.4, rainfall is measured in standard deviations
         errors
of rainfall       are clustered
             deviations     duringat    the neighborhoodoflevel
                                     January-September            the and   reported
                                                                       relevant   year in  parentheses.
                                                                                        from   the historic  Rainfall
                                                                                                                averageshocks
                                                                                                                         rainfall during 1986-
2011. Theare   measured
            -(CES-D)        by is
                         scale the  standard
                                  a 5-item      deviationsscale
                                            self-reported     of rainfall  during
                                                                     designed       January-September
                                                                                to measure                    of the relevant in the general
                                                                                              depressive symptomatology
         year Each
population.     fromitemthe historic
                             ranges fromaverage
                                             1 to rainfall   duringvalues
                                                  4 with higher        1986-2011.    The CES-D
                                                                              representing           scale is a short
                                                                                              less depression,            self-
                                                                                                                    and the  scale reported for
         report scale
each individual     is thedesigned
                            average to   measure
                                      across        depressive
                                              the five  items. The symptomatology       in the Index
                                                                       Child Food Security      generalis apopulation.
                                                                                                             sum of Yes/NoThe (1/0) responses
to whether
         Childin last
                  Foodthree  months
                          Security     any child
                                     Index         skipped
                                             is a sum          a meal,(1/0)
                                                         of Yes/No      ate less than theytoshould,
                                                                               responses       whether was in hungry   but did not eat, did not
                                                                                                               last 3 months
have varied
         any consumption,
               child skipped or     had only
                                 a meal,  ate limited
                                               less than types
                                                            theyofshould,
                                                                    food. All
                                                                            wasresponses
                                                                                 hungry but enter
                                                                                                didnegatively,
                                                                                                    not eat, did  which
                                                                                                                     not means
                                                                                                                         have a higher Child
Food Security
         variedIndex      indicates better
                   consumption,             foodlimited
                                     had only      securitytypes
                                                              for children.
                                                                     of food. The
                                                                                AllSelf-Reported
                                                                                    responses enter Health     Status (SRHS)
                                                                                                         negatively,    which Index measures
responses    on a a4-point
         means        higherscale
                               Childregarding    how good
                                       Food Security      Index respondents     believed
                                                                   indicates better    foodtheir  healthfor
                                                                                              security     is. children.
                                                                                                                Higher SRHS
                                                                                                                          The values indicate
better reported health. Expenditures expressed in 2011 Brazilian reais. Non-food household expenditure includes rent,
         Self-Reported       Health   Status   (SRHS)     Index    measures    responses    on  a 4-point    scale  regarding
clothing, health, gas, electricity and other expenses. Sample sizes are 1128, 1052, 1128, 1281, 1299, and 1306, respectively,
and varyhow
          duegood      respondents
                 to item               believed
                           non-response.    * 10%,their  health
                                                     ** 5%,        is. significance
                                                              *** 1%   Higher values    of Health Index indicate better
                                                                                     levels.
         reported health. The non-food household expenditure includes rent, clothing, health, gas,
         electricity and other expenses.
         ∗   p < 0.10,   ∗∗   p < 0.05,                    ∗∗∗     p < 0.01
                                                                                                   43
                        Table 2: Vulnerability and Assignment to Treatment (2013)
                                                    Table 1: Vulnerability and Assignment to Treatment


                                                        -(CES-D Scale)         SRHS Index        Child Food Security       Overall
                                                                                                        Index               Index
                                                               (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)
                   Treatment                                 0.092∗∗              0.075∗∗               0.084              0.126∗∗∗
                                                             (0.037)              (0.033)              (0.054)             (0.043)

                   Municipality Fixed Effects                   Yes                 Yes                     Yes                  Yes
                   Observations                                1128                1052                     1128                1128
                   Mean of Dependent Variable                  3.331               2.828                   -0.309               0.001

 Notes: Each column reports the coefficient from regressing each vulnerability measure on treatment, with municipality
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood level and reported in parentheses. The -(CES-D) scale
is a 5-item self-reported scale designed to measure depressive symptomatology in the general population. Each item
ranges from 1 to 4 with higher values representing less depression, and the scale reported for each individual is the
average across the five items. The Self-Reported Health Status (SRHS) Index employs a scale of 1-4, in which higher
values indicate better perceived health. The Child Food Security Index is a sum of Yes/No (1/0) responses to whether
in the last three months any child skipped a meal, ate less than they should, was hungry but did not eat, did not have
varied consumption, or had only limited types of food. All responses enter negatively, such that a higher Child Food
Security Index indicates better food security for children. The Overall Vulnerability Index is the unweighted mean of
standardized values of all of the above indexes. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.



                                      Table 3: Interactions with Politicians (2012)
                                                 Table 1: Interactions with Politicians (2012)

                                   Variable                                           Mean               Relationship with Rainfall Shocks
      Clientelist Relationship (Marker 1)                                             0.184                            -0.011
                                                                                     [0.387]                          (0.009)

      Clientelist Relationship (Marker 2)                                             0.120                            -0.012
                                                                                     [0.325]                          (0.007)

      Voted for mayor/councilor of same coalition                                     0.718                            -0.015
                                                                                     [0.450]                          (0.014)

      All household members voted for the same mayoral candidate                      0.773                          -0.024**
                                                                                     [0.419]                          (0.012)

      Received visit from representatives of any mayoral candidate                    0.696                            0.016
                                                                                     [0.460]                          (0.012)

      Any declared support                                                            0.485                         -0.071***
                                                                                     [0.500]                         (0.017)

      Declared support on body (sticker, shirt)                                       0.185                          -0.023**
                                                                                     [0.388]                          (0.010)

      Declared support on house (flag, banner, wall painting)                         0.387                         -0.063***
                                                                                     [0.487]                         (0.017)

      Declared support at rally (Attended and displayed paraphernalia)                0.218                         -0.039***
                                                                                     [0.413]                         (0.011)

 Notes:   Column
      Notes:  Column  1 presents
                        1 presents the    meanofof
                                     the mean        each
                                                  each     variable
                                                       variable       and
                                                                and the      its standard
                                                                           standard          deviation
                                                                                    deviations             in brackets.
                                                                                                are reported                Column
                                                                                                               in parentheses.        2 reports
                                                                                                                                Columns  2 reportscoeffi-
cientsthe
        from   regressing
          coefficients         each vulnerability
                       from regressing                 measure
                                         each of the variables on on  standardized
                                                                  rainfall               rainfall
                                                                            shocks. Standard       shocks
                                                                                              errors         (as defined
                                                                                                      are clustered         in Section 3.4).
                                                                                                                     at the neighborhood        Markers
                                                                                                                                          level and
      reported in relationships
for clientelist    parentheses. Rainfall   shocks are measured
                                      are discussed             by the
                                                       in Section      standard
                                                                     4.2.1.       deviations
                                                                               Marker    1 isofcoded
                                                                                                rainfall one
                                                                                                         during
                                                                                                              if January-September  of the relevant
                                                                                                                  a respondent conversed         at least
      year from
monthly    withthe    historic
                   a local     average rainfall
                            politician    beforeduring 1986-2011.
                                                  the 2012   electoral campaign. Marker 2 is coded one if a respondent conversed at
      ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
least monthly with a local politician before the 2012 electoral campaign and publicly declared support for a candidate
during that campaign. Standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood level and reported in parentheses in Column
2. Rainfall is measured in standard deviations of rainfall deviations during January-September of 2012 from the historic
average rainfall during 1986-2011. Sample sizes are 2667, 2678, 1742, 2339, 2680, 2678, 2678, 2678, and 2678, respectively,
and vary due to item non-response. Sample size for “voted for mayor/councilor of same coalition” is different since
this question was asked in 2013. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                                           44
                                    Table 4: Citizen Requests for Private Goods, and Relationship with Rainfall (2012 and 2013)
                                                            Table 1: Ask for Private Help and Rainfall

                                                                                                            Relationship with        Relationship with      P-Value from
                                                                           Mean (2012)    Mean (2013)     Rainfall Shocks (2012)   Rainfall Shocks (2013)   Pooling Test
                                                                              (1)            (2)                    (3)                      (4)                 (5)
       Panel A: Ask for private goods from any politician

           Any                                                                 0.213          0.086             -0.039***                   -0.003              0.003
                                                                              [0.409]        [0.280]             (0.010)                   (0.007)

           Water                                                               0.055          0.010             -0.023***                   0.001               0.001
                                                                              [0.228]        [0.098]             (0.007)                   (0.002)

           Medicine or Medical Treatment                                       0.071          0.021              -0.011**                   0.003               0.033
                                                                              [0.257]        [0.142]              (0.005)                  (0.004)

           Construction Materials                                              0.057          0.016               -0.009                    -0.003              0.356
                                                                              [0.233]        [0.125]             (0.006)                   (0.003)
       Observations                                                                                                2667                      1943




45
       Panel B: Ask for and receive private goods from any politician

           Any                                                                 0.124          0.035             -0.023***                   0.000               0.015
                                                                              [0.330]        [0.184]             (0.008)                   (0.005)

           Water                                                               0.034          0.004             -0.011***                   -0.001              0.096
                                                                              [0.182]        [0.064]             (0.006)                   (0.001)

           Medicine or Medical Treatment                                       0.051          0.010             -0.008***                   0.002               0.070
                                                                              [0.219]        [0.098]             (0.005)                   (0.003)

           Construction Materials                                              0.022          0.002               -0.005                  -0.001***             0.314
                                                                              [0.146]        [0.045]             (0.004)                   (0.001)

       Observations                                                                                                2665                     1943

      Notes:   Columns 1-2 present the mean of each request for private goods measure; standard deviations are reported in brackets. Columns 3-4 report
        Columns 1-2 present the mean of each clientelism measure and the standard deviations are reported in parentheses.
     coefficients    from regressing each request for private goods measure on rainfall shocks. Standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood level and
        Columns 3-4 report the coefficients from regressing each of the clientelism measures on rainfall shocks.
     reported     in parentheses. Rainfall shocks are measured by the standard deviations of rainfall during January-September of the relevant year from the
        Standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood level and reported in parentheses.
     historic   average rainfall during 1986-2011. Column 5 presents the p-value from the F-test of whether coefficients reported in columns 3 and 4 are equal.
        Rainfall shocks are measured by the standard deviations of rainfall during January-September of the relevant year from the historic average rainfall during 1986-2011.
     * 10%,
        Column
             ** 55%,   *** 1%
                   presents     significance
                            the p-value from thelevels.
                                                 F-test to test whether the coefficients reported in columns-3 and 4 are equal to each other.
       ∗   p < 0.10,   ∗∗   p < 0.05,   ∗∗∗   p < 0.01
                                  Table 5: Requests for Private Goods (2012 and 2013)
                                     Table 1: Private Help Requests, All Municipalities (2012 and 2013)

                                                                        All Requests                                All but Water
                                                            (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)
 β1 : Treatment                                          -0.030∗∗     -0.012                           -0.026∗∗    -0.016
                                                          (0.013)    (0.013)                            (0.012)   (0.012)

 β2 : Clientelist Relationship                                      0.119∗∗∗                                      0.082∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.026)                                       (0.025)

 β3 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship                          -0.097∗∗∗                                     -0.057∗
                                                                     (0.034)                                      (0.032)

 β4 : Treatment X 2012                                                          -0.029∗      -0.012                           -0.025    -0.016
                                                                                (0.017)     (0.018)                          (0.016)   (0.017)

 β5 : Treatment X 2013                                                          -0.031∗∗     -0.012                          -0.027∗    -0.016
                                                                                 (0.016)    (0.015)                          (0.014)   (0.013)

 β6 : Clientelist Relationship X 2012                                                      0.134∗∗∗                                    0.094∗∗∗
                                                                                            (0.033)                                    (0.031)

 β7 : Clientelist Relationship X 2013                                                      0.092∗∗∗                                    0.060∗∗
                                                                                            (0.031)                                    (0.029)

 β8 : Clientelist Relationship X Treatment X 2012                                          -0.090∗∗                                     -0.052
                                                                                            (0.044)                                    (0.043)

 β9 : Clientelist Relationship X Treatment X 2013                                          -0.106∗∗∗                                   -0.063∗
                                                                                            (0.040)                                    (0.037)

 β1 + β3                                                            -0.109***                                     -0.073**
                                                                     (0.032)                                       (0.031)
 β4 + β8                                                                                    -0.102**                                    -0.068*
                                                                                             (0.042)                                    (0.041)
 β5 + β9                                                                                   -0.118***                                   -0.079**
                                                                                             (0.040)                                    (0.037)
 Municipality Fixed Effects                                Yes         Yes       Yes           Yes      Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                                        Yes         Yes       Yes           Yes      Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes
 Observations                                              4288       4288       4288         4288      4288       4288       4288       4288
 Mean of Y : Overall                                                  0.164                   0.164                0.164                 0.133
 Mean of Y : Control Group                                            0.177                   0.177                0.145                 0.145
 Mean of Y : Clientelist Relationship in Control Group                0.285                   0.285                0.225                 0.225
 Standard errors in parentheses
 Notes:     Outcome variable is coded 1 if respondent reported requesting a private good from a local politician
  β1 is the coefficient on treatment and β3 is the coefficient on Treatment X Infrequent Interactor With Politician
inY 2012     or 2013;
     is the Outcome         0 otherwise.
                      variable:                   Specifications
                                Probability of asking for private help  employ pooled data to examine requests in either year. Treat-
ment      is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a participating household in a neighborhood cluster selected for
  ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


treatment; 0 otherwise. Marker for clientelist relationship is coded one if a respondent conversed at least
monthly with a local politician before the 2012 electoral campaign; 0 otherwise (see discussion in Section
4.2.1 and robustness to alternative marker in appendix). Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood
cluster level reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                                     46
Table 6: Requests for Private Goods - Municipalities where Incumbent Ran for
Re-Election (2012 and 2013)
                 Table 1: Private Help Requests, Municipalities where Incumbent Ran for Re-Election (2012 and 2013)

                                                                                    All Requests                                 All but Water
                                                                        (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)
 β1 : Treatment                                                      -0.044∗∗∗     -0.023                           -0.030∗∗    -0.017
                                                                      (0.016)     (0.016)                            (0.015)   (0.015)

 β2 : Clientelist Relationship                                                   0.142∗∗∗                                      0.103∗∗∗
                                                                                  (0.033)                                       (0.030)

 β3 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship                                       -0.109∗∗                                      -0.067∗
                                                                                  (0.042)                                      (0.040)

 β4 : Treatment X 2012                                                                       -0.041∗      -0.024                           -0.026     -0.017
                                                                                             (0.022)     (0.022)                          (0.021)    (0.021)

 β5 : Treatment X 2013                                                                       -0.048∗∗     -0.021                          -0.037∗∗    -0.018
                                                                                              (0.020)    (0.019)                           (0.018)   (0.017)

 β6 : Clientelist Relationship X 2012                                                                   0.158∗∗∗                                     0.112∗∗∗
                                                                                                         (0.040)                                     (0.039)

 β7 : Clientelist Relationship X 2013                                                                   0.114∗∗∗                                     0.087∗∗
                                                                                                         (0.044)                                     (0.039)

 β8 : Clientelist Relationship X Treatment X 2012                                                         -0.086                                      -0.048
                                                                                                         (0.058)                                     (0.058)

 β9 : Clientelist Relationship X Treatment X 2013                                                       -0.143∗∗∗                                    -0.097∗
                                                                                                         (0.054)                                     (0.049)

 β1 + β3                                                                         -0.131***                                     -0.085**
                                                                                  (0.040)                                       (0.039)
 β4 + β8                                                                                                 -0.110**                                      -0.065
                                                                                                          (0.055)                                     (0.056)
 β5 + β9                                                                                                -0.164***                                    -0.115**
                                                                                                          (0.053)                                     (0.048)
 Municipality Fixed Effects                                            Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes      Yes         Yes       Yes           Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                                                    Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes      Yes         Yes       Yes           Yes
 Observations                                                          2193        2193       2193         2193      2193       2193       2193         2193
 Mean of Y : Overall                                                               0.148                   0.148                0.148                   0.119
 Mean of Y : Control Group                                                         0.166                   0.166                0.166                   0.132
 Mean of Y : Clientelist Relationship in Control Group                             0.294                   0.294                0.294                   0.225
 Standard errors in parentheses
Notes:
 β1 is the Outcome          variable
           coefficient on treatment and β3isis coded      1 ifonrespondent
                                               the coefficient                    reported
                                                                 Treatment X Infrequent          requesting
                                                                                        Interactor With Politician a private good from a local politician
 Y is the Outcome variable: Probability of asking for private help
in∗ 2012
    p < 0.10,or  2013;
              ∗∗ p         0 otherwise.
                   < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01 Specifications employ pooled data to examine requests in either year. Treat-
ment is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a participating household in a neighborhood cluster selected for
treatment; 0 otherwise. Marker for clientelist relationship is coded one if a respondent conversed at least
monthly with a local politician before the 2012 electoral campaign; 0 otherwise (see discussion in Section
4.2.1 and robustness to alternative marker in appendix). Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood
cluster level reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                                                  47
                                                                 Table 7: Requests for Public Goods (2012 and 2013)
                                                                     Table 1: Public Help Requests, All Municipalities (2012 and 2013)

                                                                                                              All Municipalities             Municipalities with Incumbent Mayors
                                                                                                                                                   Running for Re-Election
                                                                                                       (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)      (6)       (7)       (8)
                                β1 : Treatment                                                       -0.004    -0.003                         -0.002    0.001
                                                                                                    (0.005)   (0.005)                        (0.006)   (0.006)

                                β2 : Clientelist Relationship With Politician                                 0.032∗∗∗                                 0.035∗∗
                                                                                                               (0.012)                                 (0.015)

                                β3 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship                                      -0.003                                   -0.012
                                                                                                              (0.015)                                  (0.020)

                                β4 : Treatment X 2012                                                                     -0.003    -0.006                        0.001     -0.002
                                                                                                                         (0.007)   (0.007)                       (0.009)   (0.009)

                                β5 : Treatment X 2013                                                                     -0.005    0.000                         -0.006    0.004
                                                                                                                         (0.006)   (0.005)                       (0.007)   (0.007)

                                β6 : Clientelist Relationship X 2012                                                               0.030∗                                   0.031
                                                                                                                                   (0.016)                                 (0.020)

                                β7 : Clientelist Relationship X 2013                                                               0.034∗∗                                  0.044∗
                                                                                                                                   (0.017)                                 (0.025)

                                                                                                                                    0.013                                   0.013




48
                                β8 : Clientelist Relationship X Treatment X 2012
                                                                                                                                   (0.022)                                 (0.029)

                                β9 : Clientelist Relationship X Treatment X 2013                                                    -0.028                                 -0.053∗∗
                                                                                                                                   (0.020)                                 (0.026)

                                β1 + β3                                                                        -0.006                                   -0.011
                                                                                                              (0.015)                                  (0.019)
                                β4 + β8                                                                                              0.007                                   0.011
                                                                                                                                   (0.021)                                 (0.028)
                                β5 + β9                                                                                             -0.028                                  -0.049
                                                                                                                                   (0.020)                                 (0.025)
                                Municipality Fixed Effects                                           Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes
                                Year Fixed Effects                                                   Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes
                                Observations                                                         4292      4292       4292       4292     2197     2197       2197       2197
                                Mean of Y : Overall                                                            0.024                 0.024             0.025                 0.025
                                Mean of Y : Control Group                                                      0.026                 0.026             0.027                 0.027
                                Mean of Y : Clientelist Relationship in Control Group                          0.051                 0.051             0.055                 0.055
                                Standard errors in parentheses
                         β1 is the
     Notes: Outcome variable    is coefficient
                                   coded on    1 treatment
                                                 if respondent
                                                           and β3 is thereported        Treatment X Infrequent
                                                                         coefficient onrequesting      a publicInteractor
                                                                                                                     good      Politician
                                                                                                                          Withfrom     a local politician in 2012 or 2013; 0 otherwise. Pooled
                                Y is the Outcome variable: Probability of asking for private help
     regressions examine requests
                           ∗ p < 0.10,in  p < 0.05, year.
                                       ∗∗ either            Treatment is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a participating household in a neighborhood cluster selected
                                                    ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


     for treatment; 0 otherwise. Marker for clientelist relationship is coded one if a respondent conversed at least monthly with a local politician before the
     2012 electoral campaign; 0 otherwise (see discussion in Section 4.2.1 and robustness to alternative marker in appendix). Standard errors clustered at the
     neighborhood cluster level reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
                Table 8: Votes for Incumbent and Other Electoral Outcomes (2012)
                               Table 1: Effect on Votes for Incumbent and Other Electoral Outcomes

                                                             Votes for                Votes for         Turnout   Blank and Null
                                                         Incumbent Mayor        Challenger Candidates                 Votes
                                                           (1)         (2)               (3)              (4)          (5)

  Panel A: Unadjusted Regressors:

  Treated Respondents                                    -1.423∗∗                       1.040           -0.442        -0.059
                                                          [0.042]                      [0.120]          [0.532]      [0.872]

  Respondents                                             0.361                        -0.348            0.127        0.114
                                                         [0.360]                       [0.478]          [0.812]      [0.546]

  Treated Respondents with Clientelist Relationship                   -2.674
                                                                      [0.176]

  Treated Respondents without Clientelist Relationship                -1.081
                                                                      [0.322]

  Respondents with Clientelist Relationship                            0.552
                                                                      [0.634]

  Respondents without Clientelist Relationship                         0.289
                                                                      [0.552]


  Panel B: Adjusted Regressors:

  Treated Respondents                                    -0.293∗∗                       0.202           -0.087        0.004
                                                          [0.038]                      [0.138]          [0.634]      [0.940]

  Respondents                                             0.074                         0.043            0.085        -0.032
                                                         [0.104]                       [0.594]          [0.450]      [0.488]

  Treated Respondents with Clientelist Relationship                   -0.467
                                                                      [0.404]

  Treated Respondents without Clientelist Relationship                -0.187
                                                                      [0.304]

  Respondents with Clientelist Relationship                            0.070
                                                                      [0.934]

  Respondents without Clientelist Relationship                         0.105
                                                                      [0.278]

  Registered Voters                                        Yes         Yes              Yes               Yes          Yes
  Location Fixed Effects                                   Yes         Yes              Yes               Yes          Yes
  Observations                                             909         909              909               909          909

 Bootstrap p-value using wild clustered bootstrapped standard errors in brackets.
Notes:
 ∗
        Outcome
            ∗∗
                       variables
                        ∗∗∗
                                      denoted by column headers. p-values using wild clustered bootstrap in brack-
   p < 0.10,   p < 0.05,   p < 0.01
ets. The estimation sample consists of 21 municipalities in which the incumbent mayor was running for
reelection in 2012. We allow standard errors to be correlated within municipalities. Marker for clientelist
relationship is coded one if a respondent conversed at least monthly with a local politician before the 2012
electoral campaign; 0 otherwise (see discussion in Section 4.2.1 and robustness to alternative marker in
appendix). * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                                 49
                                                                  Table       Politician
                                                                    Table1:9:Analysis    Responses (2012)
                                                                                      of Supply-Side Variables

                                                                          Campaign Visits        Campaign Visit Handouts          Offered Handout              Received Handout
                                                                            (1)         (2)        (3)              (4)              (5)        (6)         (7)               (8)
        β1 : Treatment                                                     0.001      -0.006      0.009            0.019           -0.003     -0.009      -0.005            -0.008
                                                                          (0.022)    (0.025)     (0.012)          (0.012)         (0.015)    (0.016)     (0.010)           (0.010)

        β2 : Clientelist Relationship                                                0.079∗∗∗                    0.077∗∗∗                     0.010                         0.002
                                                                                      (0.030)                     (0.022)                    (0.023)                       (0.017)

        β3 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship                                     0.042                        -0.053                     0.041                         0.019
                                                                                     (0.042)                      (0.033)                    (0.035)                       (0.025)




50
        Municipality Fixed Effects                                         Yes         Yes         Yes              Yes             Yes        Yes        Yes                Yes
        Observations                                                       2680       2667         2308            2305             1634      1626        1624              1616
        Mean of Y : Overall                                                           0.699                        0.069                      0.077                         0.033
        Mean of Y : Control Group                                                     0.694                        0.067                      0.077                         0.036
        Mean of Y : Clientelist Relationship in Control Group                         0.782                        0.126                      0.076                         0.035
        P-Value of β1 + β3                                                            0.342                        0.256                      0.347                         0.626
        Standard errors in parentheses
     Notes:  Dependent
      β1 is the              variables
                coefficient on treatmentare
                                         and listed   incoefficient
                                              β3 is the  column on  headers.  Treatment
                                                                      Treatment X InfrequentisInteractor if respondent
                                                                                               coded 1With    Politician belongs to a participating household in a neighborhood
        Y is the
     cluster  selected   variable:
                 Outcomefor        Probability
                            treatment;    0 otherwise.       private help
                                               of asking for Marker    for clientelist relationship is coded one if a respondent conversed at least monthly with a local
       Columns 9-10: List experiment count is the dependent variable. All coefficients are interactions between the independent variable and the list-experiment condition (the treatment).
     politician before the 2012 electoral campaign; 0 otherwise (see discussion in Section 4.2.1). Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood cluster level
       The coefficients for the main independent variables are omitted in columns 9-10 but are available upon request.
     reported  in parentheses.
       ∗ p < 0.10,                  p 10%,
                   ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ * < 0.01** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
7       Online Appendix (Not for Publication)

Appendix A: Additional Figures and Tables

                                                    Table A1: Compliance
                                                      Table A.1: Compliance

                                           Households         Cisterns in November 2012            Cisterns in November 2013
     Assigned to Treatment                    615                       67.45%                               90.78%
     Assigned to Control                      693                       20.23%                               65.30%
     Total                                   1308



                Table A2: Baseline Characteristics of Treatment and Control Groups
                        Table A.2: Treatment and Control: Baseline Individual and Household Characteristics

                    Variable                   Treatment Group   Control Group   Difference   Standard Error of Difference   Observations
                                                     (1)              (2)            (3)                  (4)                    (5)
    Individual Characteristics
    Age                                            36.587           37.393        -0.345                (0.642)                 2988
    Female                                          0.518            0.535        -0.016                (0.011)                 2990
    Current Student                                 0.139            0.126         0.005                (0.013)                 2972
    Years of Education                              5.903            5.728         0.006                (0.193)                 2931
    P-Value of Joint F-Test                                                        0.601
    Household Characteristics
    Household Size                                  4.288            4.221         0.054                (0.119)                 1308
    Number of Total Neighbors                       17.658           15.959        1.997                (1.377)                 1283
    Neighbor has Cistern                             0.664            0.598      0.060***               (0.035)                 1237
    Bolsa Familia Amount Received                   91.954           85.915        4.945                (4.327)                 1290
    Household Wealth Per Member                   18,955.48        20,256.44     -1,187.8              (992.416)                1299
    Household Expenditure Per Member               100.324          109.276       -7.745                (4.776)                 1281
    Age of Household Head                           43.899          44.840        -0.555                (0.937)                 1307
    Household Head Education                         5.734           5.830        -0.241                (0.250)                  961
    Household Head is Female                        0.182            0.182         0.007                (0.019)                 1308
    Owns House                                      0.863            0.873        -0.016                (0.021)                 1308
    Number of Rooms in House                        5.266            5.331        -0.082                (0.079)                 1294
    Has Access to Electricity                       0.883            0.905        -0.018                (0.018)                 1308
    Migrated Recently                                0.111           0.107         0.006                (0.017)                 1303
    Owns Land                                       0.483            0.465        -0.004                (0.030)                 1307
    Land Size                                       3.413            3.554        -0.218                (0.684)                 1308
    Children in Household 0-6 Months                0.047            0.058        -0.015                (0.013)                 1308
    Children in Household 6 Months - 5 Years         0.631           0.612        -0.001                (0.038)                 1308
    Household Members 5 Years - 64 Years             3.397           3.316         0.099                (0.112)                 1308
    Household Members Over 64 Years                  0.213            0.235       -0.029                (0.028)                 1308
    Voted in 2008 Municipality Election              0.891           0.865         0.020                (0.019)                 1290
    P-Value of Joint F-Test                                                        0.588


Notes: Columns 1-2 present the mean of each variable for the treatment and control group, respectively.
Column 3 reports differences estimated in OLS regression model with municipality fixed effects. Column
4 reports standard errors of the differences, which are clustered at the neighborhood level and reported in
parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                                    1
                                           Table A3: Attrition
                                              Table A.3: Attrition

                                               Wave 0         Wave 1           Wave 2             Wave 3
                                            (Localization)   (Baseline)    (Election Year)   (Non-election Year)
  Households                                    1,308          1,189            1,238               1,119
  Rate of Attrition from Wave 0                                9.10%            5.35%             14.45%
  Correlation with Treatment Status             -0.02
   Standard Error                              (0.017)




                Table A4: Clientelism Markers and Assignment to Treatment
                                 Table 1: Clientelism and Assignment to Treatment


                                           Clientelist Relationship             Clientelist Relationship*
  Treatment                                        -0.00231                              0.00875
                                                   (0.0169)                             (0.0153)

  Municipality Fixed Effects                              Yes                                 Yes
  Observations                                           2667                                2666
  Mean of Dependent Variable                             0.184                               0.120
   Standard errors in parentheses
 Notes:
   ∗ p <Outcome    variables are markers for clientelist relationships discussed in Section 4.2.1. In column
          0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
1, the primary marker (Clientelist Relationship) is coded one if a respondent conversed at least monthly
with a local politician before the 2012 electoral campaign; 0 otherwise. In column 2, the alternative marker
(Clientelist Relationship*) is coded one if a respondent conversed at least monthly with a local politician
before the 2012 electoral campaign and publicly declared support for a candidate during that campaign;
0 otherwise. Treatment is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a participating household in a neighborhood
cluster selected for treatment; 0 otherwise. Standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood level and
reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                         2
Table A5: Characteristics of Respondents with Primary Marker of Clientelist Relation-
ships (2011 and 2012)
                    Table 1: Frequent and Infrequent Interactors: Baseline Individual and Household Characteristics

                              Variable                                    Individuals with                Individuals without             Difference
                                                                     Primary Clientelism Marker       Primary Clientelism Marker
                                                                                 (1)                              (2)                        (3)
  Individual Characteristics

      Age                                                                        37.445                           37.377                    0.208
                                                                                                                                           (0.856)
      Years of Education                                                          6.105                            5.746                    0.274
                                                                                                                                           (0.228)
      Female                                                                      0.451                            0.558                  -0.114***
                                                                                                                                           (0.025)
  Household Characteristics

      Household Wealth Per Member                                               5894.113                         5641.094                   175.033
                                                                                                                                          (387.676)
      Household Expenditure Per Member                                          103.230                          104.900                     -0.640
                                                                                                                                            (4.752)
      Household Head Education                                                    5.882                            5.688                      0.059
                                                                                                                                            (0.279)
      Household Head is Female                                                    0.150                            0.194                   -0.063**
                                                                                                                                            (0.025)
      Owns House                                                                  0.881                            0.858                     0.024
                                                                                                                                            (0.022)
      Household Size                                                              4.539                            4.187                  0.383***
                                                                                                                                            (0.136)
  Household Vulnerability Indicators

      -(CES-D Scale)                                                              0.043                           -0.011                    0.040
                                                                                                                                           (0.059)
      SRHS Index                                                                 -0.000                           -0.003                    0.003
                                                                                                                                           (0.078)
      Child Food Security Index                                                   0.054                           -0.027                    0.035
                                                                                                                                           (0.057)
      Overall Vulnerability Index                                                 0.049                           -0.003                    0.034
                                                                                                                                           (0.041)
  Political Activities

      Voted in 2008 Municipal Election                                            0.916                            0.871                  0.043**
                                                                                                                                           (0.019)
      Voted for mayor/councilor of same coalition                                 0.732                            0.719                    0.006
                                                                                                                                           (0.033)
      All household members voted for same mayoral candidate                      0.819                            0.761                   0.051**
                                                                                                                                           (0.023)
      Received visit from any mayoral candidate                                   0.802                            0.676                  0.099***
                                                                                                                                           (0.021)
      Any declared support                                                        0.655                            0.448                  0.187***
                                                                                                                                           (0.026)

  Notes: Columns 1-2 present the mean of each variable for the frequent and infrequent interactors respectively. Frequent interactors
Notes:  Columns
 are those            1-2with
           who interacted present     themayor
                              either the  mean     ofcouncilor
                                               or the each variable       for
                                                               at least once   survey
                                                                             a month     repondents
                                                                                     before                with versus
                                                                                            the election campaign period (3 without
                                                                                                                            months  the pri-
  before the elections began). Column 3 reports differences estimated in OLS regression model with municipality fixed effects. Standard
mary
 errorsclientelism
        are clustered atmarker.   As discussed
                        the neighborhood             in Section
                                         level and reported         4.2.1, this marker is coded one if a respondent conversed
                                                            in parentheses.
  ∗ p < 0.10,  ∗∗
              p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
                         p < 0.01
at least   monthly    with  a local politician before the 2012 electoral campaign; 0 otherwise. Column 3 reports
differences estimated in an OLS regression model with municipality fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the neighborhood level and reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                                         3
Table A6: Characteristics of Respondents with Alternative Marker of Clientelist
Relationships (2011 and 2012)
                       Table 1: Declared Frequent Interactors: Baseline Individual and Household Characteristics

                              Variable                              Individuals with Alternative     Individuals without Alternative    Difference
                                                                        Clientelism Marker                 Clientelism Marker
                                                                                 (1)                                (2)                    (3)
  Individual Characteristics

      Age                                                                       36.956                            37.476                  -0.259
                                                                                                                                         (1.041)
      Years of Education                                                        6.122                              5.755                   0.302
                                                                                                                                         (0.269)
      Female                                                                    0.430                              0.554                -0.129***
                                                                                                                                         (0.030)
  Household Characteristics

      Household Wealth Per Member                                              5984.550                          5698.861                 46.703
                                                                                                                                        (557.115)
      Household Expenditure Per Member                                         105.880                            105.460                 2.741
                                                                                                                                         (5.725)
      Household Head Education                                                  6.046                              5.738                   0.125
                                                                                                                                         (0.340)
      Household Head is Female                                                  0.170                              0.187                  -0.020
                                                                                                                                         (0.029)
      Owns House                                                                0.878                              0.861                  0.016
                                                                                                                                         (0.027)
      Household Size                                                            4.557                              4.209                 0.343**
                                                                                                                                         (0.167)
  Household Vulnerability Indicators

      -(CES-D Scale)                                                            0.063                              -0.005                 0.031
                                                                                                                                         (0.073)
      SRHS Index                                                                0.046                              -0.022                 0.078
                                                                                                                                         (0.085)
      Child Food Security Index                                                 0.046                              0.001                  0.035
                                                                                                                                         (0.072)
      Overall Vulnerability Index                                               0.064                              0.006                  0.048
                                                                                                                                         (0.050)
  Political Activities

      Voted in 2008 Municipal Election                                          0.908                              0.880                  0.024
                                                                                                                                         (0.023)
      Voted for mayor/councilor of same coalition                               0.767                              0.716                  0.041
                                                                                                                                         (0.040)
      All household members voted for same mayoral candidate                    0.843                              0.762                0.070***
                                                                                                                                         (0.024)
      Received visit from any mayoral candidate                                 0.794                              0.683                0.088***
                                                                                                                                         (0.027)
      Any declared support                                                      1.000                              0.415                0.550***
                                                                                                                                         (0.020)

  Notes: Columns 1-2 present the mean of each variable for the frequent and infrequent interactors respectively. Frequent interactors
Notes:
 are thoseColumns      1-2
          who interacted withpresent     the mean
                              either the mayor          of each
                                               or the councilor      variable
                                                                at least         for before
                                                                         once a month survey     repondents
                                                                                            the election          with (3versus
                                                                                                         campaign period  months without the
  before the elections began). Column 3 reports differences estimated in OLS regression model with municipality fixed effects. Standard
alternative      clientelism marker. As discussed in Section 4.2.1, this marker is coded one if a respondent
  errors are clustered at the neighborhood level and reported in parentheses.
  ∗p < 0.10,   ∗∗
             p < 0.05,  ∗∗∗
                       p < 0.01
conversed    at least monthly   with a local politician before the 2012 electoral campaign and publicly declared
support for a candidate during that campaign; 0 otherwise. Column 3 reports differences estimated in an
OLS regression model with municipality fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood
level and reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                                          4
                     Table A7: Wealth and Assignment to Treatment (2013)
                                Table 1: Household Wealth and Assignment to Treatment

                               Value of Durables   Value of Livestock   Value of Property   Net Savings   Total Wealth
                                      (1)                  (2)                 (3)              (4)            (5)
  Treatment                         -41.238             -110.374            -1012.764         261.782       -902.594
                                   (308.755)           (342.491)           (1120.759)        (195.161)     (1242.988)

  Municipality Fixed Effects         Yes                 Yes                  Yes              Yes            Yes
  Observations                       1128                1128                1128              1128          1128
  Mean of Dependent Variable       3717.210            2137.855            25678.445         -684.039      30849.470

  ∗       ∗∗
  p < 0.10,         ∗∗∗
Notes: Each pcolumn
              < 0.05,  p < 0.01
                      reports   the coefficient from regressing each wealth measure on treatment, with mu-
nicipality fixed effects. Durables in column 1 defined as the sum of the estimated values of: cars, trucks,
motorcycles, refrigerator, stove, washing machine, sewing machine, television, DVD player, cell phone,
computer, and satellite television. Livestock in column 2 defined as the sum of the estimated values of:
cows, steer, calves, horses, donkeys, female goats, male goats, young sheep, adult sheep, pigs, chickens,
ducks, turkeys, geese, rabbits, fish, and other animals. Value of property in column 3 defined as the sum
of the estimated values of residential property and agricultural plots. Net savings in column 4 defined as
total liquid assets minus total loans, in which total liquid assets include liquid savings, cash, loaned money
and seed stock. Total loans include loans from family, loan sharks, banks, stores, government, and other
sources. Total wealth in column 5 is defined as the sum of the measures in columns 1-4. Standard errors are
clustered at the neighborhood level and reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                           5
Table A8: Requests for Private Goods - Inclusion of Additional Controls (2012 and 2013)
                                            Table 1: Private Help Requests, All Municipalities (2012 and 2013)

                                                                              All Requests                                   All but Water
                                                                  (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
  β1 : Treatment                                               -0.030∗∗     -0.013                            -0.026∗∗     -0.017
                                                                (0.012)    (0.013)                             (0.012)    (0.012)

  β2 : Clientelist Relationship                                           0.125∗∗∗                                        0.087∗∗∗
                                                                           (0.026)                                         (0.024)

  β3 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship                               -0.092∗∗∗                                        -0.052
                                                                           (0.034)                                        (0.032)

  β4 : Treatment X 2012                                                               -0.028∗       -0.013                             -0.025      -0.016
                                                                                      (0.017)      (0.018)                            (0.016)     (0.017)

  β5 : Treatment X 2013                                                               -0.032∗∗      -0.014                            -0.028∗∗     -0.018
                                                                                       (0.016)     (0.015)                             (0.014)    (0.013)

  β6 : Clientelist Relationship X 2012                                                            0.140∗∗∗                                        0.099∗∗∗
                                                                                                   (0.032)                                        (0.031)

  β7 : Clientelist Relationship X 2013                                                            0.098∗∗∗                                        0.066∗∗
                                                                                                   (0.031)                                        (0.028)

  β8 : Clientelist Relationship X Treatment X 2012                                                 -0.086∗                                         -0.048
                                                                                                   (0.044)                                        (0.043)

  β9 : Clientelist Relationship X Treatment X 2013                                                -0.100∗∗                                         -0.057
                                                                                                   (0.040)                                        (0.037)

  β10 : Neighbor Has Cistern                                    -0.000      -0.000     -0.000       -0.000     -0.000     -0.000∗      -0.000     -0.000∗
                                                               (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)

  β11 : Female                                                 0.047∗∗∗   0.052∗∗∗    0.047∗∗∗    0.052∗∗∗    0.045∗∗∗    0.049∗∗∗    0.045∗∗∗    0.049∗∗∗
                                                                (0.010)    (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)    (0.010)

  β12 : Years of Schooling                                    -0.006∗∗∗   -0.006∗∗∗   -0.006∗∗∗   -0.006∗∗∗   -0.006∗∗∗   -0.006∗∗∗   -0.006∗∗∗   -0.006∗∗∗
                                                               (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)

  β13 : Age                                                    -0.001∗     -0.001∗    -0.001∗      -0.001∗    -0.001∗∗∗   -0.001∗∗∗   -0.001∗∗∗   -0.001∗∗∗
                                                               (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)

  β1 + β3                                                                 -0.105***                                       -0.069**
                                                                           (0.032)                                         (0.031)
  β4 + β8                                                                                          -0.099**                                         -0.065
                                                                                                    (0.041)                                        (0.040)
  β5 + β9                                                                                         -0.114***                                       -0.075**
                                                                                                    (0.040)                                        (0.037)
  Municipality Fixed Effects                                    Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes
  Year Fixed Effects                                            Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes
  Observations                                                  4288        4288        4288         4288       4288       4288         4288         4288
  Mean of Y : Overall                                                       0.164                    0.164                 0.164                     0.133
  Mean of Y : Control Group                                                 0.177                    0.177                 0.145                     0.145
  Mean of Y : Clientelist Relationship in Control Group                     0.285                    0.285                 0.225                     0.225

 Standard errors in parentheses
Notes:    Outcome variable is coded 1 if respondent reported requesting a private good from a local politi-
 β is the coefficient on treatment and β is the coefficient on Treatment X Infrequent Interactor With Politician
   1                                    3

cian
  Y is in
  ∗
           2012
       the Outcome
             ∗∗
                   or 2013;
                   variable:
                        ∗∗∗
                                  0 otherwise.
                             Probability                   Specifications
                                         of asking for private help       employ pooled data to examine requests in either year.
   p < 0.10,     p < 0.05,   p < 0.01
Treatment is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a participating household in a neighborhood cluster selected
for treatment; 0 otherwise. Marker for clientelist relationship is coded one if a respondent conversed at
least monthly with a local politician before the 2012 electoral campaign; 0 otherwise (see discussion in
Section 4.2.1). Specifications show robustness of results to the inclusion of individual characteristics and
controlling for the only variable unbalanced at baseline (whether neighbors had a cistern). Standard errors
clustered at the neighborhood cluster level reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                                              6
                                                        Table A9: Requests
                                                                   Table 1:    Private
                                                                           forAsking forGoods,
                                                                                         Specificby Primary
                                                                                                  Goods: Pooled  (2012 and 2013)
                                                                                                            TypeData

                                                                                  All Municipalities                    Municipalites with Incumbent Mayors Running for Re-Election
                                                               Water       Construction   Medical Treatment/Medicine    Water     Construction     Medical Treatment/Medicine
                                                                 (1)            (2)                    (3)                 (4)        (5)                       (6)
      β1 : Treatment                                            0.004         -0.001                 -0.013              -0.006      0.001                   -0.020∗∗
                                                               (0.006)       (0.007)                (0.008)             (0.008)     (0.009)                  (0.009)

      β2 : Clientelist Relationship                            0.042∗∗∗      0.042∗∗                    0.012           0.043∗∗     0.037∗                    0.036
                                                                (0.013)      (0.017)                   (0.017)          (0.017)     (0.020)                  (0.023)

      β3 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship                -0.042∗∗∗     -0.037∗                    -0.010           -0.033      -0.032                   -0.017
                                                                (0.016)      (0.021)                   (0.021)          (0.021)     (0.026)                  (0.029)




7
      Municipality Fixed Effects                                 Yes           Yes                      Yes              Yes          Yes                      Yes
      Year Fixed Effects                                         Yes           Yes                      Yes              Yes          Yes                      Yes
      Observations                                               4292          4292                     4292             2197         2197                     2197
      Mean of Dependent Variable                                0.0380        0.0403                   0.0531           0.0341       0.0355                   0.0478
      P-Value of β1 + β3                                        0.0133        0.0658                   0.228            0.0619       0.210                    0.160

     Standard
    Notes:    errors in parentheses
           Outcome       variable is coded 1 if respondent reported requesting the specific private good denoted by the column header from a local politician
      β1 is the coefficient on treatment and β3 is the coefficient on Treatment X Frequent Interactor With Politician
    in β2012    or 2013; 0 otherwise. Specifications employ pooled data to examine requests in either year. Treatment is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a
         4 is the coefficient on Treatment X Rainfall and β4 is the coefficient on Treatment X Rainfall X Frequent Interactor
      Outcome variables:
    participating        Probability
                   household       inofaasking for private help
                                         neighborhood         cluster selected for treatment; 0 otherwise. Marker for clientelist relationship is coded one if a respondent
      ∗   p < 0.10,   ∗∗   p < 0.05,   ∗∗∗   p < 0.01
    conversed at least monthly with a local politician before the 2012 electoral campaign; 0 otherwise (see discussion in Section 4.2.1). Standard errors
    clustered at the neighborhood cluster level reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
                                  Table A10: Requests
                                             Table A5:forPrivate  Goods
                                                          PrivateHelp    (Instrumental
                                                                      Requests          Variables
                                                                               (Instrumental      Estimation,
                                                                                             Variables        2012 and 2013)
                                                                                                       Estimation)

                                                                                      All Municipalities                            Municipalities with Incumbent Mayors Running for Re-election
                                                                      Pooled                   2012                  2013                   Pooled                  2012                   2013
                                                                (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)        (7)          (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)        (12)
     β1 : Owns a Cistern                                     -0.085∗∗∗      -0.043     -0.058      -0.022   -0.068∗∗     -0.037    -0.111∗∗∗     -0.065∗   -0.084∗∗     -0.052    -0.076∗∗     -0.039
                                                              (0.032)      (0.033)    (0.036)     (0.037)    (0.030)    (0.029)     (0.038)      (0.038)    (0.041)    (0.042)     (0.033)    (0.032)

     β2 : Clientelist Relationship                                        0.196∗∗∗               0.170∗∗∗               0.114∗∗                 0.215∗∗∗               0.178∗∗∗               0.143∗∗
                                                                           (0.053)                (0.049)               (0.045)                  (0.062)                (0.057)               (0.058)

     β3 : Owns a Cistern X Clientelist Relationship                       -0.227∗∗∗              -0.199∗∗               -0.167∗∗                -0.237∗∗                -0.178                -0.203∗∗
                                                                           (0.086)                (0.098)                (0.079)                 (0.096)               (0.117)                (0.091)

     β1 + β3                                                             -0.270***               -0.221**              -0.204***               -0.302***               -0.229**              -0.242***
                                                                          (0.082)                 (0.093)               (0.078)                 (0.092)                 (0.112)               (0.089)
     P-Value of β1 + β3                                                    0.001                   0.018                 0.009                   0.001                   0.040                 0.007




8
     Municipality Fixed Effects                                Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes      Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes
     Year Fixed Effects                                        Yes          Yes         No          No        No           No        Yes          Yes        No           No        No           No
     Observations                                              4090         4090       2663        2663      1617         1617       2083         2083      1343         1343       846         846
     Mean of Y : Overall                                                   0.168                   0.213                 0.083                   0.153                   0.196                 0.072
     Mean of Y : Control Group                                             0.184                   0.225                 0.098                   0.175                   0.211                 0.093
     Mean of Y : Clientelist Relationship in Control Group                 0.295                   0.345                 0.181                   0.308                   0.353                 0.190
     Cragg-Donald F-Stat                                      932.9        440.91     937.58      385.38    617.17       272.52     632.87       467.19    663.81        219.5    534.93       222.65
     Standard errors in parentheses
    β1 is the coefficient
    Notes:    Outcome     on owning a cistern
                              variable      isand
                                               coded
                                                  β3 is the1coefficient
                                                             if respondent           Frequent Interactor
                                                                        on Cistern Xreported             With Politician
                                                                                                  requesting       a private good from a local politician in 2012 or 2013; 0 otherwise. Pooled
     Y is the Outcome variable: Asking for private help
    regressions     examine
      A respondent owns a cistern requests      in either
                                  if his/her household had a year.    Treatment
                                                             cistern in               is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a participating household in a neighborhood cluster selected
                                                                        the relevant year
     ∗   < 0.10, p < 0.05,
                ∗∗          p < 0.01
                            ∗∗∗
    forptreatment;    0 otherwise.   Marker for clientelist relationship is coded one if a respondent conversed at least monthly with a local politician before the
    2012 electoral campaign; 0 otherwise (see discussion in Section 4.2.1). Observations for 2013 employ the subset of individuals for which this marker was
    measured in a prior wave. Owns a Cistern is coded 1 if the household had a cistern in the relevant year; 0 otherwise. This variable is instrumented by
    Assignment to Treatment. Owns a Cistern X Clientelist Relationship is instrumented by Assignment to Treatment X Clientelist Relationship. Standard
    errors clustered at the neighborhood cluster level reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
                             A11: Ask
                        TableTable A6:for
                                       Askand
                                            forReceive Private
                                                and Receive    Goods
                                                            Private   (Instrumental
                                                                    Help             Variables Estimation,
                                                                         Requests (Instrumental            2012 and 2013)
                                                                                                Variables Estimation)

                                                                                          All Municipalities                           Municipalities with Incumbent Mayors Running for Re-election
                                                                          Pooled                    2012                  2013              Pooled                  2012                   2013
                                                                       (1)       (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)        (9)       (10)      (11)        (12)
     β1 : Owns a Cistern                                             -0.020     0.010       -0.008      0.024      -0.017     -0.005    -0.037    -0.010     -0.033     -0.007    -0.020      -0.005
                                                                    (0.024)    (0.025)     (0.028)     (0.030)    (0.018)    (0.019)   (0.029)   (0.029)    (0.035)    (0.036)   (0.019)     (0.019)

     β2 : Clientelist Relationship                                             0.131∗∗∗               0.131∗∗∗                0.043              0.121∗∗               0.115∗∗                0.061∗
                                                                                (0.040)                (0.040)               (0.028)             (0.048)               (0.048)               (0.036)

     β3 : Owns a Cistern X Clientelist Relationship                            -0.159∗∗               -0.179∗∗                -0.060             -0.142∗                -0.144                -0.083
                                                                                (0.065)                (0.078)               (0.051)             (0.073)               (0.091)               (0.057)

     β1 + β3                                                                   -0.149**               -0.155**                -0.066             -0.151**              -0.150*                 -0.088
                                                                                (0.063)                (0.075)               (0.048)              (0.072)              (0.879)                (0.055)
     P-Value of β1 + β3                                                          0.018                  0.038                  0.175               0.037                0.087                   0.107




9
     Municipality Fixed Effects                                      Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes     Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes      Yes            Yes
     Year Fixed Effects                                              Yes          Yes        No          No         No          No      Yes         Yes       No         No       No             No
     Observations                                                    4090        4090       2663        2663       1617        1617     2083       2083      1343       1343      846            846
     Mean of Y : Overall                                                         0.092                  0.124                  0.035               0.084                0.118                   0.027
     Mean of Y : Control Group                                                   0.096                  0.125                  0.039               0.090                0.122                   0.033
     Mean of Y : Clientelist Relationship in Control Group                       0.172                  0.218                  0.076               0.169                0.216                   0.076
     Cragg-Donald F-Stat                                             932.9      440.91     937.58      385.38     617.17     272.52    632.87     467.19    663.81      219.5    534.93       222.65
    Standard errors in parentheses
    Notes:
    β1 is theOutcome        owning a cistern
             coefficient on variable         and β3 is
                                        is coded    1 the coefficient on Cistern
                                                       if respondent             X Frequent
                                                                            reported        Interactor With
                                                                                        requesting      andPolitician
                                                                                                             receiving   a private good from a local politician in 2012 or 2013; 0 otherwise.
    Y is the Outcome variable: Asking for and receiving private help
    Pooled   regressions examine requests in either year. Treatment is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a participating household in a neighborhood cluster
     A respondent owns a cistern if his/her household had a cistern in the relevant year
      ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
    selected    for treatment; 0 otherwise. Marker for clientelist relationship is coded one if a respondent conversed at least monthly with a local politician
    before the 2012 electoral campaign; 0 otherwise (see discussion in Section 4.2.1). Observations for 2013 employ the subset of individuals for which
    this marker was measured in a prior wave. Owns a Cistern is coded 1 if the household had a cistern in the relevant year; 0 otherwise. This variable
    is instrumented by Assignment to Treatment. Owns a Cistern X Clientelist Relationship is instrumented by Assignment to Treatment X Clientelist
    Relationship. Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood cluster level reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
                     Table A12: Ask for and Receive Private Goods (2012 and 2013)
                               Table 1: Asking and Receiving Private Help, All Municipalities (2012 and 2013)

                                                                                     All Requests                           All but Water
                                                                         (1)      (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)      (7)       (8)
  β1 : Treatment                                                       -0.005    0.007                            -0.011    -0.006
                                                                      (0.010)   (0.010)                          (0.009)   (0.009)

  β2 : Clientelist Relationship                                                 0.076∗∗∗                                   0.043∗∗
                                                                                 (0.020)                                   (0.017)

  β3 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship                                     -0.068∗∗∗                                   -0.029
                                                                                 (0.025)                                   (0.023)

  β4 : Treatment X 2012                                                                      -0.003    0.012                          -0.012    -0.006
                                                                                            (0.014)   (0.014)                        (0.012)   (0.013)

  β5 : Treatment X 2013                                                                      -0.009    -0.001                         -0.009    -0.006
                                                                                            (0.010)   (0.010)                        (0.009)   (0.009)

  β6 : Clientelist Relationship X 2012                                                                0.099∗∗∗                                 0.060∗∗
                                                                                                       (0.027)                                 (0.025)

  β7 : Clientelist Relationship X 2013                                                                0.036∗                                    0.013
                                                                                                      (0.020)                                  (0.018)

  β8 : Clientelist Relationship X Treatment X 2012                                                    -0.081∗∗                                  -0.036
                                                                                                       (0.035)                                 (0.033)

  β9 : Clientelist Relationship X Treatment X 2013                                                     -0.043                                   -0.016
                                                                                                      (0.027)                                  (0.025)

  β1 + β3                                                                       -0.061**                                    -0.035
                                                                                 (0.024)                                   (0.022)
  β4 + β8                                                                                             -0.069**                                  -0.041
                                                                                                       (0.033)                                 (0.031)
  β5 + β9                                                                                              -0.044*                                  -0.022
                                                                                                       (0.026)                                 (0.024)
  Municipality Fixed Effects                                           Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes
  Year Fixed Effects                                                   Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes
  Observations                                                         4284      4284        4284       4284      4284     4284       4284       4284
  Mean of Y : Overall                                                            0.090                  0.090              0.071                 0.071
  Mean of Y : Control Group                                                      0.092                  0.092              0.077                 0.077
  Mean of Y : Clientelist Relationship in Control Group                          0.167                  0.167              0.124                 0.124
  Standard errors in parentheses
Notes:
 β1 is theOutcome         variable
          coefficient on treatment and is coded
                                       β3 is          1 if respondent
                                             the coefficient                  reported
                                                             on Treatment X Infrequent       requesting
                                                                                       Interactor              and receiving a private good from
                                                                                                  With Politician
  Y is the Outcome variable: Probability of asking for private help
a local   politician
  ∗ p < 0.10,              in p2012
              ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗  < 0.01 or 2013; 0 otherwise. Specifications employ pooled data to examine requests in

either year. Treatment is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a participating household in a neighborhood
cluster selected for treatment; 0 otherwise. Marker for clientelist relationship is coded one if a respon-
dent conversed at least monthly with a local politician before the 2012 electoral campaign; 0 otherwise
(see discussion in Section 4.2.1). Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood cluster level reported in
parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                                                10
Table A13: Ask for and Receive Private Goods – Municipalities where Incumbent Ran
for Reelection (2012 and 2013)
        Table 1: Asking and Receiving Private Help, Municipalities where Incumbent Ran for Re-Election (2012 and 2013)

                                                                                    All Requests                           All but Water
                                                                        (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)      (7)       (8)
 β1 : Treatment                                                       -0.015    -0.002                           -0.013    -0.003
                                                                     (0.013)   (0.013)                          (0.011)   (0.011)

 β2 : Clientelist Relationship                                                 0.079∗∗∗                                   0.056∗∗
                                                                                (0.025)                                   (0.022)

 β3 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship                                     -0.068∗∗                                   -0.048∗
                                                                                (0.031)                                   (0.028)

 β4 : Treatment X 2012                                                                      -0.014    -0.000                         -0.011    -0.001
                                                                                           (0.018)   (0.018)                        (0.016)   (0.016)

 β5 : Treatment X 2013                                                                      -0.018    -0.006                         -0.014    -0.007
                                                                                           (0.013)   (0.013)                        (0.012)   (0.011)

 β6 : Clientelist Relationship X 2012                                                                0.098∗∗∗                                 0.066∗∗
                                                                                                      (0.035)                                 (0.033)

 β7 : Clientelist Relationship X 2013                                                                 0.046                                    0.038
                                                                                                     (0.028)                                  (0.025)

 β8 : Clientelist Relationship X Treatment X 2012                                                     -0.069                                   -0.053
                                                                                                     (0.045)                                  (0.042)

 β9 : Clientelist Relationship X Treatment X 2013                                                    -0.063∗                                   -0.038
                                                                                                     (0.036)                                  (0.032)

 β1 + β3                                                                       -0.070**                                   -0.051*
                                                                                (0.030)                                   (0.027)
 β4 + β8                                                                                              -0.069                                   -0.054
                                                                                                     (0.042)                                  (0.040)
 β5 + β9                                                                                             -0.069*                                   -0.045
                                                                                                     (0.035)                                  (0.032)
 Municipality Fixed Effects                                           Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                                                   Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes
 Observations                                                         2192      2192        2192       2192      2192     2192       2192       2192
 Mean of Y : Overall                                                            0.083                  0.083              0.064                 0.064
 Mean of Y : Control Group                                                      0.088                  0.088              0.070                 0.070
 Mean of Y : Clientelist Relationship in Control Group                          0.165                  0.165              0.124                 0.124
 Standard errors in parentheses
Notes:
 β1 is the Outcome         variable
           coefficient on treatment and is
                                        β3 coded       1 if respondent
                                           is the coefficient                 reported
                                                              on Treatment X Infrequent      requesting
                                                                                        Interactor             and receiving a private good from
                                                                                                   With Politician
 Y is the Outcome variable: Probability of asking for private help
a ∗local   politician
    p < 0.10,              in p2012
              ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗  < 0.01 or 2013; 0 otherwise. Specifications employ pooled data to examine requests in

either year. Treatment is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a participating household in a neighborhood
cluster selected for treatment; 0 otherwise. Marker for clientelist relationship is coded one if a respon-
dent conversed at least monthly with a local politician before the 2012 electoral campaign; 0 otherwise
(see discussion in Section 4.2.1). Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood cluster level reported in
parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                                               11
                                        Table A14: Ask for
                                                Table      and Receive
                                                       1: Asking       Private
                                                                 for and       Goods,
                                                                         Receiving    by Primary
                                                                                   Specific        Type (2012
                                                                                            Goods: Pooled Dataand 2013)

                                                                             All Municipalities                    Municipalites with Incumbent Mayors Running for Re-Election
                                                            Water      Construction   Medical Treatment/Medicine     Water     Construction        Medical Treatment/Medicine
                                                              (1)          (2)                     (3)                (4)          (5)                          (6)
       β1 : Treatment                                      0.0136∗∗      0.00217                -0.00975            0.00237      0.00573                     -0.0167∗∗
                                                          (0.00550)     (0.00389)              (0.00658)           (0.00692)    (0.00484)                   (0.00775)

       β2 : Clientelist Relationship                      0.0336∗∗∗      0.0104                    0.0114          0.0217∗        0.00600                      0.0231
                                                           (0.0106)     (0.00871)                 (0.0146)         (0.0114)       (0.0103)                    (0.0174)

       β3 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship          -0.0434∗∗∗     -0.00526                  -0.0134          -0.0159       -0.00569                     -0.0207
                                                           (0.0134)      (0.0121)                 (0.0175)         (0.0165)       (0.0146)                    (0.0212)




12
       Municipality Fixed Effects                            Yes           Yes                     Yes               Yes            Yes                         Yes
       Year Fixed Effects                                    Yes           Yes                     Yes               Yes            Yes                         Yes
       Observations                                          4288          4288                    4288              2196           2196                        2196
       Mean of Dependent Variable                           0.0226        0.0142                  0.0354            0.0209         0.0118                      0.0323
       P-Value of β1 + β3                                   0.0232        0.792                   0.144             0.448          0.998                       0.0558
       Standard errors in parentheses
     Notes:   Outcome
      β1 is the             variable
                coefficient on treatment  coded
                                       isand       the
                                             β3 is 1    respondent
                                                     if coefficient      reported
                                                                    on Treatment    requesting
                                                                                 X Frequent Interactor receiving
                                                                                                  andWith          a private good specified in the column header from a local politician
                                                                                                          Politician
     inβ42012    coefficient
          is theor  2013; on   Treatment X Rainfall
                             0 otherwise.   Specifications
                                                    and β4 is theemploy       on Treatment
                                                                  coefficientpooled         Rainfall
                                                                                      dataXto examineX Frequent Interactor
                                                                                                           requests    in either year. Treatment is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a
       Outcome variables: Probability of asking for private help
     participating
      ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p household         a neighborhood cluster selected for treatment; 0 otherwise. Marker for clientelist relationship is coded one if a respondent
                                       0.01
                       < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p <in
     conversed at least monthly with a local politician before the 2012 electoral campaign; 0 otherwise (see discussion in Section 4.2.1). Standard errors
     clustered at the neighborhood cluster level reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
                                                            Table A15:
                                                                    Table  for and
                                                                       Ask A8:  AskReceive
                                                                                    for and Public
                                                                                            ReceiveGoods
                                                                                                    Public (2012
                                                                                                            Goodsand 2013)

                                                                                                  All Municipalities                          Municipalities with Incumbent Mayors Running for Re-election
                                                                                  Pooled                  2012                  2013                Pooled                  2012                  2013
                                                                             (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)       (10)        (11)       (12)
      β1 : Treatment                                                       -0.0004      0.0020     -0.0011    0.0030     0.0003     0.0001     0.0015     0.0038     0.0036     0.0077     -0.0018    -0.0022
                                                                          (0.0026)     (0.0024)   (0.0042)   (0.0039)   (0.0014)   (0.0015)   (0.0040)   (0.0038)   (0.0066)   (0.0063)   (0.0017)   (0.0021)

      β2 : Clientelistic Relationship                                                  0.0208∗∗              0.0338∗∗               -0.0018              0.0236∗∗              0.0391∗∗               -0.0021
                                                                                       (0.0086)              (0.0137)              (0.0014)              (0.0114)              (0.0185)              (0.0022)

      β3 : Treatment X Clientelistic Relationship                                       -0.0135               -0.0216               0.0012                -0.0118              -0.0201                0.00260
                                                                                       (0.0107)              (0.0171)              (0.0015)              (0.0155)              (0.025)               (0.0026)

      β1 + β3 :                                                                         -0.0115               -0.0186              0.00134               -0.00796               -0.0124              0.000338
                                                                                       (0.0103)              (0.0164)              (0.0012)              (0.0147)              (0.0234)              (0.0009)




13
      Municipality Fixed Effects                                             Yes          Yes      Yes          Yes      Yes         Yes       Yes          Yes      Yes          Yes       Yes         Yes
      Year Fixed Effects                                                     Yes          Yes      Yes          Yes      Yes         Yes       Yes          Yes      Yes          Yes       Yes         Yes
      Observations                                                           4288        4288      2663         2663     1625        1625      2196         2196     1344         1344      852         852
      Mean of Y : Overall                                                              0.00793                 0.0120              0.00123                0.00956                0.0149               0.00117
      Mean of Y : Control Group                                                        0.00851                 0.0129              0.00120                0.00933                0.0138               0.0154
      Mean of Y : Clientelistic Relationship in Control Group                           0.0253                 0.0397                  0                  0.0275                 0.0432               0.0380
      Standard errors in parentheses
     Notes:    coefficient on treatment
      β1 is theOutcome        variable          is the coefficient
                                        andisβ3coded     1 if respondent          Frequent Interactor
                                                                   on Treatment Xreported             With Politician
                                                                                              requesting       and receiving a public good from a local politician in 2012 or 2013; 0 otherwise.
      Y is the Outcome variable: Probability of asking for and receiving public help
     Pooled    regressions
      ∗ p < 0.10,                  p < 0.01
                  ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗examine   requests in either year. Treatment is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a participating household in a neighborhood cluster
     selected for treatment; 0 otherwise. Marker for clientelist relationship is coded one if a respondent conversed at least monthly with a local politician
     before the 2012 electoral campaign; 0 otherwise (see discussion in Section 4.2.1). Observations for 2013 employ the subset of individuals for which
     this marker was measured in a prior wave. Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood cluster level reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%
     significance levels.
                                                A16: Requests
                                          TableTable          for Private
                                                     A9: Robustness       Goods
                                                                      to Above  (Robustness
                                                                               Median       to Above Median
                                                                                      Non-Compliance:         Noncompliance)
                                                                                                      Ask for Private Help

                                                                                                      All Municipalities                                Municipalities with Incumbent Mayors Running for Re-election
                                                                                     Pooled                   2012                    2013                     Pooled                   2012                     2013
                                                                                   (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)           (7)          (8)         (9)       (10)           (11)        (12)
      β1 : Treatment                                                           -0.0414∗∗   -0.0306∗   -0.0380∗    -0.0300    -0.0493∗∗   -0.0358∗     -0.0589∗∗∗   -0.0465∗∗   -0.0586∗∗   -0.0485∗      -0.0610∗∗   -0.0471∗∗
                                                                                (0.0180)   (0.0175)   (0.0219)   (0.0224)     (0.0225)   (0.0200)      (0.0205)     (0.0207)    (0.0252)   (0.0264)       (0.0263)   (0.0234)

      β2 : Above Median Noncompliance in Control Group                          -0.0597     -0.0504    -0.116     -0.115      0.0146     0.0437∗       -0.0640      -0.0877     0.116       0.0806        0.00320     0.0188
                                                                               (0.0409)    (0.0404)   (0.123)    (0.132)     (0.0163)    (0.0248)      (0.101)      (0.104)    (0.0901)    (0.0933)      (0.00684)   (0.0232)

      β3 : Treatment X Above Median Noncompliance                               0.0235      0.0378     0.0220     0.0416      0.0320      0.0368       0.0409      0.0675∗∗     0.0408      0.0662        0.0474      0.0723∗
                                                                               (0.0250)    (0.0260)   (0.0335)   (0.0357)    (0.0294)    (0.0284)     (0.0331)     (0.0337)    (0.0461)    (0.0470)      (0.0371)    (0.0388)

      β4 : Clientelist Relationship                                                        0.112∗∗∗              0.0993∗∗                 0.127∗∗                   0.114∗∗∗                0.105∗                    0.117∗∗
                                                                                           (0.0370)              (0.0473)                (0.0498)                   (0.0392)               (0.0536)                  (0.0584)

      β5 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship                                             -0.0715               -0.0540                 -0.0902                    -0.0800                -0.0667                   -0.0890
                                                                                           (0.0481)              (0.0644)                (0.0604)                   (0.0520)               (0.0741)                  (0.0688)

      β6 : Clientelist Relationship X Above Median Noncompliance                            0.0143                0.0634                  -0.0736                    0.0703                 0.106                     0.00510
                                                                                           (0.0527)              (0.0662)                (0.0648)                   (0.0681)               (0.0813)                  (0.0908)




14
      β7 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship X Above Median Noncompliance                -0.0507               -0.0744                -0.00450                    -0.0743                   -0.0450               -0.0969
                                                                                           (0.0676)              (0.0885)                (0.0799)                   (0.0869)                   (0.117)               (0.103)

      Municipality Fixed Effects                                                 Yes         Yes       Yes            Yes      Yes            Yes       Yes           Yes        Yes             Yes       Yes            Yes
      Year Fixed Effects                                                         Yes         Yes        No            No        No             No       Yes           Yes         No             No        No             No
      Observations                                                               4288       4288       2667          2667      1621           1621      2193         2193        1345           1345       848            848
      Mean of Y : Overall                                                                   0.164                    0.213                   0.0827                  0.148                      0.196                   0.0719
      Mean of Y : Control Group                                                             0.177                    0.224                   0.0976                  0.166                      0.211                   0.0931
      Mean of Y : Clientelist Relationship in Control Group                                0.285                     0.345                   0.181                   0.294                     0.353                     0.190
      P-Value of β1 + β3                                                                   0.0323                    0.171                   0.0476                 0.0109                     0.0919                   0.0603
      Standard errors in parentheses
     β1 is the coefficient
     Notes:     Outcome    on treatment
                                   variable
                                        and β5 isis   coefficient on
                                                  the coded       1 Treatment X Frequent Interactor
                                                                     if respondent         reported With Politician
                                                                                                          requesting a private good from a local politician in 2012 or 2013; 0 otherwise. Pooled
      Y is the Outcome variable: Probability of asking for private help
     regressions          0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
       ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p <examine        requests in either year. Treatment is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a participating household in a neighborhood cluster selected
     for treatment; 0 otherwise. Marker for clientelist relationship is coded one if a respondent conversed at least monthly with a local politician before the
     2012 electoral campaign; 0 otherwise (see discussion in Section 4.2.1). Observations for 2013 employ the subset of individuals for which this marker was
     measured in a prior wave. Above Median Noncompliance partitions sample municipalities at the median of control group noncompliance. Standard
     errors clustered at the neighborhood cluster level reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
                           Table A17: Requests for Private Goods - Alternative Clientelism Marker (2012 and 2013)
                                                                     Table 1: Private Help Requests, All Municipalities (2012 and 2013)

                                                                                                                    All Requests                                 All but Water
                                                                                                       (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)
                               β1 : Treatment                                                       -0.030∗∗     -0.021∗                             -0.026∗∗   -0.020∗
                                                                                                     (0.013)     (0.012)                              (0.012)   (0.012)

                               β2 : Clientelist Relationship*                                                    0.108∗∗∗                                       0.078∗∗
                                                                                                                  (0.033)                                       (0.031)

                               β3 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship*                                        -0.085∗∗                                        -0.056
                                                                                                                  (0.042)                                       (0.040)

                               β4 : Treatment X 2012                                                                          -0.029∗       -0.022                         -0.025    -0.023
                                                                                                                              (0.017)      (0.017)                        (0.016)   (0.016)

                               β5 : Treatment X 2013                                                                         -0.031∗∗       -0.019                        -0.027∗    -0.017
                                                                                                                              (0.016)      (0.015)                        (0.014)   (0.014)

                               β6 : Clientelist Relationship* X 2012                                                                      0.110∗∗∗                                   0.067∗
                                                                                                                                           (0.040)                                  (0.037)

                               β7 : Clientelist Relationship* X 2013                                                                       0.103∗∗                                  0.100∗∗
                                                                                                                                           (0.044)                                  (0.043)

                               β8 : Clientelist Relationship* X Treatment X 2012                                                            -0.068                                   -0.028
                                                                                                                                           (0.055)                                  (0.051)




15
                               β9 : Clientelist Relationship* X Treatment X 2013                                                          -0.113∗∗                                  -0.104∗∗
                                                                                                                                           (0.054)                                  (0.053)

                               β1 + β3                                                                          -0.106**                                        -0.076*
                                                                                                                 (0.041)                                        (0.040)
                               β4 + β8                                                                                                     -0.089*                                    -0.051
                                                                                                                                           (0.053)                                   (0.050)
                               β5 + β9                                                                                                    -0.133**                                  -0.121**
                                                                                                                                           (0.054)                                   (0.052)
                               Municipality Fixed Effects                                             Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes          Yes
                               Year Fixed Effects                                                     Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes          Yes
                               Observations                                                           4288        4286         4288         4286      4288      4286       4288        4286
                               Mean of Y : Overall                                                                0.164                     0.164               0.164                  0.133
                               Mean of Y : Control Group                                                          0.177                     0.177               0.145                  0.145
                               Mean of Y : Clientelist Relationship* in Control Group                             0.281                     0.281               0.223                  0.223
                               Standard errors in parentheses
                               β1 is the coefficient on treatment and β3 is the coefficient on Treatment X Infrequent Interactor With Politician
                          Y is the Outcome variable: Probability of asking for private help
     Notes: Outcome variable
                          ∗ p<    coded
                              is0.10, ∗∗ p < 1 if respondent reported requesting a private good from a local politician in 2012 or 2013; 0 otherwise. Specifications
                                             0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
     employ pooled data to examine requests in either year. Treatment is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a participating household in a neighborhood
     cluster selected for treatment; 0 otherwise. Clientelist Relationship* is the alternative marker of clientelist relationships discussed in Section 4.2.1. This
     marker is coded one if a respondent conversed at least monthly with a local politician before the 2012 electoral campaign and publicly declared support
     for a candidate during that campaign; 0 otherwise. Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood cluster level reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, ***
     1% significance levels.
Table A18: Requests for Private Goods - Municipalities where Incumbent Ran for
Re-Election - Alternative Clientelism Marker (2012 and 2013)
         Table 1: Private Help Requests, Municipalities where Incumbent Ran for Re-Election (2012 and 2013)

                                                                                    All Requests                                All but Water
                                                                        (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)
 β1 : Treatment                                                      -0.044∗∗∗    -0.031∗                          -0.030∗∗    -0.022
                                                                      (0.016)     (0.016)                           (0.015)   (0.015)

 β2 : Clientelist Relationship*                                                  0.149∗∗∗                                     0.124∗∗∗
                                                                                  (0.039)                                      (0.035)

 β3 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship*                                      -0.116∗∗                                     -0.080∗
                                                                                  (0.050)                                     (0.048)

 β4 : Treatment X 2012                                                                       -0.041∗     -0.031                           -0.026     -0.021
                                                                                             (0.022)    (0.022)                          (0.021)    (0.020)

 β5 : Treatment X 2013                                                                       -0.048∗∗    -0.031                          -0.037∗∗    -0.022
                                                                                              (0.020)   (0.019)                           (0.018)   (0.017)

 β6 : Clientelist Relationship* X 2012                                                                  0.164∗∗∗                                    0.129∗∗∗
                                                                                                         (0.052)                                    (0.048)

 β7 : Clientelist Relationship* X 2013                                                                  0.120∗∗                                     0.114∗∗
                                                                                                        (0.058)                                     (0.056)

 β8 : Clientelist Relationship* X Treatment X 2012                                                       -0.098                                      -0.054
                                                                                                        (0.072)                                     (0.070)

 β9 : Clientelist Relationship* X Treatment X 2013                                                      -0.145∗∗                                    -0.124∗
                                                                                                         (0.071)                                    (0.068)

 β1 + β3                                                                         -0.147***                                    -0.102**
                                                                                  (0.050)                                      (0.048)
 β4 + β8                                                                                                 -0.129*                                      -0.076
                                                                                                         (0.070)                                     (0.069)
 β5 + β9                                                                                                -0.176**                                    -0.146**
                                                                                                         (0.071)                                     (0.067)
 Municipality Fixed Effects                                            Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes      Yes         Yes       Yes           Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                                                    Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes      Yes         Yes       Yes           Yes
 Observations                                                          2193        2193       2193        2193      2193       2193       2193         2193
 Mean of Y : Overall                                                               0.148                  0.148                0.148                   0.119
 Mean of Y : Control Group                                                         0.166                  0.166                0.166                   0.132
 Mean of Y : Clientelist Relationship* in Control Group                            0.305                  0.305                0.305                   0.244
 Standard errors in parentheses
Notes:     Outcome
 β1 is the coefficient       variable
                       on treatment and β3is   coded
                                           is the          1 on
                                                  coefficient if Treatment
                                                                 respondent         reported
                                                                           X Infrequent            requesting
                                                                                        Interactor With Politician a private good from a local politi-
 Y is the Outcome variable: Probability of asking for private help
cian
  ∗ p <in   2012
        0.10, ∗∗ p < or
                     0.05,2013;     0 otherwise. Specifications employ pooled data to examine requests in either year.
                           ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


Treatment is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a participating household in a neighborhood cluster selected
for treatment; 0 otherwise. Clientelist Relationship* is the alternative marker of clientelist relationships dis-
cussed in Section 4.2.1. This marker is coded one if a respondent conversed at least monthly with a local
politician before the 2012 electoral campaign and publicly declared support for a candidate during that
campaign; 0 otherwise. Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood cluster level reported in parenthe-
ses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                                                 16
                                                          for Public
                                       Table A19: RequestsTable 1: Public  - Alternative
                                                                     GoodsGood  Requests Clientelism Marker (2012 and 2013)
                                                                                         (2012 and 2013)

                                                                                  Pooled                   2012                    2013                    Pooled                   2012                   2013
                                                                             (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)        (9)         (10)        (11)        (12)
      β1 : Treatment                                                      -0.00391     -0.00356    -0.00233    -0.00288    -0.00676    -0.00482    -0.00167     -0.00159    0.00305     0.00225     -0.00916    -0.00751
                                                                         (0.00485)    (0.00483)   (0.00669)   (0.00676)   (0.00504)   (0.00486)   (0.00594)    (0.00609)   (0.00916)   (0.00931)   (0.00615)   (0.00616)

      β2 : Clientelist Relationship*                                                  0.0341∗∗                0.0397∗                  0.0234                   0.0228                  0.0335                  0.00326
                                                                                      (0.0162)                (0.0213)                (0.0217)                 (0.0187)                (0.0266)                (0.0233)

      β3 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship*                                      -0.00670                0.00150                  -0.0203                 -0.00340                0.00145                  -0.0140
                                                                                      (0.0201)                (0.0279)                (0.0237)                 (0.0238)                (0.0352)                (0.0228)

      β1 + β3                                                                          -0.0103                -0.00138                 -0.0251                 -0.00499                0.00371                  -0.0215
                                                                                      (0.0197)                (0.0269)                (0.0234)                 (0.0228)                (0.0338)                (0.0224)
      Municipality FE                                                      Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes




17
      Year Fixed Effects                                                   Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
      Observations                                                         4292          4290       2667        2666        1625         1624       2197         2197        1345        1345        852           852
      Mean of Y : Overall                                                               0.0235                 0.0304                   0.0123                  0.0246                  0.0335                   0.0106
      Mean of Y : Control Group                                                         0.0264                 0.0329                   0.0156                  0.0271                  0.0345                   0.0154
      Mean of Y : Clientelistic Relationship* in Control Group                         0.0537                  0.0633                   0.0357                  0.0458                  0.0588                   0.0217
      Standard errors in parentheses
     β1 is the coefficient
     Notes:     Outcome    on treatment
                                 variable      is the
                                        and β3 is     coefficient
                                                   coded        1 onifTreatment X Infrequent
                                                                       respondent            Interactor With
                                                                                          reported           Politician
                                                                                                         requesting     a public good from a local politician in 2012 or 2013; 0 otherwise. Pooled
      Y is the Outcome variable: Probability of asking for public help
       ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p <
     regressions        examine         0.01
                          0.05, ∗∗∗ p <requests in either year. Treatment is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a participating household in a neighborhood cluster selected
     for treatment; 0 otherwise. Clientelist Relationship* is the alternative marker of clientelist relationships discussed in Section 4.2.1. This marker is coded
     one if a respondent conversed at least monthly with a local politician before the 2012 electoral campaign and publicly declared support for a candidate
     during that campaign; 0 otherwise. Observations for 2013 employ the subset of individuals for which this marker was measured in a prior wave.
     Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood cluster level reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
Table A20: Ask for and Receive Private Goods - Alternative Clientelism Marker (2012
and 2013)
                              Table 1: Asking and Receiving Private Help, All Municipalities (2012 and 2013)

                                                                                    All Requests                           All but Water
                                                                        (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)      (7)       (8)
 β1 : Treatment                                                       -0.005     0.003                           -0.011    -0.007
                                                                     (0.010)    (0.010)                         (0.009)   (0.009)

 β2 : Clientelist Relationship*                                                0.070∗∗∗                                   0.043∗
                                                                                (0.026)                                   (0.024)

 β3 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship*                                    -0.073∗∗                                    -0.036
                                                                                (0.032)                                   (0.030)

 β4 : Treatment X 2012                                                                      -0.003    0.006                          -0.012    -0.009
                                                                                           (0.014)   (0.014)                        (0.012)   (0.012)

 β5 : Treatment X 2013                                                                      -0.009    -0.004                         -0.009    -0.004
                                                                                           (0.010)   (0.010)                        (0.009)   (0.009)

 β6 : Clientelist Relationship* X 2012                                                               0.086∗∗                                   0.043
                                                                                                     (0.035)                                  (0.030)

 β7 : Clientelist Relationship* X 2013                                                                0.042                                    0.045
                                                                                                     (0.031)                                  (0.030)

 β8 : Clientelist Relationship* X Treatment X 2012                                                   -0.084∗                                   -0.027
                                                                                                     (0.044)                                  (0.040)

 β9 : Clientelist Relationship* X Treatment X 2013                                                    -0.050                                   -0.051
                                                                                                     (0.039)                                  (0.037)

 β1 + β3                                                                       -0.070**                                    -0.043
                                                                                (0.032)                                   (0.030)
 β4 + β8                                                                                             -0.078**                                  -0.036
                                                                                                      (0.043)                                 (0.039)
 β5 + β9                                                                                               -0.054                                  -0.054
                                                                                                      (0.037)                                 (0.035)
 Municipality Fixed Effects                                           Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                                                   Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes
 Observations                                                         4284      4282        4284        4282     4284     4282       4284       4282
 Mean of Y : Overall                                                            0.090                   0.090             0.071                 0.071
 Mean of Y : Control Group                                                      0.093                   0.093             0.077                 0.077
 Mean of Y : Clientelist Relationship* in Control Group                         0.169                   0.169             0.128                 0.128
 Standard errors in parentheses
Notes:
β1 is the Outcome          variable
          coefficient on treatment and βis  coded
                                         3 is           1 if on
                                              the coefficient respondent       reported
                                                                Treatment X Infrequent       requesting
                                                                                       Interactor              and receiving a private good from
                                                                                                  With Politician
 Y is the Outcome variable: Probability of asking for private help
a ∗local   politician
    p < 0.10,               inp2012
              ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ < 0.01 or 2013; 0 otherwise. Specifications employ pooled data to examine requests in

either year. Treatment is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a participating household in a neighborhood
cluster selected for treatment; 0 otherwise. Clientelist Relationship* is the alternative marker of clien-
telist relationships discussed in Section 4.2.1. This marker is coded one if a respondent conversed at least
monthly with a local politician before the 2012 electoral campaign and publicly declared support for a
candidate during that campaign; 0 otherwise. Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood cluster level
reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                                               18
Table A21: Ask for and Receive Private Goods in Municipalities where Incumbent Ran
for Reelection - Alternative Clientelism Marker (2012 and 2013)
        Table 1: Asking and Receiving Private Help, Municipalities where Incumbent Ran for Re-Election (2012 and 2013)

                                                                                    All Requests                            All but Water
                                                                        (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)
 β1 : Treatment                                                       -0.015    -0.005                           -0.013    -0.005
                                                                     (0.013)   (0.013)                          (0.011)   (0.011)

 β2 : Clientelist Relationship*                                                0.090∗∗∗                                   0.074∗∗
                                                                                (0.032)                                   (0.029)

 β3 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship*                                    -0.091∗∗                                   -0.068∗
                                                                                (0.039)                                   (0.038)

 β4 : Treatment X 2012                                                                      -0.014    -0.001                          -0.011    -0.002
                                                                                           (0.018)   (0.018)                         (0.016)   (0.016)

 β5 : Treatment X 2013                                                                      -0.018    -0.011                          -0.014    -0.009
                                                                                           (0.013)   (0.013)                         (0.012)   (0.012)

 β6 : Clientelist Relationship* X 2012                                                               0.109∗∗                                   0.081∗∗
                                                                                                     (0.044)                                   (0.040)

 β7 : Clientelist Relationship* X 2013                                                                0.054                                     0.062
                                                                                                     (0.045)                                   (0.044)

 β8 : Clientelist Relationship* X Treatment X 2012                                                   -0.107∗                                    -0.075
                                                                                                     (0.056)                                   (0.052)

 β9 : Clientelist Relationship* X Treatment X 2013                                                    -0.063                                    -0.054
                                                                                                     (0.055)                                   (0.053)

 β1 + β3                                                                       -0.096**                                   -0.072**
                                                                                (0.039)                                    (0.038)
 β4 + β8                                                                                             -0.108**                                  -0.077*
                                                                                                      (0.054)                                  (0.051)
 β5 + β9                                                                                               -0.073                                   -0.063
                                                                                                      (0.052)                                  (0.051)
 Municipality Fixed Effects                                           Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes     Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                                                   Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes     Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes
 Observations                                                         2192      2192        2192        2192     2192      2192       2192       2192
 Mean of Y : Overall                                                            0.083                   0.083              0.064                 0.064
 Mean of Y : Control Group                                                      0.088                   0.088              0.070                 0.070
 Mean of Y : Clientelist Relationship* in Control Group                         0.183                   0.183              0.145                 0.145
 Standard errors in parentheses
Notes:
β1 is the Outcome          variable
          coefficient on treatment and βis
                                         3 iscoded      1 if onrespondent
                                              the coefficient                   reported
                                                                 Treatment X Infrequent        requesting
                                                                                        Interactor               and receiving a private good from
                                                                                                   With Politician
 Y is the Outcome variable: Probability of asking for private help
a ∗local   politician
    p < 0.10,               inp2012
              ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ < 0.01 or 2013; 0 otherwise. Specifications employ pooled data to examine requests in

either year. Treatment is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a participating household in a neighborhood
cluster selected for treatment; 0 otherwise. Clientelist Relationship* is the alternative marker of clien-
telist relationships discussed in Section 4.2.1. This marker is coded one if a respondent conversed at least
monthly with a local politician before the 2012 electoral campaign and publicly declared support for a
candidate during that campaign; 0 otherwise.Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood cluster level
reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                                               19
                  Table A22: Votes for Incumbent and Other Electoral Outcomes (2012) - Alternative Clientelism Marker
                                                                  Table 1: Effect on Votes for Incumbent and Other Electoral Outcomes

                                                                                                Votes for              Votes for         Turnout   Blank and Null
                                                                                            Incumbent Mayor      Challenger Candidates                 Votes
                                                                                               (1)      (2)               (3)              (4)          (5)

                                    Panel A: Unadjusted Regressors:

                                    Treated Respondents                                     -1.423∗∗                     1.040           -0.442        -0.059
                                                                                             [0.042]                    [0.120]          [0.532]      [0.872]

                                    Respondents                                               0.361                     -0.348            0.127        0.114
                                                                                             [0.360]                    [0.478]          [0.812]      [0.546]

                                    Treated Respondents with Clientelist Relationship*                 -2.523
                                                                                                       [0.222]

                                    Treated Respondents without Clientelist Relationship*              -1.327
                                                                                                       [0.116]

                                    Respondents with Clientelist Relationship*                          1.976
                                                                                                       [0.166]

                                    Respondents without Clientelist Relationship*                       0.215
                                                                                                       [0.600]


                                    Panel B: Adjusted Regressors:

                                    Treated Respondents                                     -0.293∗∗                     0.202           -0.087        0.004




20
                                                                                             [0.038]                    [0.138]          [0.634]      [0.940]

                                    Respondents                                               0.074                      0.043            0.085        -0.032
                                                                                             [0.104]                    [0.594]          [0.450]      [0.488]

                                    Treated Respondents with Clientelist Relationship*                 -1.229
                                                                                                       [0.186]

                                    Treated Respondents without Clientelist Relationship*               -.154
                                                                                                       [0.374]

                                    Respondents with Clientelist Relationship*                         0.745
                                                                                                       [0.39]

                                    Respondents without Clientelist Relationship*                       0.065
                                                                                                       [0.544]

                                    Eligible Voters                                           Yes       Yes              Yes               Yes          Yes
                                    Location Fixed Effects                                    Yes       Yes              Yes               Yes          Yes
                                    Observations                                              909       909              909               909          909

                                 Bootstrap p-value using wild clustered bootstrapped standard errors in brackets.
     Notes: Outcome variables denoted                       headers. p-values using wild clustered bootstrap in brackets. The estimation sample consists of 21 munic-
                                 ∗   p < 0.10,   p < 0.05,   p < 0.01
                                         by∗∗ column    ∗∗∗

     ipalities in which the incumbent mayor was running for reelection in 2012. We allow standard errors to be correlated within municipalities. Clientelist
     Relationship* is the alternative marker of clientelist relationships discussed in Section 4.2.1. This marker is coded one if a respondent conversed at least
     monthly with a local politician before the 2012 electoral campaign and publicly declared support for a candidate during that campaign; 0 otherwise. *
     10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
                           Table A23: Requests for Private
                                                     TableGoods, Controlling
                                                           1: Private              Citizen
                                                                      Requests:forPooled   Engagement (2012 and 2013)
                                                                                         Data

                                                                                      All Municipalities                      Municipalities with Incumbent Mayors
                                                                                                                                    Running for Re-Election
                                                                           (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)           (8)
       β1 : Treatment                                                    -0.006       -0.015       0.050         0.057       -0.020       -0.024       0.001        0.005
                                                                        (0.014)      (0.013)      (0.037)       (0.038)     (0.017)      (0.016)      (0.054)      (0.055)

       β2 : Clientelist Relationship                                   0.117∗∗∗      0.120∗∗∗     0.121∗∗∗     0.118∗∗∗     0.142∗∗∗    0.146∗∗∗      0.144∗∗∗    0.142∗∗∗
                                                                        (0.027)       (0.027)      (0.027)      (0.027)      (0.034)     (0.033)       (0.033)    (0.033)

       β3 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship                       -0.093∗∗∗    -0.098∗∗∗    -0.100∗∗∗     -0.097∗∗∗    -0.106∗∗    -0.112∗∗∗    -0.112∗∗∗    -0.110∗∗
                                                                        (0.034)      (0.034)      (0.034)       (0.034)      (0.043)     (0.043)      (0.043)     (0.043)

       Member of a Community Association                                  Yes          No           No            Yes         Yes          No           No           Yes
       Member of a Community Association X Treatment                      Yes          No           No            Yes         Yes          No           No           Yes




21
       President of a Community Association                               No           Yes          No            Yes         No           Yes          No           Yes
       President of a Community Association X Treatment                   No           Yes          No            Yes         No           Yes          No           Yes
       Voted in 2008 Municipal Election                                   No           No           Yes           Yes         No           No           Yes          Yes
       Voted in 2008 Municipal Election X Treatment                       No           No           Yes           Yes         No           No           Yes          Yes
       Municipality Fixed Effects                                         Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
       Year Fixed Effects                                                 Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
       Observations                                                      4288         4288         4231          4231        2193         2193         2153         2153
       Mean of Y : Overall                                               0.164        0.164        0.164         0.164       0.148        0.148        0.146        0.146
       Mean of Y : Control Group                                         0.177        0.177        0.177         0.177       0.166        0.166        0.164        0.164
       Mean of Y : Clientelist Relationship in Control Group             0.285        0.285        0.286         0.286       0.294        0.294        0.290        0.290
       Standard errors in parentheses
     Notes:  Outcome
      β1 is the          variable
                coefficient         is coded
                            on treatment and 1      the coefficientreported
                                             β3ifisrespondent                requesting
                                                                     on Treatment        a private
                                                                                  X Frequent        good
                                                                                             Interactor   from
                                                                                                        With    a local politician in 2012 or 2013; 0 otherwise. Specifications
                                                                                                             Politician
     employ    Outcome
      Y is thepooled   variable:
                     data        Probability
                           to examine        of asking
                                         requests   in for private
                                                        either  year.
                                                                   helpTreatment is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a participating household in a neighborhood
       ∗ p < 0.10,
     cluster
                  ∗∗      0.05,
             selectedp <for
                              ∗∗∗  p < 0.01
                             treatment;  0 otherwise. Marker for clientelist relationship is coded one if a respondent conversed at least monthly with a local
     politician before the 2012 electoral campaign; 0 otherwise (see discussion in Section 4.2.1). Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood cluster level
     reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
      Table A24: Effect on Votes for Workers’ Party (PT) Mayoral Candidate (2012)
                                               Table 1: Effect on Votes for PT Candidates


                                                                                            Votes for PT Candidate
                                                                                                (1)       (2)

             Panel A: Unadjusted Regressors:

             Number of Treated Individuals                                                  -0.603
                                                                                            [0.476]

             Number of Respondents                                                           0.314
                                                                                            [0.478]

             Number of Treated Individuals in a Clientelist Relationship                                 -0.197
                                                                                                        [0.942]

             Number of Treated Individuals Not in a Clientelist Relationship                             -0.749
                                                                                                        [0.502]

             Number of Respondents in a Clientelist Relationship                                         0.726
                                                                                                        [0.622]

             Number of Respondents Not in a Clientelist Relationship                                     0.255
                                                                                                        [0.644]


             Panel B: Adjusted Regressors:

             Number of Treated Individuals                                                  -0.0332
                                                                                            [0.734]

             Number of Respondents                                                          0.0307
                                                                                            [0.768]

             Number of Treated Individuals in a Clientelist Relationship                                 -0.451
                                                                                                        [0.322]

             Number of Treated Individuals Not in a Clientelist Relationship                            -0.0681
                                                                                                        [0.754]

             Number of Respondents in a Clientelist Relationship                                         0.227
                                                                                                        [0.484]

             Number of Respondents Not in a Clientelist Relationship                                     0.0744
                                                                                                        [0.756]

             Registered Voters                                                                  Yes       Yes
             Location Fixed Effects                                                             Yes       Yes
             Observations                                                                       867       867
             Bootstrap p-value using wild clustered bootstrapped standard errors in brackets.
Notes: Outcome
            ∗ p <variable    is0.05,
                  0.10, ∗∗ p <  votes∗∗∗ for candidate from the PT party. p-values in square brackets obtained us-
                                         p < 0.01

ing wild clustered bootstrap. The estimation sample consists of 21 municipalities in which the incumbent
mayor was running for reelection in 2012. We allow standard errors to be correlated within municipalities.
* 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.




                                                                   22
                                                               Requests
                                                    Table A25: Table A14:   Private
                                                                        for Ask for Private
                                                                                    Goods Help    PT Mayors
                                                                                            from from       (2012 and 2013)
                                                                                                      PT Mayors

                                                                                                   All Municipalities                              Municipalities with Incumbent Mayors Running for Re-election
                                                                                   Pooled                  2012                    2013                  Pooled                   2012                   2013
                                                                              (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)           (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)        (11)        (12)
      β1 : Treatment                                                      -0.0333∗∗     -0.0128     -0.0285   -0.00633    -0.0384∗∗    -0.0230     -0.0481∗∗    -0.0275   -0.0479∗    -0.0281    -0.0441∗∗    -0.0254
                                                                           (0.0150)    (0.0154)    (0.0202)   (0.0214)     (0.0166)   (0.0160)      (0.0203)   (0.0207)   (0.0276)   (0.0287)     (0.0219)   (0.0216)

      β2 : Treatment X PT Mayor                                            0.0170      0.00240     0.00607     -0.0164     0.0254      0.0241       0.0166      0.0162     0.0157    0.00694     0.00152      0.0178
                                                                          (0.0251)     (0.0271)    (0.0320)   (0.0357)    (0.0354)    (0.0354)     (0.0287)    (0.0301)   (0.0361)   (0.0389)    (0.0464)    (0.0441)

      β3 : Clientelist Relationship                                                    0.132∗∗∗               0.150∗∗∗                0.0895∗∗                 0.148∗∗∗              0.167∗∗∗                 0.102∗∗
                                                                                       (0.0291)               (0.0366)                (0.0351)                 (0.0368)              (0.0472)                (0.0469)

      β4 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship                                        -0.109∗∗∗              -0.113∗∗                -0.0881∗                 -0.101∗∗               -0.0867                 -0.102∗
                                                                                        (0.0378)              (0.0491)                (0.0448)                 (0.0481)              (0.0678)                (0.0567)

      β5 : Clientelist Relationship X PT Mayor                                          -0.0729                -0.100                  -0.0232                  -0.0381               -0.104                  0.0766
                                                                                       (0.0666)               (0.0793)                (0.0822)                 (0.0841)              (0.0857)                (0.125)




23
      β6 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship X PT Mayor                              0.0720                 0.118                  0.000409                  -0.0300              0.0115                   -0.103
                                                                                       (0.0834)               (0.108)                 (0.0948)                 (0.0998)              (0.120)                 (0.132)

      Municipality Fixed Effects                                            Yes          Yes        Yes            Yes      Yes             Yes      Yes         Yes       Yes            Yes      Yes           Yes
      Year Fixed Effects                                                    Yes          Yes         No            No        No             No       Yes         Yes        No            No       No             No
      Observations                                                          4288        4288        2667          2667      1621           1621      2193       2193       1345          1345      848            848
      Mean of Y : Overall                                                               0.164                     0.213                   0.0827                0.148                    0.196                  0.0719
      Mean of Y : Control Group                                                         0.177                     0.224                   0.0976                0.166                    0.211                  0.0931
      Mean of Y : Clientelist Relationship in Control Group                             0.285                     0.345                    0.181                0.294                    0.353                  0.190
      Standard errors in parentheses
     Notes:    coefficient on treatment
      β1 is theOutcome        variable          is the coefficient
                                        andisβ4coded      1 if respondent         Frequent Interactor
                                                                   on Treatment Xreported             With Politician
                                                                                               requesting       a private good from a local politician in 2012 or 2013; 0 otherwise. Specifications
      Y is the Outcome variable: Probability of asking for private help
     employ
      ∗ p < 0.10,pooled     data
                  ∗∗ p < 0.05,           examine requests in either year. Treatment is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a participating household in a neighborhood
                                     < 0.01
                               ∗∗∗ p to


     cluster selected for treatment; 0 otherwise. Marker for clientelist relationship is coded one if a respondent conversed at least monthly with a local
     politician before the 2012 electoral campaign; 0 otherwise (see discussion in Section 4.2.1). Observations for 2013 employ the subset of individuals for
     which this marker was measured in a prior wave. PT Mayor is coded 1 if a member of the Worker’s Party; 0 otherwise. Standard errors clustered at the
     neighborhood cluster level reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
                                             Table A26: Ask for
                                                     Table  A15:    Receive
                                                                andAsk       Private
                                                                       for and       Goods
                                                                               Receive      from
                                                                                       Private Help   Mayors
                                                                                                  PTfrom     (2012 and 2013)
                                                                                                         PT Mayors

                                                                                                     All Municipalities                              Municipalities with Incumbent Mayors Running for Re-election
                                                                                  Pooled                    2012                      2013                   Pooled                 2012                   2013
                                                                            (1)            (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)           (6)         (7)         (8)        (9)       (10)         (11)       (12)
      β1 : Treatment                                                     -0.00317        0.0102     0.00235     0.0190      -0.0109      -0.00418     -0.0194    -0.00540    -0.0194   -0.00528     -0.0154   -0.00383
                                                                         (0.0113)       (0.0116)    (0.0156)   (0.0167)    (0.0105)      (0.0106)    (0.0161)    (0.0162)   (0.0231)   (0.0246)    (0.0133)   (0.0130)

      β2 : Treatment X PT Mayor                                          -0.00986        -0.0151     -0.0275    -0.0313     0.0133       0.00538      0.0156      0.0114    0.00857    0.00961      0.0163     0.00217
                                                                         (0.0217)       (0.0225)    (0.0297)   (0.0310)    (0.0209)      (0.0227)    (0.0220)    (0.0234)   (0.0317)   (0.0348)    (0.0249)   (0.0259)

      β3 : Clientelist Relationship                                                     0.0822∗∗∗              0.0979∗∗∗                 0.0484∗∗               0.0814∗∗∗              0.0821∗∗               0.0692∗∗
                                                                                         (0.0222)               (0.0297)                 (0.0242)                (0.0288)              (0.0379)               (0.0345)

      β4 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship                                         -0.0712∗∗              -0.0852∗∗                  -0.0391                -0.0677∗               -0.0626                -0.0637
                                                                                         (0.0290)               (0.0391)                 (0.0319)                (0.0355)              (0.0484)               (0.0400)

      β5 : Clientelist Relationship X PT Mayor                                           -0.0361               0.000121                 -0.0843∗∗∗                -0.0157               0.0405                -0.0990∗∗
                                                                                        (0.0455)               (0.0718)                  (0.0290)                (0.0591)              (0.0908)               (0.0405)




24
      β6 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship X PT Mayor                               0.0172                -0.00347                   0.0419                 0.00548               -0.0406                 0.0723∗
                                                                                        (0.0556)               (0.0886)                  (0.0362)                (0.0748)              (0.116)                (0.0418)

      Municipality Fixed Effects                                           Yes             Yes       Yes            Yes     Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes            Yes      Yes        Yes
      Year Fixed Effects                                                   Yes             Yes        No            No       No            No         Yes          Yes        No            No       No          No
      Observations                                                         4284           4284       2663          2663     1621          1621        2192         2192      1344          1344      848         848
      Mean of Y : Overall                                                                0.0903                    0.124                 0.0345                   0.0826                   0.118               0.0271
      Mean of Y : Control Group                                                          0.0924                    0.124                 0.0386                   0.0877                   0.122               0.131
      Mean of Y : Clientelist Relationship in Control Group                               0.167                    0.218                 0.0764                   0.165                    0.216               0.190
      Standard errors in parentheses
     Notes:    coefficient on treatment
      β1 is theOutcome        variable          is the coefficient
                                        andisβ4coded      1 if respondent         Frequent Interactor
                                                                   on Treatment Xreported             With Politician
                                                                                               requesting       and receiving a private good from a local politician in 2012 or 2013; 0 otherwise.
      Y is the Outcome variable: Probability of asking for and receiving private help
     Specifications       employ
      ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05,         pooled data to examine requests in either year. Treatment is coded 1 if respondent belongs to a participating household in a
                               ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


     neighborhood cluster selected for treatment; 0 otherwise. Marker for clientelist relationship is coded one if a respondent conversed at least monthly
     with a local politician before the 2012 electoral campaign; 0 otherwise (see discussion in Section 4.2.1). Observations for 2013 employ the subset of
     individuals for which this marker was measured in a prior wave. PT Mayor is coded 1 if a member of the Worker’s Party; 0 otherwise. Standard errors
     clustered at the neighborhood cluster level reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
                                         Table A27: Requests for Private Goods, with Rainfall (2012 and 2013)
                                         Table A12: Did you ask for any private help: Pooled Data with Rainfall

                                                                                     All Municipalities                  Municipalites with Incumbent Mayors
                                                                                                                               Running for Re-Election
                                                                              (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)              (6)
       β1 : Treatment                                                       -0.0115         -0.0117        -0.0113        -0.0205       -0.0211          -0.0194
                                                                           (0.0131)        (0.0131)       (0.0132)       (0.0167)      (0.0166)         (0.0166)

       β2 : Clientelist Relationship                                       0.119∗∗∗        0.119∗∗∗       0.120∗∗∗       0.142∗∗∗      0.142∗∗∗         0.145∗∗∗
                                                                           (0.0264)        (0.0264)       (0.0267)       (0.0329)      (0.0329)         (0.0345)

       β3 : Rainfall                                                       -0.0210∗        -0.0209∗        -0.0174       -0.00990      -0.00984         -0.00444
                                                                           (0.0114)        (0.0114)       (0.0121)       (0.0176)      (0.0176)         (0.0169)

       β4 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship                          -0.0964∗∗∗      -0.0953∗∗∗     -0.0965∗∗∗      -0.109∗∗∗     -0.107∗∗          -0.110∗∗
                                                                           (0.0338)        (0.0340)       (0.0342)        (0.0420)     (0.0415)         (0.0428)

       β5 : Treatment × Rainfall                                           -0.00546        -0.00410       -0.00680       -0.00769      -0.00593          -0.0115
                                                                           (0.0122)        (0.0129)       (0.0127)       (0.0189)      (0.0203)         (0.0197)




25
       β6 : Treatment × Rainfall × Clientelist Relationship                                -0.00727       0.00789                      -0.00816          0.0227
                                                                                           (0.0217)       (0.0320)                     (0.0313)         (0.0472)

       β7 : Rainfall × Clientelist Relationship                                                            -0.0153                                       -0.0310
                                                                                                          (0.0239)                                      (0.0359)

       Municipality Fixed Effects                                            Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes               Yes
       Year Fixed Effects                                                    Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes               Yes
       Observations                                                          4288            4288           4288           2193          2193             2193
       Mean of Dependent Variable                                                                           0.164                                         0.148

     Notes: Outcome
      Standard errors variable is coded 1 if respondent reported requesting a private good from a local politician in 2012 or 2013; 0 otherwise. Treatment
                      in parentheses
     is coded
        β1 is the if respondent
                1 coefficient on treatment
                                   belongs and
                                            to a βparticipating   household
                                                  4 is the coefficient          in a neighborhood
                                                                        on Treatment                  cluster selected
                                                                                       X Frequent Interactor            for treatment; 0 otherwise. Marker for clientelist
                                                                                                               With Politician
        β5 is the coefficient
     relationship             on Treatment
                    is coded one             X Rainfall
                                  if a respondent  conversed         the coefficient
                                                         and β6atisleast monthly withon Treatment  X Rainfall
                                                                                         a local politician    X Frequent
                                                                                                            before the 2012Interactor
                                                                                                                            electoral campaign; 0 otherwise (see discussion
     in Outcome  variables:
        Section 4.2.1).     Probability
                        Standardized    of asking
                                      rainfall    for private
                                               shocks         help
                                                       are measured by the deviation of rainfall in the municipality during January-September of 2012 (or 2013)
       ∗   < 0.10, ∗∗      0.05,∗∗∗p < 0.01
     fromp the historicp <
                         average rainfall during January-September of 1986-2011. Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood cluster level reported in
     parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
                                 Table
                               Table A13:
                                       A28:Did
                                            Askyou    and
                                                 Forask forReceive Private
                                                            and receive any Good,
                                                                            private with
                                                                                    help: Rainfall
                                                                                          Pooled Data
                                                                                                   (2012with 2013)
                                                                                                         andRainfall

                                                                                  All Municipalities             Municipalites with Incumbent Mayors
                                                                                                                       Running for Re-Election
                                                                             (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
       β1 : Treatment                                                     0.00757     0.00707      0.00771       -0.000351     -0.000675        0.00153
                                                                          (0.0102)    (0.0103)     (0.0103)       (0.0135)      (0.0135)       (0.0138)

       β2 : Clientelist Relationship                                  0.0756∗∗∗       0.0756∗∗∗    0.0775∗∗∗     0.0793∗∗∗     0.0793∗∗∗       0.0833∗∗∗
                                                                       (0.0196)        (0.0196)     (0.0200)      (0.0252)      (0.0252)       (0.0271)

       β3 : Rainfall                                                   -0.00824        -0.00804     -0.00232     -0.00304      -0.00301         0.00377
                                                                      (0.00935)       (0.00937)    (0.00967)     (0.0144)      (0.0144)        (0.0142)

       β4 : Treatment X Clientelist Relationship                      -0.0676∗∗∗      -0.0649∗∗   -0.0669∗∗∗     -0.0683∗∗     -0.0670∗∗       -0.0712∗∗
                                                                       (0.0252)        (0.0254)    (0.0258)       (0.0312)      (0.0310)       (0.0326)

       β5 : Treatment × Rainfall                                          -0.00510    -0.00194     -0.00640      -0.00636      -0.00544         -0.0124
                                                                          (0.0102)    (0.0106)     (0.0105)      (0.0148)      (0.0151)        (0.0150)




26
       β6 : Treatment × Rainfall × Clientelist Relationship                            -0.0169     0.00814                     -0.00426         0.0344
                                                                                      (0.0157)     (0.0242)                    (0.0209)        (0.0349)

       β7 : Rainfall × Clientelist Relationship                                                     -0.0253                                     -0.0388
                                                                                                   (0.0189)                                    (0.0285)

       Municipality Fixed Effects                                          Yes          Yes             Yes        Yes           Yes              Yes
       Year Fixed Effects                                                  Yes          Yes             Yes        Yes           Yes              Yes
       Observations                                                        4284         4284            4284       2192          2192             2192
       Mean of Dependent Variable                                                                      0.0903                                    0.0826
       Standard errors in parentheses
     Notes: Outcome variable is coded 1 if respondent reported requesting and receiving a private good from a local politician in 2012 or 2013; 0 otherwise.
       β1 is the coefficient on treatment and β4 is the coefficient on Treatment X Frequent Interactor With Politician
     Treatment   coefficient
       β5 is the is coded 1on    respondent
                              if Treatment X belongs
                                             Rainfall and
                                                      to a βparticipating   household in a neighborhood cluster selected for treatment; 0 otherwise. Marker for
                                                            6 is the coefficient on Treatment X Rainfall X Frequent Interactor
     clientelist
        Outcomerelationship  is coded one
                 variables: Probability     if a respondent
                                        of asking              conversed at least monthly with a local politician before the 2012 electoral campaign; 0 otherwise
                                                   for private help
     (see
        ∗ pdiscussion  p <Section
            < 0.10, ∗∗ in  0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                                  4.2.1). Standardized rainfall shocks are measured by the deviation of rainfall in the municipality during January-September
     of 2012 (or 2013) from the historic average rainfall during January-September of 1986-2011. Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood cluster level
     reported in parentheses. * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1% significance levels.
Appendix B: Cisterns Treatment and Electoral Outcomes – Adjustment of Re-
gressors and Procedures for Inference

    For analyses of the cistern intervention’s effects on electoral outcomes, this appendix

discusses the adjustment of regressors as well as procedures to conduct appropriate in-

ference. As emphasized in Section 4.2.2, the statistical significance of findings is robust

without any adjustments (see also Table 8). However, the procedure described below

improves estimation of the magnitude of treatment effects on electoral outcomes.

    Before further discussion, recall that the equation for estimating voting outcomes

for the incumbent mayoral candidate at a given electronic voting machine in a given

voting location (in a given municipality) is as follows:



                      yslm = αlm + γ1 · TV slm + γ2 · EV slm + γ3 · RV slm + eslm ,                        (5)

    where yslm is the number of votes for the incumbent mayor in electronic voting ma-

chine (i.e., “electoral section”) s, in voting location l, in municipality m. The regressor

of interest is TVslm , the number of treated individuals in our study assigned by electoral

authorities to vote in that particular machine. Other controls in the regression are EVslm ,

the overall number of individuals in our study assigned to that machine; αlm , a voting

location fixed effect to control for differential voting patterns across voting locations in a

municipality; and RVslm , the total number of registered voters assigned to that machine

(regardless of whether they are in our study sample). Recall that for a given voting ma-

chine, the proportion of voters from the experimental sample who are assigned to the

treatment condition is assigned randomly. Furthermore, within a given polling place,

citizens are assigned to a specific voting machine by electoral authorities.34 Therefore,

once we condition on the total number of individuals in the study registered to vote




34 Our   identification strategy is robust to any influence citizens may have regarding their polling place.


                                                       27
in the machine, we can identify γ1 – the effect of an additional person assigned to the

cisterns treatment on votes for the incumbent mayor.

   Adjustment of Regressors

   Although our study shows that the cisterns treatment significantly reduces votes

for the incumbent mayor – without conducting any adjustments – further considera-

tion is needed because specifications about electoral outcomes (but not about requests)

involve aggregate data. As mentioned in Section 4.2.2, Brazil releases electoral results

at the electronic voting machine level. Thus, for analyses of electoral results, we aggre-

gate the counts of treated and control individuals in our experimental sample for each

machine to construct explanatory variables. TVslm and EVslm sum how many treatment

and overall study participants were assigned by electoral authorities to vote in a par-

ticular machine in a given polling location. Accurately measuring treatment effects on

electoral outcomes with these aggregate data requires attention to three potential issues:

(a) treatment effects on voting by non-interviewed members of treated households (as

registered voters in sampled households were only interviewed if present during our

home visits); (b) spillover effects on neighbors’ voting behavior (e.g., due to sharing

water with ineligible, neighboring households); and (c) peer effects on neighbors’ vot-

ing behavior. Failing to address the possible undercounting of other treated household

members, as well as positive spillover and peer effects, could bias upward our esti-

mates of treatment effects (in absolute terms). Therefore, we adjust TVslm and EVslm to

incorporate estimates of: (a) how many non-interviewed individuals live in sampled

households, (b) how many live in other households in the neighborhood cluster with-

out a cistern at baseline (i.e., those potentially affected by spillover or peer effects of the

cisterns treatment), and (c) the probabilities that these individuals are assigned by their

voter registration cards to vote in the same locations and same voting machines as our

interviewees.




                                              28
   The following discussion explains the procedure for adjusting the number of treated

individuals (TVslm ); we follow an analogous procedure to adjust the total number of ex-

perimental subjects regressor (EVslm ).

   The regressor of interest, TVslm , can be expressed as follows:



                                             TVslm =     ∑ TVcslm ,                           (6)
                                                          c

   where TVcslm is the total number of treated voters in neighborhood cluster c assigned

to vote in electronic voting machine s, in voting location l, in municipality m. This can

be further decomposed into the following expression:

                                             h                                 i
                                        ∑           I,h      N I,h      N I,h−
                           TVslm =               TVcslm + TVcslm   + TVcslm      ,            (7)
                                         c

            I,h
   where TVcslm denotes voters who were interviewed (denoted by the superscript I)

from household h in cluster c and who are assigned (as specified by electoral authorities

on the respondent’s voting identification card) to vote in the machine denoted by slm.
   N I,h
TVcslm   refers to voters from the same household h who were not interviewed (denoted
                                         N I,h
by the superscript N I), and TVcslm − denotes all voters from households other than h

(i.e. households that were not part of our survey) from cluster c who are assigned to

vote in the machine denoted by slm. This can also be expressed as:

                                   h                                                     i
                              ∑           I,h      N I,h N I,h           N I,h−    N I,h
                 TVslm =               TVcslm + TVcm    πcslm + TVcm              πcslm − ,   (8)
                               c

            N I,h                                                                   N I,h
   where TVcm     is the total number of voters not interviewed in household h and πcslm

is the proportion of these voters who are assigned to vote in machine s in location l.
                  N I,h−
Analogously, TVcm          is the total number of voters belonging to all other households in
                                         N I,h
the neighborhood cluster and πcslm − is the proportion of these voters who are assigned

to vote in machine s in location l.




                                                        29
   To estimate TVslm , we obtain each of the quantities on the right side of Equation 4 in

the following manner:
                    I,h
   (a) We obtain TVcslm directly from a question in our survey, which inquires about

which electronic voting machine the respondent is assigned to vote (as specified by

electoral authorities on the respondent’s voting identification card).
                    N I,h
   (b) We obtain TVcm     directly from a question in the baseline survey, which includes

information about all household members.
                          N I,h−
   (c) We estimate TVcm            from responses to two questions in our surveys. The first

question (in our localization survey) asked how many neighboring households do not

have water cisterns. The second question (in the baseline survey) provides information

about how many household members are of voting age. With these data by cluster, we
             N I,h−
estimate TVcm         by using the median of households’ responses about the number of

neighboring households without cisterns × the median number of household members

of voting age.
                    N I,h             N I,h
   (d) To estimate πcslm  and πcslm − , we assume these proportions are equivalent and

do not vary across electronic voting machines and voting locations in our sample. We
               N I,h          N I,h
then estimate πcslm  and πcslm − by assigning non-interviewed individuals probabilisti-

cally (by neighborhood cluster) across machines and locations. To do so, we undertake

several steps described below.

   First, we estimate the probability that survey respondents vote in the same mu-

nicipalities, voting locations, and electronic voting machines as others (i.e., as uninter-

viewed voters in sampled households and as voters in other households in sampled

clusters); it is assumed these probabilities are equal across neighborhood clusters. In

a second step, we assign non-interviewed voters probabilistically to the machines and

locations in which individuals within and outside our sample of respondents are desig-

nated to vote (as specified by electoral authorities on voting identification cards). More




                                                30
                         N I,h           N I,h
precisely, we estimate πcslm   and πcslm − as follows:
                       
                                                        
                          Ihslm . TV I,h / TV I,h                     I,h
                       
                       
                       
                        θ               cslm  ∑ s  cslm        i f TVcslm >0
                       
                       
    N I,h    N I,h−
                                                          
  πcslm   = πcslm   ,=   θ Ih,s− ,lm . RV I,h/ RV I,h
                                            slm ∑s     slm
                                                                       I,h
                                                                i f TVcslm             I,h
                                                                           = 0 & ∑s TVcslm >0
                       
                       
                       
                       
                        (θ Ih,s− ,l− ,m + θ Ih,s− ,l− ,m− )0             I,h
                                                                i f ∑s TVcslm
                       
                                                                             =0
                                                                                                (9)

    where:

    θ Ihslm is the probability an individual outside our sample is assigned to vote in

the same voting machine as respondents in our sample. That is, θ Ihslm = P(Sample Municipality) ·

P(Sample Location | Sample Municipality) · P(Sample Section | Sample Location);

    θ Ih,s− ,lm is the probability an individual outside our sample is assigned to vote in

another voting machine – but in the same voting location – as respondents in our

sample. That is, θ Ih,s− ,lm = P(Sample Municipality) · P(Sample Location | Sample Municipality) ·

(1 − P(Sample Section | Sample Location));
    θ Ih,s− ,l− ,m is the probability an individual outside our sample is assigned to vote

in another voting location in the municipality. That is, θ Ih,s− ,l− ,m = P(Sample Municipality) ·

(1 − P(Sample Location | Sample Municipality)); and
    θ Ih,s− ,l− ,m− is the probability an individual outside our sample is assigned to vote in

another municipality. That is, θ Ih,s− ,l− ,m− = 1 − P(Sample Municipality).
                          N I,h              N I,h
    In order to estimate πcslm  and πcslm − in Equation (9), the next step is to estimate

each θ just described. To this end, we use the following estimates from our surveys:

(i) P(Sample Municipality) = 90.5 percent of respondents are registered to vote in the

municipality where their household cluster is located (as specified by electoral author-

ities on voting identification cards);

(ii) among the subet of voters in (i), P(Sample Location | Sample Municipality) = 86.9

percent are registered to vote in the same voting location; and

(iii) among those registered to vote in the same location, P(Sample Section | Sample Location)

= 40.2 percent are registered to voting machines in our sample of machines with respon-

                                                     31
                            I,h
dents assigned to these (TVcslm > 0).
Using this information, we estimate each θ in Equation (9) as follows:

    (1) 31.6 percent (= 0.905 × 0.869 × 0.402) of non-respondents are registered to vote

in the same sets of electronic voting machines as those of our respondents. That is, we

assign θ Ihslm = 31.6 percent in equal proportion to the distribution across machines in

which respondents from the neighborhood cluster registered to vote;

    (2) 47.0 percent (= 0.905 ×0.869 × (1 - 0.402)) of non-respondents are registered to

vote in other machines in the same voting locations as those of our repondents. That

is, we assign θ Ih,s− ,lm = 47.0 percent in equal proportion to the distribution of registered

voters across the remaining machines of the voting locations in which our respondents

are registered to vote;

    (3) The remaining 21.4 percent of non-respondents are registered to vote outside

electronic voting machines in which our respondents are registered. More specifically,

θ Ih,s− ,l− ,m = P(Sample Municipality) · (1 − P(Sample Location | Sample Municipality))

(= 0.905 × (1 - 0.869) = 11.9 percent) of non-respondents are assigned to other voting

locations in the municipality, whereas θ Ih,s− ,l− ,m− = 1 − P(Sample Municipality) (= (1 -

0.905) = 9.5 percent) are assigned to vote in other municipalities. Both of these groups

are outside our scope of analysis.35

    Inference

    To conduct appropriate inference about electoral outcomes (but not citizen requests),

recall that two points require consideration. First, sampling error of the adjusted re-

gressors must be taken into account. And second, because we allow the errors to be

correlated across voting machines and locations within a municipality, our sample is

composed of 21 “clusters” – that is, municipalities in which the mayor is running for

reelection. To address both points, we report p-values from a wild cluster bootstrap-t

procedure. This procedure not only addresses the fact that we have a limited number of

35 Becausewe restrict the analysis to the voting locations where interviewed individuals are assigned to
 vote, we effectively exclude individuals in this category for purposes of the adjustment.


                                                  32
clusters (Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller 2008), but also takes into account sampling error

of the adjusted regressors through bootstrapped sampling of the data used to construct

estimates (Horowitz 2001). More specifically, to take the sampling error into account,

we bootstrap the entire quantification exercise 1,000 times. In each replication, we draw

a random sample of neighborhood clusters (sampling with replacement), and estimate

each of the following: the number of neighboring households, the number of registered

voters per neighboring household, and the proportion of individuals assigned to vote

across locations and machines. This nonparametric bootstrap exercise allows us to con-

struct p-values of the test of no impact of the treatment on electoral outcomes (γ1 = 0)

(Horowitz 2001). We carry out an analogous procedure to adjust the EVslm control (i.e.,

the overall number of individuals in our study assigned to a given machine) and the

p-value of the γ2 = 0 statistical test. To address the small number of municipalities is-

sue, we implement a wild cluster bootstrap procedure in each of the bootstrap samples

above to generate replicate estimates of the Wald statistics for the γ1 = 0 and γ2 = 0

statistical tests (Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller 2008).

   This procedure leads us to adjust our estimates of the treatment effects of the in-

tervention on electoral outcomes downwards, making our inferences about treatment

effects more conservative. Panel B of Table 8 reports the point estimates from the spec-

ification with the adjusted regressors of interest along with p-values from the non-

parametric and wild cluster bootstrap procedure. Finally, for purposes of comparabil-

ity, we report in Panel A p-values from a standard wild cluster bootstrap procedure that

does not take into account sampling error in the construction of the adjusted regressors.

While the adjustment allows us to gain confidence in the appropriate magnitude of the

treatment effects of the intervention, this indicates that the relationship and the degree

of precision of our inference is driven by the underlying data and not by the adjustment

procedure.




                                           33
1    Summary Stats for Voting Outcomes
                       Table B1: Summary Statistics for Voting Outcomes
                                   Table 1: Voting Outcomes: Summary Measures



                               Variable                             All Voting Locations      Locations in
                                                                       in Municipality     Estimation Sample


    Number of Voting Locations per Municipality                             32.4                  9.1
                                                                           (35.8)                (6.0)

    Number of Voting Machines per Municipality                             133.4                 43.3
                                                                          (164.3)               (22.2)

    Number of Registered Voters per Municipality                          43241.0              14633.7
                                                                         (54150.1)             (8342.8)

    Number of Registered Voters per Machine                                323.4                330.2
                                                                           (33.2)               (43.3)

    Number of Votes for Incumbent Mayor per Machine                        116.2                118.1
                                                                           (31.2)               (34.1)

    Number of Votes for Challenging Mayoral Candidate per Machine          135.6                138.5
                                                                           (30.6)               (30.9)

    Number of Blank/Invalid Votes in Mayoral Election per Machine          18.4                  18.5
                                                                           (4.2)                 (3.7)

    Turnout per Machine                                                    270.2                275.1
                                                                           (28.7)               (32.0)

    Number of Respondents per Machine                                           -                1.05
                                                                                -               (1.68)

    Number of Treated Respondents per Machine                                   -                0.50
                                                                                -               (1.14)

    Number of Control Respondents per Machine                                   -                0.55
                                                                                -               (1.16)



    Notes: The table displays means as well as standard deviations in parenthesis.




                                                      34
    Table B2: Voting Outcomes: Balance Across Machines in Voters’ Characteristics
                                    Table 1: Effect on Voters’ Characteristics


                                               Age          Schooling         Clientelist     Female
                                                              Years          Relationship   Respondents
                                               (1)             (2)                 (3)           (4)
  Number of Treated Individuals              -0.129           0.004               0.006        -0.005
                                             [0.416]         [0.808]             [0.294]      [0.128]

  Number of Respondents                      -0.020           0.003              -0.001        0.004
                                             [0.634]         [0.708]             [0.582]      [0.216]

  Total Registered Voters                      Yes             Yes                Yes           Yes
  Location Fixed Effects                       Yes             Yes                Yes           Yes
  Observations                                 909             909                909           909
  Mean of Dependent Variable                   39.2            6.4               0.346         0.547
   Bootstrap     p-value using
   Notes: Bootstrapped          wild clustered
                           p-values  using wildbootstrapped  standard errors
                                                 clustered bootstrapped      in brackets.
                                                                        standard  errors in brackets. Marker
for∗ clientelist  ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
      p < 0.10, relationship  is coded one if a respondent conversed at least monthly with a local politician
before the 2012 electoral campaign; 0 otherwise (see discussion in Section 4.2.1).




                                                       35
Appendix C: Survey Questions for Key Variables

1.- Variable: Request for Private Goods (asked in 2012 and 2013).

   • Definition: Respondent requested private good from a local politician.

   • Coded 1 if answered yes to requesting from politician, unless specifying that the

      request was for a non-private benefit; 0 otherwise.

   • Questions used in 2012 round to define this variable:

         – (a) “This year, did you ask a city councilor candidate for help?”;

         – (b) [If yes:] “What did you ask for?”;

         – (c) “This year, did you ask a mayor candidate for help?”;

         – (d) [If yes:] “What did you ask for?”

   • Identical questions were asked in 2013, first inquiring about requests of candi-

      dates who won the election, and then inquiring about requests of candidates who

      lost the election.

2.- Variable: Ask for and Receive Private Good (asked in 2012 and 2013).

   • Definition: Respondent reported receiving private good requested from a politi-

      cian.

   • Coded 1 if answered yes to receiving a requested private good; 0 otherwise.

   • This variable is generated from a question asked directly after Request variable

      described above. Question: “Did you receive it?”

3.- Variable: Talked Monthly with Politicians Before 2012 Campaign (asked in 2012).

   • Definition: Respondent reports conversing with a political candidate at least monthly

      before the 2012 campaign began.


                                             36
   • Coded 1 if answered yes to having spoken with politician at least monthly; 0 oth-

      erwise.

   • Questions:

         – (a) “This year, did you speak with any city councilor candidate?”;

         – (b) [If yes:] “How often before the political campaign (before June)?”;

         – (c) “This year, did you speak with any mayor candidate?”;

         – (d) [If yes:] “How often before the political campaign (before June)?”

4.- Variable: Declared Support (asked in 2012).

   • Definition: Respondent publicly declared support for any political candidate dur-

      ing the 2012 election.

   • Coded 1 if answered yes to any of the following four questions; 0 otherwise: “Let’s

      talk about this year’s political campaign, that is, about the last 3 months before the

      October election.

         – (a) Did you wear a candidate’s sticker or shirt?”;

         – (b) [Asked of rally attendees] “In this rally, did you use a flag, shirt or any-

           thing else to show your support?”;

         – (c) “During the electoral campaign, did you put a flag or a poster on your

           house?”;

         – (d) “Was the wall of your house painted with the name of a candidate?”




                                             37
