NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A WELFARIST ROLE FOR NONWELFARIST RULES:
AN EXAMPLE WITH ENVY
Matthew Weinzierl
Working Paper 23587
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23587

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2017

Thanks to Louis Kaplow, Benjamin B. Lockwood, Francois Maniquet, Hannah Sha§er, Itai Sher,
Lucas Stanczyk, and Stefanie Stantcheva for insightful discussions and to Jiafeng Chen and
Molly Wharton for both exceptional comments and research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Matthew Weinzierl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

A Welfarist Role for Nonwelfarist Rules: An example with envy
Matthew Weinzierl
NBER Working Paper No. 23587
July 2017
JEL No. D61,H21
ABSTRACT
I propose and formalize an argument for why economists working in the welfarist normative
tradition should include nonwelfarist principles in how they judge economic policy. The key idea
behind this argument is that the world is too complex, and our ability to model it too limited, for
us to fully trace a policy's effects on welfare. Nonwelfarist principles can be valuable to a
welfarist facing this limitation if they act as informational proxies, carrying accumulated
knowledge about the effects of policy that otherwise cannot be considered. This argument can be
seen both as extending a familiar logic for rule utilitarianism beyond the realm of individual
ethics and as a specific version of a broader argument made for centuries by theorists from Hume
to Hayek. I also provide evidence of an example in which real-world policy judgments are
consistent with this theoretical argument. Results from a novel U.S. opinion survey show that
approximately half of respondents reject redistribution driven by envy even though it generates
direct utilitarian gains. That share rises as the role of envy is made more salient, consistent with
respondents using nonwelfarist principles to encode concerns about the unobservable
consequences of policy.

Matthew Weinzierl
Harvard Business School
277 Morgan
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mweinzierl@hbs.edu

Introduction
In this paper, my …rst goal is to propose and formalize an argument for why economists working in
the welfarist normative tradition should include nonwelfarist principles in how they judge economic
policy. If accepted, this argument would have broad implications for the dominant modern approach
to policy analysis.
The key idea behind this argument is that the world is too complex, and our ability to model
it too limited, for us to fully trace a policy’s e¤ects on welfare. To see why this limitation may
justify the use of nonwelfarist principles, start with opposite (conventional) case in which a policy
designer is able to predict a given policy’s full set of consequences or, more generally, the probability
distribution across full sets of consequences. This is the setting Louis Kaplow and Steven Shavell
(2001) assume, following a vast related literature, and in it they derive their well-known, important,
and powerful result: namely, "any non-welfarist method of policy assessment violates the Pareto
principle." The intuition behind their result is that an omniscient, welfarist policy designer will
unavoidably risk sacri…cing welfare by giving weight to anything other than welfare, including
nonwelfarist principles, in policy assessments. In reality, however, even the most sophisticated
policy designer falls far short of omniscience.
Nonwelfarist principles can be valuable to a welfarist policy designer facing this limitation if
they act as informational proxies, carrying accumulated knowledge about the e¤ects of policy that
otherwise cannot be considered. In that case, ignoring nonwelfarist principles means ignoring
useful information about welfare-maximizing policy design. The implication is clear: to select
policies that maximize a welfarist objective, our methods of policy assessment may at times, and
perhaps regularly, need to include nonwelfarist principles. Kaplow and Shavell (2001) themselves
acknowledge1 this possibility in principle, but modern optimal tax research ignores it in practice.
In fact, Liam Murphy and Thomas Nagel (2002) praise modern tax theory in the Mirrlees (1971)
tradition for its purely welfarist approach.2
The second goal of this paper is to provide evidence of an example in which real-world policy
judgments are consistent with this theoretical argument.3 I focus on the tax policy response to
the existence of envy, a classic area of tension for welfarism. When individuals su¤er psychological
losses from the economic gains of others, those gains yield less welfare to society as a whole than
they do to the envied. In a welfarist framework, envy thus acts as a negative externality from
economic advantage, and optimal tax policy will respond with greater redistribution.4
Using a novel opinion survey, I show that the American public is skeptical of envy-based redistribution, even when its direct e¤ect would be to increase welfare. More than half of survey
respondents reject envy-based redistribution when presented with a hypothetical scenario in which
its direct utilitarian appeal is made clear.5 Moreover, that share rises as the role of envy is made
more salient, and respondents who express more support for libertarianism–a classic alternative
1

For example, they write: "a notion of fairness might be useful for policymaking if it serves as a good proxy
principle for raising utilities when direct assessment of policies cannot be undertaken."
2
See also the extensive defense of the social welfare function as a criterion for policy evaluation in Matthew Adler
(2011). Adler describes (in his Chapter 4) a way in which a policy designer can extend a limited set of information.
My argument suggests an alternative approach.
3
See Weinzierl (2014, 2016a, 2016b) for additional examples.
4
See Boskin and Sheshinski (1978, result 11) as well as Oswald (1995, result 18).
5
As I discuss below, public opinion thereby echoes the responses to envy-based redistribution of even staunchly
welfarist scholars. For example, Kaplow (2008) is characteristically clear: "In sum, it seems di¢ cult to articulate the
actual meaning of preference censoring or to identify a convincing rationale for ignoring, as a matter of …rst principles,
certain sorts of preferences. Nevertheless, it may be good social policy to set aside certain negative preferences, such
as envy."

2

to welfarism–are less likely to accomodate envy’s welfare implications. These patterns are consistent with respondents using nonwelfarist principles to encode concerns about the indirect welfare
consequences of policy.
One way to see the argument of this paper is as extending the reach of a logic for so-called rule
utilitarianism from the the realm of individual ethics to society’s policymaking decisions. Moral
philosophers have long recognized that individuals, even if seeking to act so as to produce the best
outcomes, must sometimes act according to rules that make no direct reference to the consequences
of their actions. John Stuart Mill (1871) calls these nonwelfarist rules "secondary principles," and
like many others he emphasizes their importance in achieving an underlying welfarist goal.6 John
Harsanyi (1992) is particularly clear: "rule utilitarianism is free to choose a moral code that judges
the moral value of individual actions partly in terms of nonconsequentialist criteria if use of such
criteria increases social utility." The argument of this paper is that this logic for why individuals
making ethical choices ought to use principles based on what Mill called "the experience of human
life" applies just as well to the di¢ cult normative judgments societies must make.
The general version of this argument–namely, that policy design ought to be in‡uenced by
principles re‡ecting society’s accumulated wisdom–is far from original to this paper.7 Most prominently, Friedrich Hayek (1973) warns that "irremediable ignorance of most of the particular facts
which determine the processes of society" prevents us from anticipating "all the costs of achieving
particular results" and compels us to give weight to such principles. Related observations can be
found in the writings of eminent thinkers such as David Hume, Adam Smith, and Edmund Burke.8
Despite its empirical plausibility and intellectual pedigree, this general argument exerts essentially no in‡uence on the modern welfarist approach to optimal policy analysis, with predictable
consequences. As I and others have discussed elsewhere, and as the evidence below on the response
to envy suggests, that standard approach yields policy recommendations that appear to be at odds
with prevailing public priorities for policy, priorities that in turn appear to be consistent with historically prominent nonwelfarist principles.9 By advancing an argument for why such nonwelfarist
principles may further, rather than displace, welfarist goals, this paper hopes to engage researchers
who embrace the standard approach.
This paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 formalizes, in a setting based on Kaplow and Shavell
(2001), how incorporating nonwelfarist principles may be optimal in the face of limits to the information society has on a policy’s consequences. Section 2 turns to an example of this argument
in action, reviewing the controversial implications of envy for welfarist-optimal taxation and using
new survey results to show how public opinion against envy-based redistribution appears to re‡ect
the in‡uence of nonwelfarist principles on policy judgments. Section 3 links this argument to the
vast literature on the use of rules in individual utilitarian ethics and earlier, more general versions
of this argument as a response to intractable complexity. Section 4 concludes.
6
"Whatever we adopt as the fundamental principle of morality, we require subordinate principles to apply it by..."
(U, II, pp. 296-297).
7
In addition to the authors noted below, the current work of Eric Nelson (2016) on the link between egalitarianism
and the problem of theodicy is closely, if subtly, related to the argument of this paper.
8
Given this list of authors, it may be important to note that the logic for using nonwelfarist principles to achieve
welfarist goals is not exclusively relevant to those on the political "right." On the contrary, the same logic applies
for those on the political "left" whose welfarism gives priority to the worst o¤ and whose resulting policy preferences
support, among other things, progressive taxation. An empirical example, explained at length by Scheve and Stasavage
(2016), is the use of Mill’s principle of Equal Sacri…ce to justify the estate tax in developed economies throughout
the twentieth century.
9
See Weinzierl (2014, 2016a, 2016b), in which I present evidence on the in‡uence of Mill’s (1871) Equal Sacri…ce
principle and Smith’s (1776) view, described by Musgrave (1959) as Classical Bene…t-Based Taxation. Work by Saez
and Stancheva (2015) and Charité, Fisman, and Kuziemko (2016) identi…es related departures of policy and public
opinion from common normative assumptions.

3

1

A formal illustration of the role for nonwelfarist rules

To provide a formal statement of this paper’s main argument, I generalize the framework in which
Kaplow and Shavell (2001) analyze the con‡ict between welfarism and nonwelfarist principles.

1.1

Full information

Start by assuming, as in Kaplow and Shavell (2001), that the policy designer is able to predict
(perhaps probabilistically) the complete set of a policy’s consequences. Let x denote a vector
of length n of data characterizing the state of the world: that is, a comprehensive account of
anything that might be relevant to policy judgments, including but not limited to aspects of the
economic status of individuals. For simplicity, I will refer to x as the state. Let X be the set
of all possible states. The function F : X ! R is what I will call the social objective function
and is used to make policy judgments. The function Ui : X ! R gives the welfare of individual i,
though welfare is not directly observable. A social objective function will be called welfarist if it
depends on the state x only through individual welfare levels: that is if it takes the form F (x) =
W (U1 (x) ; U2 (x) ; :::; UI (x)) W (U (x)). Assume that, for all i and Ui; @W
0: Note that a social
@Ui
objective function may depend on the state in other, i.e., nonwelfarist, ways. De…ne the Pareto
social preference relation P over two states xs ; xt 2 X as usual: xs P xt i¤ Ui (xs ) Ui xt for
all i and Ui (xs ) > Ui xt for some i:
Consider two states, x1 ; x2 2 X; for which
x1

P

x2 :

(1)

Then,
W U x1

> W U x2

;

(2)

and a policy designer choosing between states based on maximizing a welfarist social objective will
choose the Pareto-preferred state, x1 .

1.2

Limited information

Suppose, instead, that the policy designer understands the welfare implications of only the …rst m <
n elements of x. For simplicity, I will denote this vector of data and refer to it as the observable
state. For each state xs , I will use s to denote its associated observable state. Speci…cally, the
elements of xs not in s are aspects of the state of the world that may a¤ect individual welfare, but
the policy designer is either unaware of those e¤ects, unable to model them, or in some other way
cannot form beliefs about how they a¤ect individual welfare.10 Recall that U (x) is unobservable, so
the designer cannot directly estimate these e¤ects.11 Let be the set of all . Denote the individual
welfare function de…ned on this limited information V : ! R. Retain the same de…nitions and
notation for the social objective function and Pareto social preference relation as above, but now
F :
! R, the welfare arguments of any F are the functions V , and P is de…ned using the
functions V over observable states 2 :
10
I do not take a stand on which of these reasons is at play in any given circumstance. At times, society may be
truly unaware of elements of the state space that matter to individual welfare. At other times, society may be unable
to model the channels through which those elements matter.
11
This point intersects with the limitations of econometrics. In many areas of tax policy, for example, many
outcomes of interest or determinants of such outcomes are functionally unobservable.

4

1.2.1

A misleading observable state

Consider the speci…c but plausible case in which the observable state
For example, consider the case in which, for the pairs 1 ; x1 and
x1

x2 ; but

P

1

2

P

is what I will call misleading.
;

2 ; x2

.

(3)

That is, while the superiority of state x1 is clear under full information, under limited information
the Pareto-ranking of the states reverses and x2 appears, through 2 , to be the better choice. Then,
W U x1

> W U x2

1

; but W V

<W V

2

:

(4)

In words, with misleading information, the policy designer choosing between states based on a
welfarist social objective will mistakenly choose x2 (by choosing 2 ) even though x1 is Pareto
preferred.
1.2.2

A welfarist role for nonwelfarist rules

In this case, information from the observable states 1 and 2 may help the policy designer avoid
this mistake. Consider an element of that takes di¤erent values in states x1 and x2 . A social
objective function may depend on , and in so doing capture omitted, welfare-relevant information
about the state x.
In particular, de…ne a social objective function F^ such that, despite the misleading information,
F^ V

1

;

1

> F^ V

2

;

2

:

(5)

That is, if the policy designer uses this nonwelfarist (or more precisely, not purely welfarist) social
objective function, state x1 will be preferred, consistent with the Pareto criterion.12 The intuition
for this result is that
carries relevant information about x that is understandable even when
other, welfare-relevant components of x are not.13

1.3

Relationship to Kaplow and Shavell (2001)

The preceding analysis relates to Kaplow and Shavell’s in an instructive way, in that it shows how
limited information can create a situation in which a welfarist policy designer correctly (from its
own perspective) using a nonwelfarist social objective appears to be violating the Pareto criterion,
as those authors emphasize.
Consider the pair 0 ; x0 , where 0 2 and x0 2 X. Suppose that, for all i,
Vi

1

= Vi

0

(6)

12
An ideal F^ : ! R would yield recommendations "close to" the true social objective function F : X ! R. The
process by which society decides on such an F^ , including how it chooses , is an important topic for further research.
That task may be facilitated by the fundamentally welfarist social objective assumed here, as welfarism makes the
ranking of options relatively straightforward. In the speci…c case of tax policy, work on principles such as Mill’s equal
sacri…ce or Smith’s classical bene…t-based taxation suggest they are promising candidates for nonwelfarist principles
implicitly chosen by (at least U.S.) society (see Scheve and Stasavage 2016, Weinzierl 2014, 2016a, 2016b). Thanks
to Jiafeng Chen for suggesting this discussion.
13
Note that V cannot depend directly on . By assumption, the planner cannot know how the omitted welfarerelevant aspects of the state directly a¤ect utilities. That assumed limitation is why F^ gives weight to the proxy
directly. A di¤erent case, which I do not consider, is if individuals internalize a direct concern for the information in
, in which case would be an appropriate argument of V . The policy designer will nevertheless retain an incentive
to put weight on
in F^ in that case, as the individuals’ internalized concerns for
may fail to match society’s
optimal consideration of : For a related discussion, see Kaplow 2008, p. 358.

5

but that the same social objective function as above, F^ (V ( ) ; ), yields:
F^ V

1

;

1

> F^ V

0

;

0

:

(7)

In words, the observable welfare implications of the observable states 1 and 0 are the same, but
the nonwelfarist F^ prefers 1 because of its value of .
As Kaplow and Shavell show, the nonwelfarist nature of F^ (V ( ) ; ) may make it appear as
though a policy designer using it is violating the Pareto criterion in this case. To see why, suppose
that the state x2 , the same state as in the limited information case above, relates to x0 in a speci…c
way. Namely, all individuals have slightly more of a component xk of x that they positively and
continuously value in x2 than in x0 (i.e., x2k = x0k + for > 0), but all other aspects of x2 and x0
are unchanged.14 Assume k < m, so that xk is included in the observable state . Then,
1

P

2

,

(8)

because for some > 0 the observable state 2 yields greater welfare for all individuals than does
1 . Recall, however, from the limited information case above, condition (5) relating these two
observable states:
F^ V 1 ; 1 > F^ V 2 ; 2 :
(9)
Conditions such as (8) and (9) lead Kaplow and Shavell, in the full-information analogue to this
example, to conclude that the nonwelfarist social objective function F^ causes the policy designer
using it to violate the Pareto criterion (i.e., by choosing 1 over 2 ).
In this limited information setting, however, we know from condition (3) that:
x1

P

x2 ;

(10)

because components of the states not included in the observable states make x1 Pareto-preferred
to x2 (and x0 ): That is, the observable states 0 ; 1 ; and 2 are misleading.
This example shows, then, that the conclusion opposite to Kaplow and Shavell’s may be merited:
if a nonwelfarist function takes into account otherwise unobservable, welfare-relevant information,
it can help to ensure that the Pareto criterion is respected.

1.4

Examples

To make this formalization more concrete, suppose that the distinction between and x is due to
time horizon. That is, the policy designer cannot see in…nitely far into the future, so the e¤ects on
welfare of elements in x but not in are impossible to model. Fortunately, past human experience
has found that those hidden e¤ects are systematically related to
2 , a feature of the state
that is observable far before the e¤ects occur, perhaps due to inertia or other complex channels of
causality. Society has therefore developed, and passed from generation to generation, a principle
regarding . A welfarist planner will, in this situation, want to put weight on that principle.
To be even more concrete, suppose that an important welfare-relevant element of x not included
in is the degree of interpersonal trust in a society, and is the extent to which envy is acknowledged as a morally legitimate emotion in that society in a preceding generation. A policy designer
may be unable to model how welfare generations in the future will be impacted by a current policy’s e¤ect on future levels of interpersonal trust. But, that policy designer may be able to choose
a policy that supports or undermines the moral legitimacy of envy in the current generation. If
14

I thus adopt Kaplow and Shavell’s two mild technical assumptions.

6

accommodating envy has tended to lower interpersonal trust–and thus overall welfare–in the past,
society is likely to have developed a policymaking principle that discourages it. In that case, a policy
designer will correctly attend to that nonwelfarist principle when making policy assessments.
As I will discuss in the next section, this last example …ts well with both scholarly and popular
resistance to envy-based redistribution in reality. It may be hard to explain precisely why many of
us reject a policy that accommodates envy, though we may be con…dent in that judgment. In fact,
many of us would agree that a policy accommodating envy is less likely to produce a Pareto-superior
outcome than one that does not, so that the appearance of a Pareto-improving accommodation of
envy would be misleading. We believe it would be missing something relevant to overall welfare
even if we cannot say exactly what that something is.

2

A welfarist role for nonwelfarist rules in action: resistance to
welfare-increasing, envy-based redistribution

In this section, I provide evidence of an example in which it appears that policy preferences are
consistent with this paper’s theoretical argument for the use of nonwelfarist rules. I focus on the role
of envy in justifying income redistribution. First, I brie‡y review how tax theorists have responded
to the complications introduced by the presence of envy. Then, I present the results of a new survey
showing popular skepticism toward envy-based redistribution that appears to re‡ect the in‡uence
of nonwelfarist principles.

2.1

The welfarist’s dilemma with envy in standard optimal tax theory

Given a standard welfarist social objective function, the direct implications of envy for optimal tax
policy are to increase the extent of redistribution. Boskin and Sheshinski (1978) and Oswald (1992)
show this result in linear and nonlinear tax environments, respectively. For the purposes of this
paper, a simpler setup is su¢ cient. I focus directly on allocations of resources, broadly construed,
and show that the acceptance of envy may cause a reversal in the welfarist preferences over two
allocations.
Consider the following utility function for individual i comparing himself or herself to individual
j, where yi is a measure of economic resources and ; , and are scalars:
2
3
!1
y
i
4
Ui (yi ; yj ) =
15 :
(11)
1
(max fyi ; yj g)
Note that utility in (11) depends on envy through the ratio of individual i0 s resources to the
maximum level of individual resources in the population (here, of only two individuals).15 The
parameter controls the degree of envy: = 0 means envy exerts no in‡uence on utility; = 1
means that only i’s income relative to the maximum matters for i’s utility.16
15
This utility function is a standard representation of envy, but it could capture nonenvious concerns about the
e¤ects of relative status on wellbeing.
16
This utility function’s form of envy follows Rawls’(1971) de…nition: "We envy persons whose situation is superior
to ours...and we are willing to deprive them of their greater bene…ts even if it is necessary to give up something
ourselves." (pp. 532-5) Rawls made an important distinction, summarized in Fleurbaey et al. (2008), in that he
"did accept legitimate forms of resentment induced by inequalities, while at the same time rejecting feelings of envy
as irrelevant for social evaluation." Adam Smith (1759) similarly de…nes envy as "that passion which views with
malignant dislike the superiority of those who are really entitled to all the superiority they possess."

7

The following table displays two allocations of resources and the resulting well-being levels for
di¤erent values of .17

Person i
Person j
Total

Table 1: Envy and well-being
Resources
Well-being, = 0
Alloc. 1 Alloc. 2
Alloc. 1 Alloc. 2
5,000
6,000
139.3
139.8
10,000
16,000
140.7
141.2
15,000
22,000
280.0
281.0

Well-being, = 0:65
Alloc. 1 Alloc. 2
120
110
160
166
280
276

Note that Allocation 2 provides both individuals with greater resources but increases inequality
between them. One way to interpret these allocations is that Allocation 1 can be obtained from
Allocation 2 through a policy that destroys resources to achieve greater equality.
This example illustrates the power of envy to make welfarist-optimal policy more redistributive:
a utilitarian will prefer Allocation 1 if envy’s e¤ects on well-being are considered normatively
relevant, but the same utilitarian will prefer Allocation 2 if not. That is, as Table 1 shows, Allocation
2 provides a greater sum of well-being if each individual’s utility function is independent of the
other’s allocation (i.e., when = 0). However, in the case of = 0:65, where envy of the most
advantaged lowers Person i’s well-being, total well-being is greater in Allocation 1.
The welfarist logic for redistribution based on envy has been endorsed, perhaps grudgingly, by
some economists and philosophers. They argue that, if envy re‡ects a real factor in well-being, it
should count in our welfarist policy evaluations. Hare (1981), for example, writes: "...Envy has been
accounted a sin; but its existence is a fact relevant to moral thinking. If there were good arguments
in favour of inequalities, there would be equally good arguments in favour of suppressing envy. But
if there are already arguments against the inequalities, it is likely to be better to remove the envy
by removing the inequalities than by preaching against it as a sin." Rakowski (1991) makes the
broader point: "utilitarianism forsakes its motivating idea and produces unattractive consequences
if it excludes external preferences from its calculus."
On the other hand, many leading economists and philosophers (welfarist and otherwise) ‡atly
reject policy that accommodates envy. Some argue that accommodating envy would not yield
even directly welfarist gains.18 But most take a more indirect route. For example, Harsanyi (1982)
strongly argues for omitting envy from welfare calculations because it is an example of "clearly
antisocial preferences" while "the basis of utilitarianism is benevolence." Mirrlees’s (1971) model
assumes away other-regarding preferences, consistent with his later arguments that they can be
generally disregarded (Mirrlees 1982, p. 76). Hayek’s opposition is vehement: "However human,
envy is certainly not one of the sources of discontent that a free society can eliminate. It is probably
one of the essential conditions for the preservation of such a society that we do not countenance
envy, not sanction its demands by camou‡aging it as social justice, but treat it, in the words of John
Stuart Mill, as ’the most anti-social and evil of all passions.’" Thomas Nagel (1995) recognizes that
17

I set = 2 for each situation and let vary to scale total well-being to 280 in both instances of Allocation 1.
These choices are unimportant for the results.
18
For example, Rakowski (1991) writes that envy "tends to create much petty dissatisfaction and little genuine happiness." Or, following Banerjee (1990), if envy is driven by ordinal, not cardinal di¤erences, it cannot be ameliorated
by reducing inequality and anything short of full redistribution–which may be impossible for incentive reasons–is
counterproductive. Nozick (1974) asserted that envy is inherently multidimensional and that a "conservation of
envy" law applies such that removing disparities of one sort, say in income, will simply heighten envy along other
dimensions. And Elizabeth Anderson (1999) noted that acknowledging envy makes the envious feel worthless, and
any envy-based redistribution is pointless. As I explain below, my survey is designed to avoid these possibilities and
isolate the case in which accommodating envy would directly raise overall welfare.

8

"...it must be acknowledged that such inequalities [of status] can cause a good deal of pain...But in
the end, the unhappiness of unsuccessful contenders, or the low self-esteem of those who cannot even
make the attempt, are not evils that a decent society should be asked to weigh in the balance against
the concentrated support of what is best. Such inequalities are inextricable from the recognition
and pursuit of certain values too important to be compromised."
One interpretation of this brief review is that the scholarly debate over tax policy’s response to
envy pits pure, or direct, welfarists against those who look past envy’s direct welfare implications
and rely on indirectly welfarist reasoning that is encoded into nonwelfarist principles. I now turn
to evidence on how the public wrestles with that same dilemma.

2.2

New evidence on popular resistance to envy-based redistribution

First, I describe the survey.19 I listed the survey on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (M-Turk) platform20
in mid-2016, and approximately 750 respondents were paid $2.50 or $3.00 to complete the survey, a
task that took less than ten minutes on average. The results of interest relate to a set of questions
asked early in the survey, where each respondent was randomly allocated to one of seven versions
of the main survey module. The respondents were also asked to self-report a set of demographic
characteristics, answer three mathematical exercises, and choose responses to several questions on
their political views.
2.2.1

Baseline setup and results

At the start of the main module of the survey, respondents are introduced to a hypothetical scenario
that includes two unequal allocations of money across two individuals. (Readers will recognize the
scenarios from Table 1 above). Speci…cally, in the baseline version respondents see the following
screen after agreeing to take the survey:

Figure 1. The …rst step of the main survey module in the baseline case.
Figure 1 shows that a shift from Situation 1 to 2 increases the amount of money each individual has
but widens the gap between them. If an individual’s welfare is independent of the other’s resources,
both should have greater well-being in Situation 2 than in 1.
Respondents then advance to a second screen with additional information. In particular, they
are given a measure of each individual’s well-being (for which a de…nition is given) in each situation.
19

Available at https://hbs.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_80niBI5g6Fzhgln
See Horton, Rand, and Zeckhauser (2010) for an analysis of online labor markets for economic research and
see Saez and Stantcheva (2015), Kuziemko, Norton, Saez, and Stantcheva (2015), and Weinzierl (2014, 2016b) for
examples of its use in gauging distributive preferences.
20

9

Figure 2: The second step of the main survey module in the baseline case.
As Figure 2 shows, a shift from the …rst to the second allocation increases the well-being of the
better-o¤ individual but lowers the well-being of the worse-o¤ individual. One interpretation of the
well-being decrease for Person F from Situation 1 to Situation 2 is that F su¤ers from envy toward
Person G.21 Note that, to increase engagement with the question, I require respondents to calculate
the changes in money and well-being for each individual. If they choose an incorrect answer, they
receive an error message and must try again.
Importantly, the gain in well-being for the better-o¤ individual is smaller than the loss for the
worse-o¤ individual in Figure 2, so the second allocation is worse from a utilitarian (or more egalitarian) perspective than the …rst. This fact is highlighted by showing the total levels of well-being
in each situation. Being explicit on this point with respondents is important for avoiding concerns,
raised by some scholars as mentioned above, that accommodating envy would be ine¤ective from
a directly (i.e., observable) welfarist perspective.
21
Though this interpretation is not the only possibility (for example, respondents may think F has reduced access
to scarce goods in Situation 2), variations on this baseline setup discussed below that explicitly suggest a role for
envy reinforce the baseline results.

10

Finally, as shown in Figure 3, respondents are asked to consider the following screen:

Figure 3: The third step of the main survey module in the baseline case.

Note that respondents are not given a speci…c criterion by which to judge, from the perspective of
an objective observer, "which situation do you think is better?"
Resistance to envy-based redistribution In response to this question, 54% of respondents
prefer Situation 2. In other words, by not choosing Situation 1, more than half of the respondents
reject a potential utilitarian gain when that gain is due to a negative welfare externality imposed
by envy. I will refer to this choice as a "rejection of envy-based redistribution" throughout the
remainder of the paper.
This result stands in sharp contrast to what would be chosen by the welfarist normative objective used in conventional optimal tax analysis. But, to reiterate this paper’s main argument,
if respondents put weight on nonwelfarist principles that capture society’s accumulated knowledge
of envy-based redistribution’s negative, unobservable welfare e¤ects, a preference for Situation 2 is
consistent with an underlying commitment to welfarism.
2.2.2

Robustness to variations on the baseline setup

Several variations on the survey support this baseline …nding and provide insights into what drives
it. As shown in Figure 4, the share of respondents preferring Situation 2, and thereby resisting
envy-based redistribution, ranges from 40% to 73% across these variations.

11

Strongly
prefer 1

Slightly
prefer 1

Slightly
prefer 2

Strongly
prefer 2

Figure 4: Responses to the baseline and six variations of the main
survey module.
The second and third columns of Figure 4 show the results for two variations that present the
choice between the situations as an active policy intervention. In the "Policy shift 1 to 2" variation
the respondent sees only Situation 1 at …rst (both the money and well-being data). On the next
screen, the respondent is told that a policy is available that would cause a shift to Situation 2.
Then, the respondent chooses whether to support that policy intervention. The "Policy shift 2
to 1" variation is the same, but with Situation 2 presented as the starting point. If respondents
generically dislike policy intervention, we would expect a smaller share of respondents to choose
Situation 2 in the …rst of these variations and a larger share to choose it in the second. Figure 4
con…rms these expectations, with 41% and 59% of respondents choosing Situation 2 compared to
54% in the baseline.
The fourth column gives the results when I ask respondents to give their opinion on the situations
twice: …rst after seeing only the allocations of money (as in Figure 1) and then again after seeing the
levels of well-being (as in Figure 3). This variation potentially increases respondents’engagement
with and comprehension of the scenario. It also tests the extent to which having them focus on
the allocations of money without information on well-being a¤ects their eventual judgments. In
this variation, 70% of respondents choose Situation 2 in the …rst step. With the information on
well-being, that share is 56%, close to the baseline result. I return to this variation in Section 2.3.2.
The …fth column of Figure 4 corresponds to a variation in which I change the well-being calculations so that the shift from Situation 1 to Situation 2 generates a gain to Person F that is smaller
than the loss to Person G. That is, total well-being is greater in Situation 2 than in Situation 1.
If a respondent chooses Situation 1 in this case, he or she would appear to put greater weight on
a prioritarian, or even maximin objective. In this variation, 73% of respondents choose Situation
2, suggesting that only a small share of respondents …nd such an objective determinative for their
12

distributive justice judgments.
In sum, these variations support the baseline results. So, too, do the variations behind the …nal
two columns of Figure 4 to which I turn in the next subsection.

2.3

Suggestive evidence on use of nonwelfarist principles

Further examination of the survey results, including from two additional variations on the baseline
setup, provide suggestive evidence that nonwelfarist principles may play the role suggested by the
argument proposed in this paper, at least in the case of envy-based redistribution.
2.3.1

Increasing envy’s salience

First, two variations increase the salience of envy’s role in the hypothetical scenario. If respondents
are weighing the utilitarian advantage of Situation 1 over Situation 2 against a nonwelfarist principle
that rejects accommodating envy, priming their attention to that principle ought to sway preferences
toward Situation 2.
The …rst variation highlights the role of envy, but avoids explicitly mentioning the word "envy."
In particular, after the same screens as in Figure 1 and Figure 2, respondents assigned to this
variation see the following screen22 .

Figure 5: The third step of the main module in the Envy Salient variation.
22
The well-being numbers are slightly di¤erent in this variation, but they play the same role as in the baseline
speci…cation.

13

The key variation in this version of the survey is that respondents are shown a "possible interpretation" of the scenario that describes the e¤ect of Person G’s allocation on Person F’s well-being,
making clear the negative externality envy exerts.23
The second variation more aggressively raises the salience of envy by explicitly naming it,
replacing the last paragraph in Figure 5 with the following:
Person F feels envy toward Person G. Person F’s well-being goes up when F has
more money. But, due to envy, Person F’s well-being goes down when G has more
money. Because the gap between the money G has and the money F has is larger in
Situation 2 than in Situation 1, F’s well-being is lower in Situation 2, even though F
has more money in Situation 2.
As the …nal two columns of Figure 4 show, the share of respondents choosing Situation 2 in
these variations rises to 55% and 63%, respectively. The latter of these is signi…cantly greater than
the baseline result at the 10% con…dence level. The e¤ect of increasing the salience of envy appears,
therefore, to be to increase the share of respondents rejecting envy-based redistribution.24
These results are consistent with respondents using nonwelfarist principles to reject envy-based
redistribution. Recall that the direct implications of envy for a welfarist criterion are made explicit
and are constant across these variations, suggesting that something other than information on
these direct welfare e¤ects is driving the respondents’opinions. That is, if individuals give weight
to nonwelfarist principles that resist the accommodation of envy, raising their level of awareness
that Situation 1 violates those principles–while the utilitarian advantage of Situation 1 remains the
same–would predict the increased support for Situation 2 that these variations generate.
2.3.2

Relation to political views

We can utilize results from the "Choose twice" variation to provide further suggestive evidence that
nonwelfarist reasoning may be behind the general rejection of envy-based redistribution. In that
variation, respondents …rst choose between the situations knowing only the allocations of money
across Person F and Person G. Then, the well-being data are revealed, and the respondents choose
a second time.
In this variation, 70% of respondents choose Situation 2 when only information on money is
shown, and 36% of those respondents report a shift in their preferences toward Situation 1 after
the well-being data are revealed. One interpretation of such a shift is that the respondents give
su¢ cient weight to the potentially surprising facts they learn from the well-being data, namely that
envy has caused both Person F’s well-being and total well-being to be lower in Situation 2 than in
Situation 1. Those respondents who shift from Situation 2 to Situation 1 are, in other words, more
supportive of envy-based redistribution.
Respondents who express support for libertarianism, a prominent alternative to welfarism, are
less likely to change their preferences toward Situation 1 after the well-being data are revealed. Only
21% of supporters of libertarianism shift, compared to 46% of those who oppose libertarianism (a
statistically signi…cant di¤erence) Table 2 gives the results of a simple logit regression analysis using
the self-reported demographic and opinion data from the survey as explanatory variables for the
23

To increase the likelihood that respondents perceive this e¤ect, I require them to answer whether this interpretation is consistent with the calculations they made (it is). If they choose an incorrect answer, they receive an error
message and must try again.
24
An alternative interpretation is that respondents were unable to understand the mechanism behind the changes
in well-being without these explanations. In that case, the higher numbers choosing Situation 2 in these variations
suggest greater baseline opposition to redistribution based on envy.

14

likelihood the respondents report a stronger preference for Situation 1 relative to Situation 2 after
the well-being data are presented than before.
Table 2: Explaining support for envy-based redistribution
Coe¢ cient Standard error
Political perspective on economic issues (L to R)
0:17
(0:35)
Support for Libertarianism
1:32
(0:63)
Belief that individuals are responsible for their basic needs
0:09
(0:64)
Household’s income status at age 45
0:04
(0:18)
Household’s income status at age 10
0:08
(0:17)
Gender (M=0,F=1)
0:88
(0:54)
Age
0:18
(0:47)
Race (White=0, Black=1)
0:41
(0:35)
Education level
0:03
(0:29)
Score on math questions
0:23
(0:54)
N
95
Notes: The dependent variable in this logit regression is the 0-1 indicator of whether the respondent
expresses more support for Situation 1 relative to Situation 2 when the well-being allocations are revealed
in the "Choose twice" variation of the baseline survey setup. A positive coe¢ cient on an explanatory
variable can be interpreted as meaning that a higher value for it is related to a higher likelihood that a
respondent will support envy-based redistribution. The symbol ** denotes signi…cance at the 5% level.

Table 2 shows that support for libertarianism is signi…cantly and negatively related to this
outcome, with an estimated marginal e¤ect of shifting from opposing to supporting libertarianism
equal to a 27 percentage point increase in the likelihood of changing preferences (consistent with
the gap described above).
This result provides further suggestive evidence of the role of nonwelfarist principles in the
public’s resistance to envy-based redistribution. While some respondents respond to the welfare information in the second stage of this variation in a way that acknowledges (and o¤sets) the e¤ects of
envy on well-being, fewer libertarians–who generally reject welfarist reasoning for policy–respond in
this way. This is the pattern we would expect if nonwelfarist rules have more normative signi…cance
for the policy judgments of some (i.e., libertarian) individuals than others (i.e., welfarists).

3

Rule utilitarian policy design

The argument presented in this paper can be seen as extending a familiar logic for rule utilitarianism
beyond individual ethics and as a speci…c version of a more general argument found in the writings
of prominent thinkers, especially Hayek. In this section, I brie‡y review these linkages.

3.1

An informational logic for rule utilitarianism

A vast philosophical literature on rule utilitarianism establishes the importance of nonutilitarian
principles for utilitarian individual ethics. Utilitarianism is the idea that questions of morality are
to be decided based on the criterion of maximum overall welfare. One way for an individual to
implement utilitarianism is to judge each of his or her actions by its impact on overall welfare, a
practice philosophers name act, or direct, utilitarianism. An alternative implementation is to judge

15

each action according to a rule that, when followed, will yield maximum overall welfare. Because this
rule utilitarianism avoids the explicit calculation of an act’s welfare impact, it is sometimes called
indirect utilitarianism. As quoted in the Introduction, Harsanyi gave an emphatic endorsements
of rule over act utilitarianism for individuals. At a formal level, rule utilitarianism dominates act
utilitarianism because a rule utilitarian can choose adherence to act utilitarianism as his or her
rule. But Harsanyi and others who argue for rule utilitarianism in individual ethics have a more
substantive logic, as well.25
I will emphasize one aspect of the substantive logic for why individuals ought to follow rule
utilitarianism: namely, that limits to our knowledge make it unrealistic and unwise for an individual
to be an act utilitarian.26 Unrealistic because an individual cannot know the full consequences of
his or her actions; unwise because such an information-poor method of choosing actions will give
the wrong answers in many cases.27
In a well-known example of this logic, R.M. Hare (1981, 1982) stresses the role of information in
requiring that moral thought proceed at two levels: "level-1, the everyday moral thinking...in which
information is sparse," and "level-2...in which there is time for unlimited investigation of the facts."
He imagines an "archangel [with] superhuman knowledge of the facts" practicing level-2 thinking
in order to provide a moral education to children. The archangel "will try to implant in them a set
of good general principles...they will use in their ordinary level-1 moral thinking." As Hare writes,
"The result will be a set of general principles, constantly evolving, but on the whole stable, such
that their use in moral education, including self-education, and their consequent acceptance by the
society at large, will lead to the nearest possible approximation to the prescriptions of archangelic
thinking."
A speci…c way in which individuals not using rules will miss relevant information is that the
scope of direct, provably causal consequences of any individual ethical choice is inevitably narrow.
Harsanyi (1977, 1982, 1992) stresses that rule utilitarianism circumvents this narrowness by taking
into account not only the direct consequences of the rule’s verdict on a given ethical choice but also
the causal consequences of the rule being adopted in general and the "noncausal logical implications
of its adoption." As summarized by Marc Fleurbaey, Maurice Salles, and John Weymark (2008),
Harsanyi concluded that: "an optimal rule utilitarian code provides desirable incentives to take
actions (to work hard, to save and invest, etc.) that bene…t society as a whole, and it provides
assurances that individual interests will be protected (e.g., the interest of a lender in having a
loan repaid). These e¤ects are typically fairly small when considering individual acts in isolation,
but can be considerable when the complete set of rights and obligations that constitute a rule
utilitarian’s optimal moral code is considered."
Philosophers endorsing this logic for rule utilitarianism have long pointed out that it implies an
individual may need to adhere to nonutilitarian principles to achieve utilitarian-optimal outcomes.
Hare cites Plato and Aristotle as precursors for his two-level thinking, and Mill forcefully argues this
25

Jonathan Riley (2008) argues–contrary to Harsanyi–that certain nonconsequentialist priorities (e.g., rights) should
be treated as lexicographically prior to utilitarianism. Also see Rawls (1971) on the priority of maximal equal liberty
over his di¤erence principle. I follow Harsanyi’s fundamentally consequentialist view.
26
An additional argument (see Hare 1981, chapter 3 and Sen 2011) is that humans are not su¢ ciently morally
disciplined to implement act utilitarian calculations rather than serve their own self-interest. This concern is not a
component of my argument because economists routinely include that form of behavioral constraint in optimal policy
analysis (i.e., through incentive compatibility constraints).
27
The formalization of the previous section shows that this paper’s argument does not rest on there being risky
consequences of actions (clari…ed by Hammond 1982), but on ignorance of, or inability to consider, a subset of
consequences. My argument is also separate from Dasgupta’s (1982) insightful discussion of the optimal policy
response to private information.

16

point.28 More recently, Derek Par…t (1984) writes: "It is not the aim of a theory to be believed."
Instead, at least in part because "[w]e often do not know what the e¤ects of our acts would be," a
moral theory may be most e¤ective when individuals adopt principles for their actions that do not
directly align with that theory; that is, when a theory is (in Par…t’s terminology) "self-e¤acing."
The main thesis of this paper is that this logic for rule utilitarianism, as well as its implied role
for principles that only indirectly further the underlying utilitarian goal, can be readily extended
to the public sphere, justifying the use of nonwelfarist principles in fundamentally welfarist policy
evaluation. Hare’s archangelic level-2 thinking requires a level of knowledge–about the functioning of the economy and society more broadly–that even the most sophisticated real-world policy
designers lack, at least at any point in time. And Harsanyi’s emphasis on the indirect e¤ects of
adopting moral rules can be translated immediately to concerns about the "general equilibrium"
e¤ects of policy choices, for example on unobservable social norms and attitudes.29
Though it will not be the focus of this paper, a natural related conjecture is that the secondary
principles useful to individuals and those useful to society share a source: accumulated human
wisdom. As Mill (1871) writes in the context of individual ethics, "...mankind must by this time
have acquired positive beliefs as to the e¤ects of some actions on their happiness; and the beliefs
which have thus come down are the rules of morality for the multitude, and for the philosopher
until he has succeeded in …nding better."30

3.2

Ignorance and policy rules

This paper’s argument is a speci…c version of a more general point made by eminent thinkers since
policy design became a topic of study. Perhaps the most prominent development of that point is
due to Friedrich A. Hayek, who stressed the impact of ignorance on optimal policymaking along a
number of dimensions. Directly relevant to this paper, Hayek (1960) states the informational logic
described above for the use of rules in individual ethics: "quite generally, the reliance on abstract
rules is a device we have learned to use because our reason is insu¢ cient to master the full detail of
complex reality."31 Moreover, he thinks that the limits to individual knowledge naturally extend to
society, as "Knowledge exists only as the knowledge of individuals...The sum of the knowledge of
all the individuals exists nowhere as an integrated whole." These observations lead Hayek to a deep
skepticism of what he calls the "idea of intelligent men coming together for deliberation about how
to make the world anew." Instead, he endorses the idea that "civilization was the accumulated hardearned result of trial and error; that it was the sum of experience, in part handed from generation
28
"...to argue as if no such secondary principles could be had, and as if mankind had remained till now, and always
must remain, without drawing any general conclusions from the experience of human life, is as high a pitch, I think,
as absurdity has ever reached in philosophical controversy." (U, II, pp. 296-297).
29
As I mentioned in an earlier note, such concerns are relevant to advocates across the political spectrum. The
unobservable long-term e¤ects of progressive tax and transfer policy on social norms is a classic concern of those on
the "right," while the importance of progressive tax and transfer policy to social cohesion and the legitimacy of the
state in a capitalist economy is a major concern of the "left."
30
Mill reiterates the point later: "Again, defenders of utility often …nd themselves called upon to reply to such
objections as this–that there is not time, previous to action, for calculating and weighing the e¤ects of any line of
conduct on the general happiness...The answer to the objection is, that there has been ample time, namely, the whole
past duration of the human species. During all that time, mankind have been learning by experience the tendencies
of actions; on which experience all the prudence, as well as all the morality of life, are dependent." Also see Harsanyi
(1982), who discusses promise-keeping and writes: "rule utilitarianism comes fairly close to traditional morality in
recognizing the importance of social institutions which establish a network of moral rights and of moral obligations
among di¤erent people in society."
31
Also see: "Certainty we cannot achieve in human a¤airs, and it is for this reason that, to make the best use of
what knowledge we have, we must adhere to rules which experience has shown to serve best on the whole, though we
do not know what will be the consequences of obeying them in the particular instance."

17

to generation as explicit knowledge, but to a larger extent embodied in tools and institutions which
had proved themselves superior–institutions whose signi…cance we might discover by analysis but
which will also serve men’s ends without men’s understanding them."
Long before Hayek, eminent thinkers such as David Hume, Adam Smith, and Edmund Burke
emphasized the importance of experience, not just abstract reason, in forming our individual moral
judgments and the related importance of respecting social institutions and principles that arose
from a social evolutionary process of historical trial and error. Smith (1759), for example, writes:
"Some general, and even systematical, idea of the perfection of policy and law, may no doubt
be necessary for directing the views of the statesman. But to insist upon establishing, and upon
establishing all at once, and in spite of all opposition, every thing which that idea may seem to
require, must often be the highest degree of arrogance. It is to erect his own judgment into the
supreme standard of right and wrong. It is to fancy himself the only wise and worthy man in the
commonwealth, and that his fellow-citizens should accommodate themselves to him and not he to
them."32
Hayek (1973) laments that political theory in his time had moved away from his arguments
and adopted, instead, what he called "constructivist rationalism" based on the belief that "all the
relevant facts are known to some one mind, and that it is possible to construct from this knowledge
of the particulars a desirable social order." He would no doubt raise the same concern about the
standard modern approach to optimal policy analysis.

4

Conclusion

Evidence that nonwelfarist principles are used in real-world policy evaluation is not limited to this
paper. In brief, a large body of research across the social sciences has shown that most people
consider multiple, often mutually contradictory principles when making normative judgments on
economic policy. I have previously referred to this phenomenon as normative diversity. This paper’s
argument closely relates to the idea of normative diversity, as it o¤ers a logic for principles not
directly related to society’s ultimate objective to nevertheless be included in that society’s method
of policy assessment. If this argument is accepted, the next task for research is to identify the
diverse set of rules that act as informational proxies.33 Potential sources of evidence on this include
public opinion, robust features of policy that help delineate between principles, political rhetoric,
and scholarly analysis.
Though the argument for a welfarist role for nonwelfarist rules has a long historical reach, a
foundation in familiar theories of individual ethics, and growing empirical support, it has been
discounted in modern normative economic policy research. This paper hopes to renew interest in
it and spur further work on it.
32

See also, for example, Hume (1738, vol 2, 3.2.2; 1752, p. 60) and Hayek (1960, note 37 p. 436); Smith (1759,
7.3.2); and Burke (1790, p. 120).
33
For evidence and analysis of normative diversity and two prominent nonwelfarist principles that may exert
in‡uence in U.S. policymaking, see Weinzierl, 2014, 2016a, 2016b.

18

References
[1] Adler, Matthew (2011). Well-being and Fair Distribution. Oxford.
[2] Anderson, Elizabeth (1999). "What is the Point of Equality?" Ethics (109), pp. 287-337.
[3] Banerjee, Abhijit (1990). "Envy," in Economic Theory and Policy, Bhaskar Dutta, Shubhashis
Gangopadhyay, Dilip Mookherjee, and Debraj Ray (eds), Oxford.
[4] Boskin and Sheshinski (1978)."Optimal Income Redistribution when Individual Welfare Depends upon Relative Income," Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 589-601.
[5] Brennan, Geo¤rey. (1973), "Pareto Desirable Redistribution: The Case of Malice and Envy."
Journal of Public Economics (2), pp. 173-183.
[6] Burke, Edmund. (1790). Re‡ections on the Revolution in France, Penguin.
[7] Charité, Jimmy, Raymond Fisman, and Ilyana Kuziemko (2015), "Reference Points and Redistributive Preferences: Experimental Evidence," NBER Working Paper 21009.
[8] Dasgupta, Partha (1982), "Utilitarianism, information and rights," in Sen and Williams.
[9] Dworkin, Ronald (1981). "What is Equality? Part 2: Equality of Resources," Philosophy and
Public A¤ airs, 10(4), pp. 283-345.
[10] Fleurbaey, Marc, Maurice Salles, and John A. Weymark (2008), eds. Justice, Political Liberalism, and Utilitarianism, Cambridge.
[11] Hammond, Peter (1982), "Utilitarianism, uncertainty, and information," in Sen and Williams.
[12] Hare, R.M. (1981). Moral Thinking, Oxford.
[13] Hare, R.M. (1982), "Ethical theory and utilitarianism," in Sen and Williams.
[14] Harsanyi, John C. (1977), "Rule Utilitarianism and Decision Theory," Erkenntnis 11(1), 25-53.
[15] Harsanyi, John C. (1982), "Morality and the theory of rational behaviour," in Sen and
Williams.
[16] Harsanyi, John C. (1992), "Game and Decision Theoretic Models in Ethics," chapter 19 in
Handbook of Game Theory, R.J. Aumann and S. Hart, (eds.), Elsevier.
[17] Hayek, Friedrich A. (1945). "The Use of Knowledge in Society," American Economic Review,
35(4), pp. 519-530.
[18] Hayek, Friedrich A. (1960). The Constitution of Liberty. Chicago.
[19] Hayek, Friedrich A. (1973). Law, Legislation, and Liberty. Chicago.
[20] Horton, John J., David G. Rand, and Richard J. Zeckhauser (2010). "The Online Laboratory:
Conducting Experiments in a Real Labor Market," Experimental Economics 14.3, pp. 399-425.
[21] Hume, David (1738) A Treatise of Human Nature. Oxford (Clarendon 2007).
[22] Hume, David (1752), "Of the Original Contract," in Political Essays, Liberal Arts Press (1973).
19

[23] Kaplow, Louis (2008). The Theory of Taxation and Public Economics, Princeton.
[24] Kaplow, Louis and Steven Shavell (2001). "Any non-welfarist Method of Policy Assessment
Violates the Pareto Principle," Journal of Political Economy 109(2).
[25] Kuziemko, Ilyana, Michael Norton, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva (2015). "How
Elastic are Preferences for Redistribution: Evidence from Randomized Survey Experiments,"
American Economic Review 105(4), pp. 1478-1508.
[26] Mill, John Stuart (1871). Principles of Political Economy. Oxford University Press (1994).
[27] Mirrlees, J.A., (1971). "An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation," Review
of Economic Studies 38, 175-208.
[28] Mirrlees, J.A., (1982). "The economic uses of utilitarianism." In Sen and Williams (1982).
[29] Murphy, Liam and Thomas Nagel. (2002). The Myth of Ownership, Oxford.
[30] Musgrave, Richard (1959). The Theory of Public Finance,. McGraw-Hill.
[31] Nagel, Thomas (1995). Equality and Partiality, Oxford.
[32] Nelson, Eric (2016). Personal communication.
[33] Oswald, Andrew (1983). "Altruism, Jealousy, and the Theory of Optimal Non-linear Taxation,"
Journal of Public Economics, 20, pp. 77-87.
[34] Par…t, Derek (1984). Reasons and Persons, Oxford.
[35] Rakowski (1991). Equal Justice, Oxford.
[36] Rawls, John (1971). A Theory of Justice, Harvard.
[37] Riley, Jonathan (2008). "Rule Utilitarianism and Liberal Priorities," in Justice, Political Liberalism, and Utilitarianism, Fleurbaey et al. (eds.), Cambridge.
[38] Saez, Emmanuel and Stefanie Stantcheva (2015). "Generalized Social Marginal Welfare
Weights for Optimal Tax Theory." American Economic Review, 106(1), pp. 24-45.
[39] Scheve, Kenneth, and David Stasavage (2016). Taxing the Rich, Princeton.
[40] Sen, Amartya and Bernard Williams (1982), eds. Utilitarianism and Beyond, Cambridge.
[41] Smith, Adam (1759). Theory of Moral Sentiments.
[42] Smith, Adam (1776). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, New
York: Prometheus Books.
[43] Varian, Hal. (1974). "Equity, Envy, and E¢ ciency," Journal of Economic Theory, 9(1).
[44] Weinzierl, Matthew (2014). "The Promise of Positive Optimal Taxation: Normative Diversity
and a role for Equal Sacri…ce," Journal of Public Economics, 118, pp. 128-142.
[45] Weinzierl, Matthew (2016a). "Revisiting the Classical View of Bene…t Based Taxation," Economic Journal (forthcoming), also NBER Working Paper 20735.
[46] Weinzierl, Matthew (2016b). "Popular Acceptance of Inequality due to Brute Luck and Support
for Classical Bene…t-Based Taxation," NBER Working Paper 22462

20

