                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE CYCLICAL SENSITIVITY IN ESTIMATES OF POTENTIAL OUTPUT

                                        Olivier Coibion
                                      Yuriy Gorodnichenko
                                        Mauricio Ulate

                                       Working Paper 23580
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23580


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 2017, Revised October 2017




This paper was prepared for the second annual conference of the National Bank of Ukraine.
Gorodnichenko thanks the NSF for financial support. We are grateful to Larry Ball and Olivier
Blanchard for helpful comments and Alexander Kopoin (OECD) for sharing OECD data on
potential output. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23580.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Mauricio Ulate. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Cyclical Sensitivity in Estimates of Potential Output
Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Mauricio Ulate
NBER Working Paper No. 23580
July 2017, Revised October 2017
JEL No. E2,E3

                                          ABSTRACT

The fact that most of the persistent declines in output since the Great Recession have parlayed
into equivalent declines in measures of potential output is commonly interpreted as implying that
output will not return to previous trends. Using a variety of estimates of potential output for the
U.S. and other countries, we show that these estimates respond gradually not only to supply-side
shocks but also respond to demand shocks that have only transitory effects on output. Observing
a revision in measures of potential output therefore says little about whether concurrent changes
in actual output are likely to be permanent or not. In contrast, some structural VAR
methodologies can avoid these shortcomings, even in real-time. These approaches point toward a
more limited decline in potential output following the Great Recession.


Olivier Coibion                                  Mauricio Ulate
2225 Speedway                                    Department of Economics
Economics Depatment                              530 Evans Hall #3880
University of Texas at Austin                    University of California, Berkeley
Austin, TX 78712                                 Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER                                         mauricioulate@econ.berkeley.edu
ocoibion@gmail.com

Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and IZA
and also NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
1       Introduction
The Great Recession was characterized not just by large declines in economic activity in most advanced
economies, but also ones that have persisted for now nearly a decade with no sign of these affected
economies “catching up” to previously expected trend levels. If anything, it is the trends that are now being
revised down in light of the continuing inability of these economies to close the output gaps first generated
in 2008. As illustrated in Figure 1 for the U.S., estimates of potential output have been systematically
revised downward since the Great Recession, such that all of the current deviations of output from past
estimates of potential are now being reinterpreted as permanent declines in the productive capacity of the
economy. In light of these revisions, a number of commentators (e.g. Summers 2014, 2016, Krugman 2014)
have suggested that the U.S. economy has entered a period of secular stagnation. If correct, this
interpretation poses many, seemingly insurmountable challenges for policymakers in the current
environment of ultra-low interest rates and limited fiscal capacity to stimulate economic activity.
        However, before we take these dynamics in the estimates of potential output and ring the alarm bell,
we should understand the properties of estimates of potential output and what determines revisions of these
estimates. In this paper, we focus on how real-time estimates of actual and potential output respond to
different economic shocks in the U.S. as well as across a wide range of countries. Using a variety of sources
that estimate potential gross domestic product (GDP), we find that real-time estimates of this variable
respond to cyclical shocks that have no long-run effects on the economy and under-respond to shocks that
do. In all cases, adjustments in real-time estimates of potential GDP are extremely gradual, much like a
moving average of past output changes. In fact, given the gradual pace of adjustment to shocks and the
inability of the estimates to differentiate between shocks that do and do not affect the productive capacity of
the economy, there seems to be little value added in estimates of potential GDP relative to simple measures
of statistical trends. At a minimum, the fact that estimates of potential GDP are revised, either upward or
downward, should not be taken as a sign that future changes in GDP will in fact be more or less persistent
than usual but rather indicates little more than that the prior changes in GDP have been persistent.
        Because estimates of potential GDP are not necessarily created in the same fashion across
institutions, we consider estimates from the Federal Reserve Board (Fed) and from the Congressional Budget
Office (CBO) for the U.S. as well as estimates from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) for a broader cross-section of countries.
We complement this with long-term forecasts of output growth from professional forecasters (Consensus
Economics). We show that estimates of potential output for a country are highly correlated across
organizations. Most public or international organizations follow production function approaches, in which
estimates of the potential productive capacity of an economy reflect estimates of the capital stock, potential
labor force sizes combined with estimates of human capital, as well as measures of total factor productivity.

                                                                                                             1
Hence, estimates of potential output should change when the technological capacity of the economy improves
but not in response to purely cyclical variations in employment such as those arising from monetary policies.
        To test these propositions, we bring to bear not just a wide range of estimates of potential output but
also a range of shock measures. Somewhat surprisingly given the short samples, we find several clear
patterns in the data that should give one pause before interpreting changes in estimates of potential output as
indicators of permanent changes in output. First, and perhaps most strikingly, while we reproduce the
common and well-documented finding that monetary shocks have only transitory effects on GDP, we then
document the startling feature that these shocks are followed by a gradual change in estimates of potential
GDP. This finding occurs not just in the U.S. but across countries as well and is true for a range of sources of
estimates of potential GDP.
        We find a similar set of results when we focus on government spending shocks. Regardless of the
identification strategy, increases in government spending have transitory effects on GDP, but estimates of
potential GDP again display a delayed response to these shocks, ultimately responding to the shock in the
same direction as the short-run response of GDP. As with the effects of monetary shocks, the fact that
estimates of potential GDP respond so unambiguously to these shocks strongly suggests that estimates of
potential GDP are failing to adequately distinguish between permanent and transitory shocks. In this respect,
estimates of potential GDP are sensitive to cyclical fluctuations in GDP originating from demand shocks.
        Turning to supply shocks that should affect potential GDP, the results are more mixed. With
productivity shocks, which have immediate and persistent effects on GDP, we find that estimates of potential
GDP again respond only very gradually but, after several years, fully incorporate the effects of new
productivity levels. With tax shocks, we similarly observe that, after a long delay, estimates of potential GDP
eventually catch up to actual changes in GDP. Hence, these two supply shocks provide evidence of these
estimates correctly capturing changes in potential GDP. However, the very slow rate at which information
about these shocks is incorporated into estimates of potential GDP points to an insufficient cyclical sensitivity
of these estimates in response to supply shocks. With oil price shocks, however, an even more severe problem
arises. We observe persistent declines in GDP after these shocks, but estimates of potential GDP actually go
in the opposite direction. As with demand shocks, this specific type of supply shock therefore also presents a
challenge to the view that estimates of potential GDP are actually capturing what they are meant to.
        Furthermore, we can consistently reproduce the way in which estimates of potential GDP respond
to shocks by applying a one-sided Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter to real-time real GDP data. In the U.S. as
well as in the cross-country data, this approach generates impulse responses to shocks that are nearly
indistinguishable from those found using the actual estimates of potential GDP from all organizations,
including the counter-cyclical behavior of measured potential GDP after oil supply shocks. The HP filter is
effectively just a weighted moving-average of recent GDP changes and by construction does not

                                                                                                               2
differentiate between the sources underlying changes in GDP, be they monetary, technology, etc. Thus, we
can rationalize why one can observe a gradual response to any economic shock, even those that have only
transitory effects on GDP and that should presumably be stripped out of estimates of potential GDP.
        We argue that some of the puzzling reactions of potential output to identified shocks may be
addressed using tools developed in previous studies. Specifically, we show that the Blanchard and Quah
(1989) approach to identify supply and demand shocks can be a useful element in a statistical framework
that generates potential output estimates consistent with theoretical predictions. Indeed, when the Blanchard
and Quah (1989) approach is applied to real-time data to recover potential output measured as the historical
contribution of shocks with permanent effects on output, the resulting real-time estimate of potential output
reacts strongly to identified supply shocks (TFP, tax, and oil price shocks) and it does not respond
significantly to identified demand shocks (monetary policy and government spending shocks). Hence, it
does not suffer from the problems associated with most other measures of potential output. Furthermore, this
approach yields a different interpretation for changes in U.S. potential output following the Great Recession.
Our estimates imply that the gap between potential and actual output in the U.S. has increased by more than
7 log percentage points between 2007Q1 (when the gap was likely close to zero) and 2017Q1, leaving
ample room for policymakers to close this gap through demand-side policies if they so chose to.
        We find similar evidence of a large output gap using other methods to calculate measures of
potential output, such as the ones proposed by Gali (1999) and Cochrane (1994) or one based on an
estimated Phillips curve. All these methodologies give similar results, pointing to an increase in the gap of
5-10 percentage points between 2007Q1 and 2017Q1. This assures us that this result is not an artifact of the
Blanchard-Quah approach and instead is a feature robust across different identification schemes.
        This paper touches on several literatures. It is most directly tied to recent work since the Great
Recession focusing on the possibility of hysteresis: cases where demand shocks lead to permanent effects on
the level of economic activity. While there are many mechanisms that can generate such effects (e.g. less
R&D during periods of low investment as in Anzoategui et al. (2016) and Benigno and Fornaro (2017)),
empirical evidence on it remains scant. Recent research has focused on the degree to which the sustained
declines in output since the Great Recession have ultimately been interpreted as reflecting declines in
potential GDP and therefore expected to be long-lasting. Ball (2014) documents that for most advanced
economies, much of the declines in output after the Great Recession have been matched with declines in
estimates of potential output. Fatas and Summers (2016) focus on the degree to which fiscal consolidations
map first into output changes and then into changes in estimates of potential GDP, with the latter being an
indicator that GDP changes will be permanent. Our results suggest that one should draw little inference from
the evolution of estimates of potential GDP about the persistence of GDP changes: these estimates fail to
exclusively identify supply shocks that should drive potential GDP and instead also respond to transitory

                                                                                                            3
demand shocks. The fact that most of the output declines observed since the Great Recession are now
attributed to declines in potential GDP implies little other than that these declines have been persistent since
estimates of potential GDP fail to adequately distinguish between the underlying sources of changes in GDP.
        Our paper also relates to work on news shocks and beliefs about long-run productivity. A strand of
literature studies how news about future productivity can have contemporaneous effects on economic activity
long before the productivity changes actually occur (e.g. Beaudry and Portier 2006, Barsky and Sims 2011,
2012). In that spirit, Blanchard et al. (2017) show that revisions in estimates of future potential output are
correlated with contemporaneous changes in consumption and investment. If estimates of future potential
output were invariant to transitory shocks, then one could entertain a causal interpretation of these correlations
as reflecting the effect of news about the future on current economic decisions. But our results call for caution
with this type of interpretation: estimates of potential GDP display cyclical sensitivity to demand shocks, and
this sensitivity calls into question the basis for causal inference of the type made in Blanchard et al. (2017).
        A third literature that we build on focuses on the implications of real-time measurement of the
output gap for monetary policy. Orphanides and van Norden (2002), for example, illustrate how real-time
estimates of potential GDP can in short samples depend on the method used to measure either the trend or
deviations from trend. Orphanides (2001, 2003, 2004) argues that the Federal Reserve’s mismeasurement of
the output gap in the 1970s was one of the primary reasons why inflation was allowed to rise so sharply in
the 1970s. We are similarly interested in the difficulties with measuring potential output and the output gap,
but rather than studying how sensitive estimates of potential output can be to the different statistical
techniques used to identify it, we instead characterize whether the historical estimates of potential output
from public and international organizations respond to the “correct” shocks.
        Finally, by comparing the actual responses of output after economic shocks to the predictions of
agents about these variables, our paper is closely related to recent work studying the expectations
formation process of economic agents. Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012), for example, study the
forecast errors of agents to economic shocks and find that these errors are persistent after economic
shocks, consistent with models where agents are not fully informed about the state. By comparing the
long-run response of GDP to estimates of potential GDP, this paper similarly provides some insight about
how these potential GDP estimates are formed.
        The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents information about the estimates of potential
output used in the paper. Section 3 presents our baseline estimates, using U.S. data, of how estimates of
potential GDP respond to economic shocks. Section 4 extends these results to a broader range of countries.
Section 5 presents some examples of how estimates of potential output can be improved. Section 6 concludes.


2.      How Estimates of Potential Output Are Created (and Used)

                                                                                                                   4
As classified in Mishkin (2007), there are three broad classes of methods to construct a measure of
potential output: statistical, production function, and structural (DSGE-based). We first review these
methods and then discuss how various agencies measure potential output.
        Statistical methods typically impose little theoretical structure on the properties of potential output
and interpret low-frequency variation in output series as potential output. One example of this approach is
to use univariate time series methods, such as autoregressive (AR) models or different types of filters, on
actual output to extract a statistical trend component which is then identified with potential output. Another
example is given by methods using several variables, such as output, unemployment and inflation, to
obtain potential output via an unobserved components model and a Phillips curve (e.g., Kuttner 1994).
        In the production function approach, independent estimates of the different inputs that go into the
aggregate production function (e.g., labor, capital, multifactor productivity) are plugged into the
production function to obtain potential output. Since the objective is to obtain potential output and not
actual output, the estimates of the different inputs must correspond to the concept of the maximum (or
“normal”) amount of each variable that could be used for production without leading to an acceleration of
inflation (e.g., the labor force participation rate and a level of natural unemployment should be used
instead of the cyclical level of employment). This approach is related to growth accounting, since after
log-differentiation of a Cobb-Douglas production function, the growth of potential output can be
expressed as the weighted average of the growth rates of the different inputs (see Fernald et al. (2017) for
an application of this approach to the dynamics of output in the post-Great Recession period).
        Finally, structural approaches use dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models, typically
with a New Keynesian structure, to back out potential output. This requires calibrating or estimating the
parameters of the model to the relevant economy so that the different shocks hitting the economy can be
identified. Once this stage is completed, potential output can be obtained from the solution of the model
when certain shocks and frictions are turned off (e.g. Andres et al. 2005). This methodology is particularly
model-dependent and relies heavily on the estimation of a sophisticated model, which given limited
variation in macroeconomic data may be a challenge for identification of structural parameters and shocks.


2.1. Congressional Budget office (CBO)
The CBO uses the production function approach for estimating potential output. As described in CBO
(2001, 2014), this institution estimates potential output with different methods for five sectors in the
economy. The main one is the nonfarm business (NFB) sector, which represents approximately 75 percent
of the U.S. economy. The remaining four smaller sectors are agriculture and forestry, households,
nonprofit organizations serving households, and government.



                                                                                                             5
         In each of these sectors the CBO projects the growth of each input by estimating a trend growth
rate for it during the previous and current business cycles (as dated by the National Bureau of Economic
Research) and extending that trend into the future. This implies that the trend growth for inputs depends
on recent history and on business cycle dating, with possibly large changes in trends when a new business
cycle begins. The CBO tries to remove the cyclical component of the growth rate of different variables by
estimating the relationships between those variables and a measure of the unemployment rate gap, the
difference between the actual unemployment rate and the natural rate of unemployment.
         For the nonfarm business sector the CBO uses a production function with three inputs: potential
labor, services from the stock of capital and the sector’s potential TFP. For the sectors of agriculture and
forestry, and nonprofits serving households, potential output is estimated using trends in labor productivity
for those sectors. For the household sector, potential output is obtained as a flow of services from the
owner-occupied housing stock. Finally, for the government sector, potential output is estimated using
trends in labor productivity and depreciation of government capital. Real-time CBO estimates of potential
output are available since 1991 at the annual frequency and since 1999 at the semiannual frequency.
         Forecasts of potential output by the CBO play an important role in fiscal policy discussions in the
U.S. When new tax or spending policies are under review by the U.S. Congress, their implications for
future tax revenues, government expenditures, and deficits are assessed under assumptions about the
long-run future path of the economy, as captured by estimates of potential GDP (although some policies
require the CBO to make inferences about how these policies themselves may change potential output
over time, e.g. via “dynamic scoring”). How these estimates are formed and how well they separate
cyclical from permanent shocks therefore matters for how well these policy measures are scored.
         These estimates of potential output are sometimes subject to very large revisions. Prior to the
revisions over the course of the Great Recession for example, the CBO had similarly made large upward
revisions to the projected path of potential output over the course of the 1990s, as illustrated in Panel B of
Figure 1. These upward revisions were tied to the higher than expected productivity growth in the U.S. over
this period.1


1
  While it is true that some of these revisions were not related to productivity changes, such as the ones coming from the
shift to chained GDP, the addition of software, or revisions to NIPA, CBO (2001, p.2) summarized one of the larger
revisions as follows, “CBO also altered its method to address changing economic circumstances. In particular, labor
productivity has been growing much faster since 1995 than its post-1973 trend. Because that acceleration has coincided
with explosive growth in many areas of information technology (IT)—including telecommunications, personal computers,
and the Internet—many observers have speculated that the U.S. economy has entered a new era, characterized by more-
rapid productivity growth. Those observers argue that trends from the 1980s and early 1990s are no longer relevant
benchmarks for projecting labor productivity. After analyzing the data and the relevant empirical literature, CBO has
concluded that elements of the so-called IT revolution—including very strong investment in IT goods and rapid
productivity growth in the manufacture of semiconductors and computers—explain much of the acceleration in the growth
of labor productivity during the late 1990s. CBO has incorporated many of those elements into its economic projections.”

                                                                                                                        6
2.2. Federal Reserve
While preparing macroeconomic projections (historically known as Greenbook forecasts) for meetings of
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), the staff of the Federal Reserve Board constructs a
measure of the output gap (that is, the difference between actual and potential output) to assist the
FOMC’s members in their decision making. As pointed out by Edge and Rudd (2016), from the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the estimate of the output gap from the Greenbook: “… is
judgmental in the sense that it is not explicitly derived from a single model of the economy. In particular,
the staff’s estimates of potential GDP pool and judgmentally weight the results from a number of
estimation techniques, including statistical filters and more structural model-based procedures.”
        While describing the evolution of measuring potential output by the Fed, Orphanides (2004)
mentions that in the Greenbook estimates: “…the underlying model for potential output was a
segmented/time-varying trend. The specific construction methods and assumptions varied over time.
During the 1960s and until 1976, the starting point was Okun's (1962) analysis. From 1977 onward, the
starting point was Clark's (1979) analysis and later, the related methods explained in Clark (1982) and
Braun (1990). Throughout, these estimates of potential output were meant to correspond to a concept of
noninflationary “full employment”. However, judgmental considerations played an important role in
defining and updating of potential output estimates throughout this period, so the evolution of these
estimates cannot be easily compared to that of estimates based on a fixed statistical methodology.”
        More recently, Fleischman and Roberts (2011) describe a methodology to compute potential
output using a multivariate unobserved components model that is taken into account by the Federal
Reserve Board when producing their judgmental estimates of potential output. Their procedure embeds
some parts of many of the methodologies described above: it uses multivariate statistical methods, trend
estimation, growth accounting (as in the production function approach) and the relationship between
cyclical fluctuations in output and unemployment (as in Okun’s law). The authors use data on 9
macroeconomic series: real GDP, real gross domestic income, the unemployment rate, the labor-force
participation rate, aggregate hours for the nonfarm business sector, a measure of NFB sector employment,
two measures of NFB sector output (measured on the product side and on the income side) and inflation
as measured by the CPI excluding food and energy. The common cyclical component of the economy is
constrained to follow an AR(2) process and trends in the series are related to each other via structural
equations (e.g. Okun’s law, production function) to obtain a final measure of the trend of output which is
associated with potential output.




                                                                                                          7
        Real-time estimates of potential output can be computed from the estimates of actual output and
the output gap reported in Greenbooks since 1987.2 Real-time estimates for the same variables in the
1969-1987 period are provided in Orphanides (2004). For this earlier period, the quality of the estimates
is likely to be worse since the estimates sometimes had to be obtained from a variety of sources (e.g., the
Council of Economic Advisors) other than the Federal Reserve. As a result, we take the 1987-2011 series
as the benchmark and explore the longer time series in robustness checks.
        Estimates of potential output play an immediate role in decision-making by the Federal Reserve.
One of the objectives of the FOMC is to stabilize output around potential and whether output is below or
above potential is also commonly interpreted as having implications for inflation, the other objective
targeted by the Federal Reserve. Potential mismeasurement of the output gap (the difference between
actual output and potential) is mentioned (e.g. Orphanides 2001) as a reason why the Federal Reserve
allowed inflation to rise during the 1970s, and Greenspan’s perception that potential output was growing
unusually rapidly in the 1990s explains why monetary policymakers during this period were less
concerned about inflation than they normally would have been given the low unemployment rates of this
period (see Gorodnichenko and Shapiro 2007).

2.3. International Monetary Fund (IMF)
The IMF provides estimates of potential output for a wide range of countries. There is considerable
methodological variation across countries in how the IMF generates estimates of potential output. As
summarized in de Resende (2014), a study conducted by the IMF’s Independent Evaluation Office,
“Interviews with staff showed that the use of the macro framework is country-specific and varies greatly in
detail and sophistication, ranging from the use of “satellite” models to simply entering numbers based on
judgment.” In this respect, the IMF approach to measuring potential output is methodologically similar to
measures reported in Greenbooks, in the sense that they use a combination of different methods to compute
potential output and aggregate them using a great deal of judgement. At the same time, the IMF staff often
uses the Hodrick-Prescott filter and/or multivariate methods such as the ones described in Blagrave et al.
(2015) to construct measures of potential output. The IMF provides potential output estimates for 27
countries (see Table 1 for the list of countries). Nowcasts and one-year-ahead forecasts are available for
2003-2016. Since 2009, the IMF also provides up to five-year-ahead forecasts for potential output.
        Estimates of potential output can play an important role in IMF policy decisions. To assess the
sustainability of countries’ fiscal policies, tax and spending levels are commonly evaluated at the level of
potential GDP to control for the cyclical changes in revenues and expenditures that are expected to be


2
 This series is available from the Real-Time Data Research Center at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
There is a five-year delay period for the release of Greenbook projections.

                                                                                                            8
transitory, thereby helping to gauge any “structural” fiscal imbalances. These structural imbalances are then the
primary focus of policy reforms associated with countries receiving funds from the IMF during times of crisis.

2.4. Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
OECD estimates of potential output are based on a production function approach. In particular, the OECD
uses a Cobb-Douglas production function with constant returns to scale that combines physical capital,
human capital, labor, and labor-augmenting technological progress. Each of these inputs is projected using a
trend, and total factor productivity is assumed to converge to a certain degree among different countries in the
medium run. As pointed out in OECD (2012): “The degree of convergence in total factor productivity
depends on the starting point, with countries farther away from the technology frontier converging faster, but
it also depends on the country’s own structural conditions and policies.” Note that when forecasting potential
output in the medium term, the OECD assumes that output gaps close over a period of 4 to 5 years,
depending on their initial size. Therefore, one should expect to see above average future growth for countries
with large output gaps. Relative to the IMF, the OECD covers more countries and has longer time series (see
Table 1). For many countries, nowcasts and one-year-ahead forecasts are available since 1989. Since 2005,
the OECD also reports five-year-ahead forecasts for potential output. As with the IMF, estimates of potential
output in the OECD are commonly used to assess cyclically adjusted fiscal balances and to characterize the
need for structural reforms.

2.5. Consensus Economics
Consensus Economics, a survey of professional forecasters, does not provide estimates of potential output
but they report forecasts for the growth rate of actual output from 1 to 10 years into the future. Since
estimates made for several years into the future (for example, years 6 through 10) are likely to be
independent of business cycle conditions we use these long-run estimates as an approximation of the growth
rate of potential output at the same horizon. These data are available for 12 countries and the starting date
varies across countries from 1989 to 1998 (see Table 1). Given the wide range of forecasters included in
Consensus Economics forecasts, one cannot readily summarize how these forecasts are made. Private
forecasts, however, are widely used in both public and international organizations for comparison purposes
with in-house forecasts.

2.6. Comparison of Potential Output Measures
Table 2 documents some basic moments for estimates of potential output growth rate (nowcasts) produced by
the IMF and OECD as well as forecasted long-term actual output growth rate from Consensus Economics.
These series are highly correlated and generally have similar moments. This is especially true for the IMF and




                                                                                                               9
OECD forecasts, which conceptually are measuring the same objects (nowcasts of potential GDP).
Consensus forecasts, in contrast, are at a different horizon and are for actual GDP rather than potential GDP.
         Figure 2 shows that these strong correlations are not driven by outliers and that large differences
across sources tend to be concentrated in a handful of countries and periods. For example, the largest
difference between the IMF and OECD estimates of potential output growth rate happens for Slovakia in
2009, during which GDP fell sharply and the IMF reduced its estimates of potential GDP growth while
the OECD did not. In a similar spirit, the IMF and OECD estimated a low growth rate of potential output
for Spain in the post-Great Recession period while forecasters in Consensus Economics maintained their
predictions of a relatively fast long-term growth rate of actual output for Spain during the same period.
        Figure 3 illustrates that this strong correlation across series is not restricted to differences in growth
rates across countries. Time series for the growth rate for U.S. potential output across the different
institutions that produce estimates (Greenbook, CBO, IMF, OECD, Consensus Economics long-term
forecasts of actual output) track each other closely as well. There are nonetheless occasional differences
across estimates. After the 1990-91 recession, for example, the CBO reduced its estimate of potential GDP
growth significantly more than the staff of the Federal Reserve Board, whereas private forecasters hardly
changed their long-term forecasts of growth at all. After the Great Recession, the IMF and OECD both
lowered their estimates of potential GDP growth far more than the Greenbooks or the CBO, but then revised
them back up while the CBO continued to progressively revise its estimates of potential GDP growth down.
        Figure 4 plots a longer-time series of estimates of potential GDP available from the Greenbooks,
as extended backward by Orphanides (2004). In addition, we plot several statistical approaches to
estimating potential GDP, including a one-sided 5-year moving average of real-time GDP and a one-sided
HP-filter (λ=2,000,000) of real-time GDP. The HP-filter tracks the Greenbook estimate of potential
output quite closely, especially since the mid-1980s while the moving-average approach tends to display
larger fluctuations. All series co-move relatively closely with a moving-average of capacity-adjusted TFP
changes as measured in Fernald (2012).
        The persistence in revisions of potential GDP visible in Figures 3 and 4 suggests some of these
revisions might be predictable from recent changes. We evaluate this formally by regressing revisions of
potential GDP on lags of itself:
                  ∗           ∗                        ∗                 ∗
         Δ log    |   Δ log   |                Δ log       |     Δ log       |                                1
              ∗
where Δ log   |   is the growth rate of potential output in time t according to a projection made at time s.
We find (Table 3) a mild amount of predictability in Greenbook revisions of potential GDP. With CBO,
the coefficient on lagged revisions is similar but not significantly different from zero. The results are
different for international data, with coefficients on past OECD revisions being not different from zero
while those on past IMF and Consensus Economics exhibiting negative predictability.

                                                                                                               10
3       How Estimates of U.S. Potential Output Are Adjusted after Economic Shocks

While a limited unconditional predictability is a desirable attribute of estimates of potential GDP, it does
not imply that there is no predictability in estimates of potential output conditional on different economic
shocks. To assess how estimates of potential output respond to economic shocks, we will combine the
estimates described in the previous section with identified measures of economic or policy shocks.


3.1 Measures of economic shocks
There is a long literature on identifying shocks that potentially drive business-cycle and longer-term
fluctuations, particularly for the U.S. (see Ramey 2016 for a survey). Following this literature, we employ
several measures of both “demand” and “supply” shocks for the U.S.3
        For supply shocks, we consider changes in total factor productivity (TFP), oil price shocks and tax
shocks. The former are measured as in Fernald (2012), which adjusts Solow residuals for time-varying
utilization of inputs. Although these data are somewhat sensitive to vintage (see Sims 2016), we rely on the
final vintage of the data because the data by vintage are available for relatively recent times. For oil price
shocks, we use oil supply shocks as identified in Kilian (2009).4 For tax shocks, we use Romer and Romer
(2010)’s narrative measure of exogenous tax changes. To be clear, tax shocks have both demand and supply
effects. We denote them here as “supply” shocks because they appear to have permanent effects on output,
and therefore should be captured by estimates of potential GDP.
        We consider three identified demand shocks, all related to policy. The first are monetary policy
shocks. For the U.S., our baseline measure of these shocks follows the quasi-narrative approach of Romer
and Romer (2004). They use the narrative record to construct a consistent measure of policy changes at
FOMC meetings since 1969, then orthogonalize these policy decisions to the information available to
policymakers at each FOMC meeting, as captured by the Greenbook forecasts prepared by the staff of the
Federal Reserve Board before each FOMC meeting. The unexplained policy changes are then defined as
the monetary shocks. We use the updated version of these shocks from Coibion et al. (2017) and set
values after the onset of the zero-bound equal to zero.5


3
  Our use of the terms “supply” and “demand” reflects certain abuse of terminology. All of the shocks we consider
have both supply and demand effects in modern business cycle models. Our classification instead primarily relies on
whether these shocks appear to have permanent or transitory effects on GDP, and we define demand shocks as those
whose real effects appear to be transitory and therefore should not affect long-run forecasts of potential output.
Because the units of these shocks vary, we normalize all shocks to be mean zero and have unit variance.
4
  We also tried using the oil shocks identified by Baumeister and Hamilton (2015) in place of the ones identified by
Kilian (2009). The results were very similar and are available from the authors upon request.
5
  We also experimented with monetary policy shocks identified via recursive ordering of VAR residuals as in
Bernanke and Blinder (1992) and we found similar results, as documented in Appendix Figure 3.

                                                                                                                 11
         The second type of demand shock we consider are the military spending news shocks of Ramey
(2016). Using real-time measures of the expected future path of defense spending in the U.S., Ramey
constructs a measure of the present discounted value of future defense expenditures each quarter. Changes in
these measures from one quarter to the next thus reflect changes in either current or future defense spending.
         Finally, we consider a broader measure of government spending shocks, namely differences
between ex-post government spending and ex-ante forecasts of that spending following Auerbach and
Gorodnichenko (2012a). Unlike the Ramey news measure, this measure captures unanticipated short-run
changes in government spending, but is broader in that it includes much more than just military spending.

3.2 Effects of Shocks on Actual Output and Estimates of Potential Output in the U.S.
To provide a benchmark for how we should expect estimates of potential output to respond to economic
shocks, we first characterize the response of actual output to these shocks. Specifically, we regress ex-post
changes in output on current and past values of a shock as follows:

         Δ log                                                                                                       2

where     indexes time (quarters), Δ log         is the growth rate of real GDP,             is an identified shock, and
        is the residual. A key advantage of this moving-average specification is that it allows us to handle
data with mixed frequencies and gaps in the time series as well as correlations of the error term. For
consistency, we run these regressions at the same time frequency as what is available for estimates of
potential output, namely quarterly when comparing to Greenbook forecasts, semi-annually otherwise.
Since Greenbook forecasts of potential output begin in 1987, we run the regression for output over the
same time sample. Given the limited number of observations available, we include only one shock at a
time (the shocks are roughly uncorrelated). Because the error term is not necessarily white noise, we use
Newey-West standard errors everywhere.6 Impulse responses come directly from the estimates of                       . To
recover responses of the level of output, we cumulate               up to a given horizon. For example, the level
responses are       for      0,           for       1,                  for       2, etc.7
         For each impulse response, we include 66% confidence intervals and the legend of each
associated graph reports the p-values for two types of tests. In parentheses we report the p-value for a test
of whether the response of actual output is different from zero at the max horizon (8 quarters), while in
square brackets we show the p-value for a test of whether the path of the response of actual output is
different from zero over the entire horizon of the impulse response. These p-values are also included in
Panel A of Appendix Table 1, together with more information that we describe later.

6
  Since the null hypothesis we are testing is that of zero response of output and potential output, the fact that shocks
are estimated does not constitute an issue for standard errors and tests of the null hypothesis, as in Pagan (1984).
7
  For monetary policy shocks, we constrain          0 to capture the minimum delay restriction.

                                                                                                                      12
        We plot the responses of actual output to each type of shock in Figure 5. Panel A focuses on the
three supply shocks. In response to a TFP shock, output immediately rises about 0.5% points and remains
persistently higher by about that magnitude. Hence, these TFP shocks appear to have permanent effects
on output. Tax increases have a (negative) contemporaneous effect on output that is similarly sustained
over the entire impulse response horizon. In contrast, negative oil supply shocks have a more delayed
effect on output, but are associated with a long-lived decline in GDP. In short, all three supply shocks
have the expected long-lived effects on GDP.
        Turning to demand-side shocks (Panel B), we again find the expected responses of output.
Contractionary monetary policy shocks push output down. The point estimates are much less precise than
in Romer and Romer (2004), reflecting the shorter time sample, the fact that monetary shocks are smaller
over this limited sample, and the different approach to estimating impulse responses. Increases in
expected military expenditures have a delayed positive effect on GDP (which reflects the fact that the
expenditures themselves are also generally delayed).8 Immediate spending shocks as in Auerbach and
Gorodnichenko (2012a) have transitory short-run effects on GDP and no long-run effects. Demand-side
shocks therefore generally deliver cyclical variation in output but no long-run effects on GDP.
        To characterize the effects of these economic shocks on estimates of potential output, we run
equivalent specifications:

                    ∗
        Δ log       |                                                                                             3

                ∗
where Δ log     |       is the (nowcast) estimated growth in potential in quarter t given information in quarter t at
an annualized rate. We first consider Greenbook estimates of potential output and extend our results to
alternative estimates of potential in subsequent sections. Responses of the implied level of potential output
are constructed in the same way as before. For comparison, we plot the responses of potential output in the
same graphs as the responses of actual output, we also include 66% confidence intervals and the p-values
for the same tests mentioned above (now for the responses of potential output instead of actual output).
Finally, we also include the p-values for a test of whether paths of the responses for actual and potential
output are equal over the entire duration of the impulse response (in square brackets) and the p-values of a
test of whether the responses are equal at the maximum horizon (in parenthesis). The p-values are also
included in Panel A of Appendix Table 1.
        Looking first at TFP shocks, we find that estimates of potential GDP respond very gradually but in
the same direction as actual GDP. The shock has little immediate impact on estimates of potential, but after
two years, the responses are overlapping and estimates of potential GDP have caught up to actual GDP.

8
 While our horizon of impulse responses is too short to illustrate this, Ramey (2016) shows that news about future
military spending has only transitory effects on GDP.

                                                                                                                  13
Very similar results obtain with tax shocks: estimates of potential GDP are unchanged immediately after the
shock, but gradually converge to the path of actual GDP. Hence, with both TFP and tax shocks, one would
ultimately attribute the decline in output to a decline in potential output, but only with some delay. One
possible reason for delayed responses of forecasts is information rigidity, as suggested in Coibion and
Gorodnichenko (2012, 2015b). However, the fact that estimates of potential GDP evolve very gradually
after tax shocks (which occur only for large legislative tax changes that staff members at the Board would
be well aware of) suggests that other mechanisms must be at play to explain the inertia in real-time estimates
of potential output.
        Turning to the response to oil price shocks, we find a starkly different response: estimates of
potential GDP increase over time while actual GDP falls. In contrast to TFP and tax shocks, in which the
long-run response of output is ultimately matched by the response of potential, contractionary oil price
shocks are associated with sharply falling measured output gaps ( /          ) in the long run, as estimates of
potential are progressively increased while output itself is falling. Policymakers facing a tradeoff between
stabilizing inflation (which rises after a negative oil supply shock thereby calling for higher interest rates)
and closing the output gap (which is falling and calling for lower interest rates) are therefore perceiving an
even starker tradeoff since the rise in the estimate of potential output makes the output gap seem even more
negative.9 This result is not driven by the specific measure of oil supply shocks (we find a similar result with
the Kilian (2008) measure of OPEC supply shocks) or by the sample period (we find similar results for
alternative periods).
        There are several potential explanations for this finding. One is that policymakers are confounding
oil supply and demand shocks: if they observe a supply-driven increase in oil prices which they incorrectly
attribute to stronger global demand for oil from e.g. improved technology, then this might lead them to revise
their estimates of potential GDP upward even as actual GDP is falling. An alternative explanation is that
higher oil prices might be perceived as inducing greater investment in new energy sources and alternative
energy technologies, which could then raise potential GDP in the long-run even as short-run GDP falls,
though there is little evidence that GDP ultimately responds in this manner. The available data unfortunately
do not enable us to identify the underlying explanation. If nothing else, this result provides a surprising
example of how estimates of potential GDP can move in the direction opposite to that of actual GDP.
         Turning to demand shocks, we again observe important deviations from what one would expect of
estimates of potential GDP. With monetary and both types of fiscal shocks, estimates of potential respond
little on impact to these shocks but progressively respond in the same manner as the short-run response of


9
  The pronounced decline in the perceived output gap after oil supply shocks is consistent with the view that
monetary policymakers were too willing to accommodate these shocks with lower interest rates and that this
accommodation may have contributed to the Great Inflation of the 1970s.

                                                                                                             14
GDP. The transitory decline in GDP after a contractionary monetary shock is followed by a persistent
decline in the real-time estimates of potential GDP, while the transitory increase in output after an increase
in government spending is followed by a persistent rise in estimates of potential GDP. Hence, these cyclical
fluctuations in output lead to the perception among forecasters that they are permanently affecting output, as
if they were TFP or tax shocks, despite the fact their effects on income are actually short-lived.

3.3. Robustness of Baseline Results for the U.S.
Because of the relatively short samples involved, we want to verify that our results are robust to a range
of reasonable variations. Our first check is on the empirical method used to estimate impulse responses.
As an alternative to equations (2) and (3), we reproduce impulse responses of actual output and nowcasts
of potential GDP to each of the shocks using auto-distributed lag specifications to estimate IRFs as in
Romer and Romer (2004), namely:

           Δ log                     Δ log                                                                      4


using        4 and        8. Results are presented in Figure 6. By and large, the results are very similar. With
productivity and tax shocks, we continue to find persistent but delayed effects on estimates of potential GDP
that are ultimately converging to the responses of actual GDP. Similarly, with all three demand shocks, we find
the same qualitative patterns as with the previous empirical specification. The only difference lies in the
response to oil supply shocks, where we no longer observe a pronounced rise in estimates of potential GDP.
Instead, our estimates instead point toward no response of the nowcasts of potential, suggesting some
sensitivity in this result.
            One potential source for this empirical sensitivity is the limited time sample. As a result, we
replicate our baseline results over an extended time period, where for each shock we now use the maximum
time sample available across both the shocks and the Greenbook estimates of potential GDP (1969-2011).
The results, presented in Figure 7, confirm our baseline findings: there is a delayed but persistent response
of the estimates of potential GDP to all shocks. In every case but oil supply shocks, the nowcasts evolve in
the direction of the short-run changes in GDP. With oil supply shocks, the estimates of potential GDP rise in
an even more pronounced fashion while actual output falls.10 Hence, the baseline results are not specific to
the period since 1987. The p-values of the tests in Figure 7 are also included in panel B of Appendix Table
1.
           Another potential issue with these results is our reliance on estimates of potential GDP from a single
source, the staff of the Federal Reserve Board. In Figure 8, we reproduce our results using estimates of
potential GDP from the Congressional Budget Office. One advantage of CBO estimates is they are available

10
     When we apply the ADL specification to oil supply shocks over the whole sample, we find the same result.

                                                                                                                15
at different horizons. As a result, we consider both “nowcasts” of potential GDP (equivalent to Greenbook
estimates) as well as 5-year ahead forecasts (that is, the growth rate of potential output in five years from the
date when a forecast is made). A disadvantage of CBO estimates, as discussed in section 2.1, is that the
sample for these is more limited and the time frequency at which forecasts are available is reduced. Not
surprisingly, the effects of each shock on GDP are therefore considerably less precisely estimated. However,
the responses of the estimates of potential GDP are still quite precise. Qualitatively, we find that CBO
estimates of current potential GDP respond much like those from the Greenbooks: gradually but persistently
to all shocks. Long-run forecasts of potential GDP generally respond by less than those of current potential
GDP. However, they still ultimately respond to demand shocks, implying that the CBO implicitly interprets
cyclical shocks as having permanent effects on GDP. The p-values of the tests in Figure 8 are included in
Panel D of Appendix Table 1.11
         In short, we document a systematic response of estimates of potential GDP to shocks that have
only cyclical effects on GDP. Furthermore, even some supply shocks have contradictory effects on
estimates of potential GDP, in the sense that changes in the latter after oil supply shocks speak little to
actual long-run changes in output. Thus, seeing ex-post that declines in GDP seem to be accounted for by
changes in potential GDP, as has been the case in the U.S. since the Great Recession, says little about
whether the decline in output is likely to persist or can be reversed by standard countercyclical policies.

3. 4 Explaining Patterns in Impulse Responses
Why are estimates of potential GDP responding to shocks that only have cyclical effects, such as monetary
policy and government spending shocks? One possibility is that policy institutions and statistical agencies
perceive these shocks as affecting current levels of potential output (e.g., if they affect current capital stocks)
but not long-run levels of potential output (as would be implied by e.g. monetary neutrality). This is unlikely
to be the case, however, since the long-horizon CBO forecasts of potential GDP respond approximately as
much as their nowcasts of potential GDP.
         An alternative possibility is that these estimates are relying to a large extent on simple statistical
methods to measure trend (potential) levels from actual GDP. As illustrated in Figure 4, one can come close to
replicating the real-time Greenbook estimates of potential GDP growth by using a one-sided HP-filter on real-
time GDP data available each quarter or by taking a simple one-sided moving-average of recent GDP

11
  The fact that CBO forecasts of long-run potential respond similarly to nowcasts of potential GDP addresses one
potential issue raised in Blanchard (2017), namely that demand shocks might have transitory effects on potential
output even in standard models through a number of channels, such as lower levels of physical capital following
periods of disinvestment or lower levels of human capital after extended unemployment stretches. But in these
models, demand shocks would still have only transitory effects on potential, so forecasts of long-run potential output
should remain unchanged after demand shocks even if contemporaneous levels of potential were responding to these
shocks. The fact that both nowcasts and long-run CBO forecasts of potential respond to demand shocks suggests that
the mechanism emphasized in Blanchard is not driving these results.

                                                                                                                   16
outcomes.12 Since these types of methods fail to identify the different potential sources of changes in economic
activity, they would naturally lead to slow-moving dynamic responses to all economic shocks that move actual
output.
          To assess this possibility, we replicate our baseline impulse responses using the same two alternative
statistical approaches to estimating potential GDP. In the first case, we apply a one-sided HP-filter to real-
time data on GDP. In the second, we take a 5-year moving average of real GDP using real-time data. We
present the results, along with the responses of potential GDP as measured by the Greenbooks in Figure 9
(and the p-values are included in Panel C of Appendix Table 1). When using the HP-filtered series, we can
very closely replicate the response of estimated potential GDP after every shock.13 With the moving average,
the fit is not as close, and the response goes in the wrong direction after news about military spending and oil
supply shocks. The very close fit of the impulse responses using the HP filter, as well as how closely one can
reproduce the unconditional time series of historical estimates of potential GDP in Figure 4 with an HP-
filtered series, suggests that Greenbook estimates of potential GDP incorporate little additional information
relative to this purely statistical approach to estimating potential GDP.14 It is then quite natural for these series
to respond to all shocks that affect GDP, even if these movements are transitory in nature. But this
endogenous response to cyclical shocks should then not be interpreted as reflecting permanent effects of these
shocks on output but rather as a mechanical reaction based on how estimates of potential GDP are
constructed. Equivalently, observing a downward revision in Greenbook or CBO estimates of potential GDP
is not informative about whether the associated declines in actual GDP are likely to be sustained or not.

4         Cross-Country Evidence on the Incorporation of Shocks into Estimates of Potential

The Great Recession was of course not limited to the U.S. and the persistence of output declines in most
major advanced economies has also been associated with declines in their potential output, as documented

12
   This one-sided HP filter is implemented as follows. For a given quarter, “potential” output is calculated as the value
of the HP-filter trend for the quarter given by the first vintage of GDP data that covered that given quarter. The one
sided 5-year moving average for a given quarter is calculated as the 20-quarter moving average running on the current
quarter and the preceding 19 quarters reported in the first vintage of GDP data that covers the given quarter.
13
   The fact that we can match the increase in estimated potential output after an oil supply shock with the HP-filter points
toward a possible identification issue with these shocks. They are identified from a 3-variable VAR of oil production,
global economic activity (measured using an index of shipping prices) and oil prices. If oil prices are disproportionately
sensitive to U.S. output (rather than global output) or shipping prices are an otherwise imperfect measure of global
activity, then one might observe identified oil supply shocks disproportionately happening after sustained U.S. economic
expansions (since oil prices and production are endogenous). This could lead an HP-filter of real GDP to rise after an oil
supply shock.
14
   The best fit of HP-filtered series comes with very high values of λ (we use λ=2,000,000). This high value is
consistent with a low pass filter that allows only low frequencies with periods of about 15 years and higher. Lower
values do not replicate Greenbook measures of potential GDP as closely, as can be seen in Appendix Figure 2.
Similarly with moving average measures, we can better replicate the dynamic response of Greenbook estimates of
potential when averaging over long periods (10-20 years) than over shorter horizons (3-5 years) as illustrated in
Appendix Figure 1.

                                                                                                                         17
in Ball (2014). To what extent do the cyclical patterns documented above in estimates of potential GDP
generalize to other countries? In this section, we turn to cross-country estimates of potential GDP, both from
international organizations as well as from professional forecasters. Using international data gives us many
more observations and thus more statistical precision and power.

4.1 IMF and OECD Estimates of Potential GDP
We consider first estimates of potential GDP from two international organizations, the IMF and the OECD.
Both provide estimates of the level of potential GDP for a wide range of countries.15
         We follow the same strategy as with the U.S. and compare impulse responses of actual GDP and
estimates of potential GDP from each of these two organizations to different economic shocks. However,
because time samples are much shorter for most countries, we pool data across all countries in our sample.
In short, for each identified shock , we estimate the following specifications:

         Δ log    , |                               ,              ,                                                    5

                 ∗
         Δ log   , |                                ,              ,                                                    6

where j indicates the country and         ,   and       ,   denote country and time fixed effects respectively. The
time frequency is semi-annual, as determined by the frequency of real-time estimates of potential GDP by
both the IMF and OECD.
         Because of more limited data availability across countries, we cannot identify as many shocks
and in the same way as done for the U.S. For productivity, we use innovations in labor productivity, after
conditioning on past changes in labor productivity as well as country and time fixed effects.16 For oil
shocks, we continue to use the Kilian measure of oil supply shocks but interact it with a country-specific
measure of oil sufficiency (from the International Energy Agency’s (IEA 2017) World Energy Statistics
and Balances, available via the OECD) to distinguish it from the time fixed effects.17 For monetary policy
shocks, we run a VAR for each country on GDP growth, unemployment, inflation and the interest rate
and apply a Choleski decomposition on this ordering to recover country-specific interest rate shocks. The



15
   We exclude Norway from our analysis because this country relies heavily on energy exports.
16
   Specifically, we use a measure of labor productivity at the semiannual frequency taken from the OECD and then
regress it on lags of itself in a panel regression with country and time fixed effects, allowing coefficients on the lags of
labor productivity to vary over countries, as well as a dummy for Ireland in 2015 due to its very big outliers in terms of
productivity changes. It is important to notice that this OECD measure of labor productivity is highly correlated with
other measures of productivity, such as multifactor productivity from the OECD or productivity from EU-KLEMS data.
17
   Oil sufficiency measures what percentage of total oil usage can be satisfied from each country’s supply. Hence it
ranges from 0 (if the country has no oil supply at all, for example Belgium), passing through 1 (if the country can
exactly satisfy its oil demand, for example Australia) up to high numbers like 20 (if the country has a lot more oil
that it demands and can export a lot, for example Norway).

                                                                                                                         18
VAR has four lags using quarterly data from 1980Q1 until 2016Q4 or as available.18 Finally, fiscal shocks
are differences between ex-post government spending and ex-ante forecasts of government spending from
the OECD, following Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012b).
         Turning first to the OECD sample of countries and estimates of potential GDP, Figure 10 presents
responses of both GDP and potential to each of the four shocks (the p-values for the same tests discussed in
section 3 are included in the figure and summarized in Appendix Table 2). All four shocks yield the
expected changes in GDP. Productivity shocks have an immediate and permanent effect on output while oil
supply shocks have a negative albeit delayed persistent effect on output. Both demand shocks have
transitory effects on GDP which start dissipating around one or one and a half years and are mostly gone
after three years (we only show IRF’s up to 4 semesters in the figure).
         The effects of these shocks on potential GDP are very consistent with those obtained for the U.S.
with Greenbook and CBO forecasts. In response to productivity shocks, estimates of potential GDP evolve
gradually in the direction of actual changes in output. After oil supply shocks, estimates of potential GDP
decrease slightly, but this response is very weak. After both demand shocks, estimates of potential GDP
gradually and persistently evolve in the same direction as the short-run changes in GDP even though these
changes in GDP are transitory. Thus, we observe both the under-cyclicality after productivity shocks and
over-cyclicality after demand shocks documented in the U.S.
         Furthermore, we include in the figure the impulse response of HP-filtered real GDP (constructed for
each country using real-time data and a one-sided filter) to each shock. As was the case with the U.S., we
find that HP-filtered GDP responds almost identically to each shock as the OECD’s estimates of potential
GDP. As was the case with the Greenbook estimates of potential GDP, OECD estimates do not appear to
capture much more information than what is embodied in a simple univariate filter of real-time actual GDP
growth rates, which can account for why their estimates of potential GDP growth rates therefore respond to
shocks that have only cyclical effects on GDP.
         In Figure 11, we produce equivalent results for the IMF sample of countries and IMF estimates of
potential GDP. Despite the different countries in the sample, the estimated effects of the shocks on actual
GDP are very similar as those found in the OECD sample. The responses of the IMF’s estimated levels of
potential GDP respond similarly as those from the OECD: they rise inertially after productivity shocks, and
respond inertially as well after monetary and fiscal shocks, in the same direction as the short-run response of
GDP. Their response after oil supply shocks is equally weak. We also again include for comparison



18
  A group of countries is in the eurozone after 1999. For these countries, we construct monetary policy shocks as follows.
For the pre-euro period, we run a country-specific VAR and obtain monetary policy as described in the text. For the euro-
period, we run a VAR with variables measured at the level of the eurozone. From this VAR, we obtain monetary policy
shocks which we append to the shocks identified in the pre-euro period. We estimate VARs on the full sample.

                                                                                                                       19
responses of real-time HP-filtered output and find, as with the OECD, that these very closely track the IMF
estimates of potential output after shocks, with the only exception again being oil supply shocks.
        Overall, the evidence from these two international organizations closely aligns with previous
evidence from the U.S.: their estimates of potential GDP are well-approximated by an HP-filter applied to
real-time data and therefore seem to respond mechanically to short-run changes in GDP, regardless of the
underlying source of economic variation. This suggests that observing revisions in one of these
organization’s estimates of potential GDP in a country possibly tells us little about how persistent the
concurrent changes in GDP are likely to be.

4.2 Private Long-Horizon Forecasts of GDP growth rate
In addition to forecasts from international policy organizations, we consider how private forecasters adjust
their beliefs about the long-run GDP growth rate in response to shocks. While forecasts of potential GDP
are not readily available, Consensus Economics provides forecasts of GDP at long-horizons on a semi-
annual basis. To the extent that cyclical fluctuations in GDP should be complete within 5 or so years, these
long-horizon forecasts should be equivalent to forecasts of potential GDP growth at the same horizon.
        Using the same shocks as those used with OECD and IMF samples, we replicate our previous
results using private forecasts of long-run GDP for the 12 countries for which we have these forecasts (see
Table 1 for countries and periods included in this sample). With the different sample of countries and time
periods, the impulse responses of actual GDP are broadly similar (Figure 12), although the output responses
to monetary shocks are more persistent while the response to oil supply shocks is much less precise.
        After productivity shocks, private forecasts gradually evolve in the same direction as actual output,
therefore replicating the pattern observed with forecasts from public and international organizations. After
the two demand shocks, the private sector forecasts also gradually evolve in the direction of the short-run
movements in GDP, although the response after monetary shocks is not significant at standard levels. With
respect to oil supply shocks, private forecasts of long-run GDP decline gradually.
        For comparison, we also plot the implied response of HP-filtered levels of output to the same shocks
and countries. For all shocks HP-filtered forecasts evolve in the same direction as private forecasts but more
rapidly. This is in contrast to what was found with estimates of potential from public and international
organizations when the estimates of potential GDP were almost identical in the impulse responses to those of
an HP-filtered level of output. The more inertial response of private forecasters could reflect less rapid
information updating or a difference in forecasting horizon (private forecasts are for long-run levels of GDP
rather than current estimates of potential GDP). As was found with CBO forecasts at different horizons, long-
run forecasts may be changed less rapidly than estimates of contemporaneous output gaps.




                                                                                                           20
5       Alternative Approaches to Estimating Potential Output
The apparent inability of available estimates of potential output to differentiate between shocks that have
permanent effects and those with only transitory effects raises the question of whether alternative approaches
might do better. Obviously, this is a challenging task and developing a single satisfactory method is beyond
the scope of the paper. However, we can utilize available tools to get a glimpse of what may constitute a basis
for a satisfactory method to estimate potential output. Specifically, we first use the Blanchard and Quah
(1989) approach, designed specifically to separately identify supply and demand shocks, to show that long-
run restrictions may provide a practical solution to some of the issues we have identified above. We show that
this approach implies significantly different estimates of potential output during the Great Recession, and that
alternative approaches yield similar conclusions.

5.1 Blanchard and Quah Approach to Estimating Potential Output
In this simple, proof-of-concept exercise, we follow Blanchard and Quah (1989, BQ henceforth) and
estimate a bivariate VAR(8) where the variables are output growth and the unemployment rate. The
identifying restriction of this model is as follows: supply-side shocks are the structural shocks that have
permanent effects on the level of output and demand-side shocks are restricted to have zero effect on the
level of output in the long run. We then interpret predicted movements in output driven by supply-side
shocks as capturing potential output. The restriction that only supply-side shocks have permanent effects
on output is broadly consistent with the responses of demand observed in Figure 5 and other results in the
literature, namely that monetary and government spending shocks do not seem to have permanent effects
on output (e.g. Romer and Romer 2004, Ramey 2016).
        Because BQ and others emphasize the importance of structural breaks, we use a rolling window of
120 quarters.19 When applying the BQ approach, we use real-time data to ensure that our results are not
driven by information not available to the econometrician. That is, in a particular quarter (say 1995Q1) we
use the vintages of real output growth and unemployment rate that were available at that point in time
(obtained from the FRB of Philadelphia’s real time database for macroeconomists), we estimate the SVAR
with long run restriction using these series, we then perform the historical decomposition on this data to
recover the component of the growth rate of actual output due to supply-side shocks for the given quarter.
That is, we keep only the data point that corresponds to the last quarter in a rolling-window sample. The
next quarter’s (1995Q2) historical decomposition data point is going to use vintages that were not available
yet in 1995Q1, and the previous quarter’s (1994Q4) historical decomposition data point used vintages that
contained less information and stopped in 1994Q4. This approach therefore uses no more information than

19
   We would like the rolling window to be big for the long-run identifying restriction to work well, but we would
like it to be small to minimize exposure to structural breaks, we compromise by using a rolling window of 120
quarters, but results are similar when we use alternative rolling windows such as 80, 100, 140 or 160 quarters.

                                                                                                              21
was available to agents in real-time, making our estimates comparable to real-time estimates of US potential
GDP like those from the Greenbooks or the CBO.
        After we recover the time series of the growth rate of output due to supply shocks (that is, our
estimate of potential output), we estimate regressions (2) and (3) on actual output and our estimate of
potential output. Figure 13 shows the resulting impulse responses. We find that, in contrast to the
conventional estimates of potential output, our estimate strongly reacts to supply shocks and exhibits no
significant sensitivity to demand shocks. Interestingly, the reaction of our estimate for potential output to a
TFP shock is stronger at short horizons than the reaction of actual output. This pattern is consistent with
theoretical responses in New Keynesian models where frictions prevent actual output from an immediate
adjustment to a productivity shock so that a productivity shock creates a negative output gap in the short
run. Despite its simplicity, the BQ approach can therefore make progress toward resolving puzzles in the
reaction of conventional estimates of potential output to identified shocks.
        The fact that real-time estimates of potential output coming from the BQ do not suffer from the
same issues identified with CBO and other agency estimates of potential output is notable. One
interpretation of how the latter respond to shocks is that they represent the optimal outcome in the
presence of noisy information: if agents cannot differentiate between supply and demand shocks in real-
time, then their estimates of potential should slowly respond to each kind of shock. But the fact that the
BQ methodology can, in real-time, successfully distinguish between the two kinds of shocks suggests that
this is not a binding constraint on real-time analysis but rather reflects the specific methodologies used by
each organization to create measures of potential output.
        The different estimates of potential output coming from the Blanchard and Quah (1989)
methodology are also not innocuous in their policy implications relative to the estimates of organizations
like the CBO. In Figure 14, we plot the real-time revisions in potential output from the BQ methodology
during the Great Recession. Like CBO estimates, we find that there are declines in potential output during
the Great Recession that take time to uncover: the first significant downward revisions for 2009 potential
output occur using the 2013 estimates. But there is little predictability in subsequent revisions: they all
closely track the 2013 estimates of the path of output. And unlike the CBO estimates, the BQ approach
points to a large difference and continuing gap between actual output and potential. For 2016, we estimate
U.S. potential output to be approximately 7 log percentage points higher than actual output, a difference
which could potentially be closed through the use of demand side policies.

5.2 Alternative Estimates of Potential Output after the Great Recession




                                                                                                            22
The BQ methodology points to a very different view of potential output since the Great Recession than
that suggested by the CBO and other statistical and policy institutions. In this section, we consider several
alternative theory-based approaches to investigate the robustness of this finding.
          One approach closely related to BQ is from Gali (1999). He proposes to identify technology
shocks in a VAR through long-run restrictions by assuming that these shocks change labor productivity in
the long-run while other shocks do not. We apply the same 2-variable VAR as used in Gali (1999) on
real-time data and define the real-time level of potential output as the level of output coming only from
the identified technology shocks. As illustrated in Panel A of Figure 15, this approach points to even
smaller revisions to the output gap over the course of the Great Recession, perhaps due to the narrower
interpretation of the types of shocks that affect potential output than in BQ. The 2017 level of potential
output is only 5 log percentage points lower when estimated using 2017 data than forecasted from 2006
data, yielding an output gap in 2017 of well over 10 log percentage points.
          Cochrane (1994) proposes an alternative approach to identifying permanent changes in GDP by
exploiting the consumption/output ratio. Under the Friedman (1957) Permanent Income Hypothesis,
consumption changes reflect permanent changes in income so adding information about consumption can
help decompose transitory from permanent changes in income. Applying his methodology to real-time data
on consumption and GDP and identifying potential GDP as those changes associated with changes in
consumption yields a surprisingly similar path of revisions in potential output over the Great Recession as the
BQ approach, as illustrated in Panel B of Figure 15. There is a large downward revision in the predicted path
of potential output between 2007 and 2009 of about 5 percentage points, but subsequent revisions are very
small. As with the Gali (1999) approach, the implied output gap in 2017 is therefore above 10 log percentage
points.
          Another variable that can be informative about potential output is the inflation rate. In New
Keynesian models, nominal rigidities generate an expectations-augmented Phillips curve which relates
inflation to expected inflation and the output gap. Conditional on observing inflation, expected inflation, and
real GDP, one can then use the Phillips curve to infer the potential level of GDP (under the assumption of no
markup shocks). A key advantage of this approach is that it does not reply on long-run restrictions which may
be sensitive to structural breaks (Fernald 2007). Because there are few revisions to inflation data and we
cannot forecast the path of future potential GDP from the Phillips curve, we cannot replicate the previous
results of plotting predicted paths of potential output from different periods. Instead, we plot a smoothed
version of 2017 estimates of potential GDP over the period of the Great Recession in Panel C of Figure 15,




                                                                                                            23
along with the 2017 estimates from other approaches for comparison.20 Because inflation did not decline
significantly until well into the Great Recession (the “Missing Disinflation”), these estimates of potential
GDP do not decline much until 2011, significantly later than other approaches. However, by 2017, the
resulting estimate of potential GDP is close to that of the BQ approach, pointing to an output gap of about 5
log percentage points.
        In short, bringing additional information to bear on the identification of potential output, be it
from labor productivity, consumption or inflation, combined with theoretical predictions regarding how
these variables relate to potential GDP, largely confirms the findings of the BQ approach. Each approach
points to non-trivial revisions in potential output following the Great Recession, but not nearly as large as
those coming from the CBO or other organizations. This implies that current US output likely remains
significantly below potential output, and therefore that further stabilization policies could be warranted.


6       Conclusion
In the U.S. as well as across a wide range of countries, we find that private and public estimates of potential
GDP respond gradually but systematically to all of the economic shocks that we consider and deviate little
from what one would expect from simple univariate time series estimates of potential GDP. These results
have several potential policy implications.
        The first is that revisions in estimates of potential GDP tell us little about the underlying source of
changes in GDP. While revisions in potential GDP are often interpreted as indicating permanent changes in
the level of GDP, our results call for caution in adopting this interpretation. Even shocks that induce only
transitory changes in income are associated with subsequent revisions in estimates of potential GDP. The
fact that forecasters now attribute much of the decline in output across countries since the Great Recession
to changes in potential GDP therefore tells us little about whether these changes in output are in fact likely
to persist or whether they can be reversed through monetary or fiscal policies.
        A second implication is that there is much work to be done to create better measures of potential
GDP in real-time before policymakers rely on these too much. There are several methods that seem
potentially underused. One is using additional macroeconomic variables and restrictions to better identify
supply and demand shocks rather than relying on univariate processes. For example, we show that the
Blanchard and Quah (1989) approach may provide a good starting point, and that information from labor
productivity, consumption and inflation each also can be informative about the potential level of GDP. A
second possibility is to combine information from public estimates of potential GDP with private sector


20
  We plot a smoothed version because high-frequency variation in inflation generates high-frequency variation in
estimates of potential GDP. The Phillips curve is estimated with inflation expectations from the Michigan Survey of
Consumers as in Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015a).

                                                                                                                 24
forecasts, as the latter appear somewhat more successful at isolating supply shocks from demand shocks. A
third possibility is to avoid excessive use of model-averaging, or at least to avoid including simple
approaches like HP-filters among the class of models used, since these mechanically induce movements in
estimates of potential after cyclical demand-driven fluctuations. More generally, the absence of clear ways to
precisely estimate potential output in real-time suggests that the practice of relying on “judgement” by
professional economists should not be discontinued anytime soon since judgement may be useful in
differentiating sources of macroeconomic volatility.
        More broadly, our results are informative about the degree of “slack” that may remain in the U.S.
economy, ten years after the start of the Great Recession. One prominent view among policy-makers is that
the economy is currently close to potential and therefore that policy accommodations can be gradually
removed. An opposing view comes from the literature on hysteresis. As suggested in Blanchard (2017), if
hysteresis forces are strong, even a demand-side driven recession can lead to long-lasting declines in
potential GDP. But the fact that the output gap may currently be zero does not imply, under this
interpretation, that further countercyclical policy is unwarranted since additional monetary and fiscal
stimulus could not only push the economy above its low levels but also ultimately raise the potential level of
GDP as well. Our results favor a third but complementary view, namely that the economy remains below
potential GDP and therefore additional monetary and fiscal stimulus remains warranted, regardless of
whether they ultimately affect potential GDP or not.


References

Andres, Javier, David Lopez-Salido, and Ed Nelson, 2005. “Sticky-Price Models and the Natural Rate
        Hypothesis,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52(5): 1025-1053.
Anzoategui, Diego, Diego Comin, Mark Gertler, and Joseba Martinez, 2016. “Endogenous Technology
        Adoption and R&D as Sources of Business Cycle Persistence,” NBER Working Papers, 22005.
Auerbach, Alan, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2012a. “Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal Policy,”
        American Economic Journal – Economic Policy 4(2): 1–27.
Auerbach, Alan, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2012b. “Fiscal Multipliers in Recession and Expansion,” in
        Fiscal Policy after the Financial Crisis, Alberto Alesina and Francesco Giavazzi, eds., University
        of Chicago Press.
Ball, Laurence, 2014. “Long-Term Damage from the Great Recession in OECD Countries,” Working
        Paper, John Hopkins University, May 2014.
Barsky, Robert, and Eric Sims, 2011. “News Shocks and Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary
        Economics 58(3): 273-289.
Baumeister, Christiane, and Gert Peersman, 2013. “Time-Varying Effects of Oil Supply Shocks on the
        US Economy,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 5(4): 1-28.
Baumeister, Christiane, and J.D. Hamilton, 2015. “Structural Interpretation of Vector Autoregressions
        with Incomplete Identification: Revisiting the Role of Oil Supply and Demand Shocks,” Working
        paper, November 2015.
Beaudry, Paul, and Franck Portier, 2006. “Stock Prices, News and Economic Fluctuations,” American
        Economic Review 96(4): 1293-1307.

                                                                                                           25
Benigno, Gianluca, and Luca Fornaro, 2017. “Stagnation traps,” ECB Working Paper 2038.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Alan S. Blinder, 1992. “The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels of Monetary
         Transmission,” American Economic Review 82(4): 901-921.
Blagrave, Patrick, et al., 2015. “A Simple Multivariate Filter for Estimating Potential Output.” IMF
         Working Paper, 2015-79.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Danny Quah, 1989. “The Dynamic Effects of Demand and Supply Disturbances,”
         American Economic Review 79(4): 655-673.
Blanchard, Olivier, 2017. “Should One Reject the Natural Rate Hypothesis?” Manuscript.
Blanchard, Olivier, Guido Lorenzoni and Jean-Paul L’Huillier, 2017. “Short-Run Effects of Lower
         Productivity Growth. A Twist on the Secular Stagnation Hypothesis.” NBER Working Paper 23160.
Cochrane, John, 1994. “Permanent and Transitory Components of GNP and Stock Prices,” Quarterly
         Journal of Economics, 109(1): 241-265.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2012. “What Can Survey Forecasts Tell Us about
         information Rigidities?” Journal of Political Economy 120(1): 116-159.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2015a. “Is the Phillips Curve Alive and Well after All?
         Inflation Expectations and the Missing Disinflation,” American Economic Journal:
         Macroeconomics 7(1): 197-232.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2015b. “Information Rigidity and the Expectations
         Formation Process: A Simple Framework and New Facts,” American Economic Review 105(8):
         2644-2678.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Lorenz Kueng, and John Silvia, 2017. “Innocent Bystanders?
         Monetary Policy and Inequality in the U.S.” Journal of Monetary Economics 88: 70-89.
Congressional Budget Office, 2001. CBO’s Method for Estimating Potential Output: An Update. August
         2001.
Congressional Budget Office, 2014. Revisions to CBO’s Projection of Potential Output Since 2007.
         February 2014.
de Resende, Carlos, 2014. “An Assessment of IMF Medium-Term Forecasts of GDP Growth.” Background
         Paper, Independent Evaluation Office of the International Monetary Fund. February 12, 2014.
Edge, Rochelle, and Jeremy Rudd, 2016. “Real-time Properties of the Federal Reserve’s Output Gap.”
         Review of Economics and Statistics 98(4): 785–791.
Fatas, Antonio, and Summers, Lawrence, 2016. “The Permanent Effects of Fiscal Consolidations.”
         Manuscript.
Fernald, John G., 2007. “Trend breaks, long-run restrictions, and contractionary technology
         improvements,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Elsevier, vol. 54(8), pages 2467-2485,
         November.
Fernald, John G., 2012. “A Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Productivity.” FRBSF
         Working Paper, 2012-19 (updated April 2014).
Fernald, John G., James H. Stock, Robert E. Hall and Mark W. Watson, 2017. “The Disappointing
         Recovery of Output after 2009.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2017.
Fleischman, Charles and Roberts, John, 2011. “From Many Series, One Cycle: Improved Estimates of the
         Business Cycle from a Multivariate Unobserved Components Model.” Finance and Economics
         Discussion Series, Divisions of Research & Statistics and Monetary Affairs Federal Reserve
         Board, Washington, D.C., 2011-46.
Friedman, Milton, 1957. A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ.
Gali, Jordi, 1999. “Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks Explain
         Aggregate Fluctuations?” American Economic Review 89(1): 249-271.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, and Matthew D. Shapiro, 2007. “Monetary policy when potential output is uncertain:
         Understanding the growth gamble of the 1990s,” Journal of Monetary Economics 54(4), 1132-1162.
International Energy Agency (IEA), 2017. “World Indicators,” IEA World Energy Statistics and
         Balances (database). DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/data-00514-en. (Accessed on 12 May 2017).


                                                                                                     26
Kilian, Lutz, 2008. “Exogenous Oil Supply Shocks: How Big Are They and How Much Do they Matter
        for the U.S. Economy?” Review of Economics and Statistics 90(2): 216–240.
Kilian, Lutz, 2009. “Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply Shocks in
        the Crude Oil Market.” American Economic Review 99(3): 1053–1069.
Krugman, Paul, 2014. “Four observations on secular stagnation.” in Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes
        and Cures, Teulings, C. and Baldwin, R., eds., CEPR, London.
Kuttner, Kenneth, 1994. “Estimating Potential Output as a Latent Variable,” Journal of Business and
        Economic Statistics 12(3): 361-368.
Mishkin, Frederick, 2007. Estimating Potential Output. Speech at the Conference on Price Measurement
        for Monetary Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. Dallas, Texas. May 24, 2007.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 2012. OECD Economic Outlook.
        Chapter 4, Medium and long-term scenarios for global growth and imbalances. Volume 2012/1.
Orphanides, Athanasios and Simon van Norden, 2002. “The Unreliability of Output-Gap Estimates in
        Real Time,” Review of Economics and Statistics 84(4): 569-583.
Orphanides, Athanasios, 2003. “The quest for prosperity without inflation.” Journal of Monetary
        Economics 50: 633–663.
Orphanides, Athanasios, 2004. “Monetary Policy Rules, Macroeconomic Stability, and Inflation: A View
        from the Trenches.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 36(2): 151-175.
Orphanides, Athanasios. 2001. “Monetary Policy Rules Based on Real-Time Data.” American Economic
        Review 91(4): 964-985.
Pagan, Adrian, 1984. “Econometric Issues in the Analysis of Regressions with Generated Regressors,”
        International Economic Review 25(1): 221-247.
Ramey, Valerie, 2016. “Macroeconomic Shocks and Their Propagation,” in Handbook of
        Macroeconomics, Volume 2, John Taylor and Harald Uhlig, eds., Elsevier Science.
Romer, Christina, and David Romer, 2004. “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation and
        Implications,” American Economic Review 94(4): 1055–1084.
Romer, Christina, and David Romer, 2010. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes: Estimates
        Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks,” American Economic Review 100(3): 763–801.
Sims, Eric, 2016. “Differences in Quarterly Utilization-Adjusted TFP by Vintage, with an Application to
        News Shocks.” NBER Working Paper 22154.
Summers, Lawrence, 2014. “U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero
        Lower Bound.” Business Economics 49(2):65-73.
Summers, Lawrence, 2016. “The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It,”
        Foreign Affairs 95(2): 2-9.




                                                                                                    27
                                  Figure 1: Historical Revisions in CBO Estimates of U.S. Potential Output.

                                                              Panel A: The Great Recession




                           .25
                                                      CBO 2007             CBO 2009
                                                      CBO 2011             CBO 2013
                           .2                         CBO 2015             CBO 2017
                                                      actual
              log deviation from 2007Q1
               0     .05      .1
                           -.05
                           -.1      .15




                                            2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017



                                                          Panel B: The 1990s Productivity Boom
                          .35
                          .3
               log deviation from 1994Q1
             .05    .1    .15    .2   .25




                                                                                 CBO 1995            CBO 1997
                          0




                                                                                 CBO 1999            CBO 2001
                                                                                 CBO 2003            actual
                          -.05




                                            1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005



Notes: The figure plots estimates of U.S. potential output from the Congressional Budget Office made at
different time periods. The solid black line represents real GDP in the U.S.

                                                                                                                    28
    Figure 2: Comparison of IMF and OECD estimates (nowcast) for potential output growth rate with
                forecasted long-term growth for actual output in Consensus Economics.
                                       Panel A. IMF vs OECD




                                                                            6
                          Growth rate of potential output (annualized %), IMF
                                                                4
                                                                                                                                       SVK, 2009S1



                                                    2

                                                                                                                                             SVK, 2009S2
                         -2           0




                                                                                 -2             0                  2                4                6
                                                                                      Growth rate of potential output (annualized %), OECD


                                                                                 Panel B. OECD vs. Consensus Economics
                         Growth rate of potential output (annualized %), OECD
                                 0        1        2       3       4      5




                                                                                                        ESP
                         -1




                                                                          1                       2                    3                  4
                                                                 Growth rate of actual output, 6-10 yr ahead (annualized %), Consensus Economics


                                                                                  Panel C: IMF vs Consensus Economics
                                                                             4
                           Growth rate of potential output (annualized %), IMF
                                    0         1          2          3




                                                                                                                                 ESP
                          -1




                                                                     .5             1             1.5           2           2.5           3
                                                                   Growth rate of actual output, 6-10 yr ahead (annualized %), Consensus Economics


Notes: Filled markers in Panels B and C show observations for Spain in the 2009-2016 period.


                                                                                                                                                           29
   Figure 3: Comparison of estimates of potential output growth rate and forecasted long-term growth for
                                           actual output, USA.


    1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5
                                                                      IMF          OECD                 Consensus
     Growth rate of potential output (annualized %)


                                                                      CBO          Greenbook




                                                      1987   1991   1995    1999   2003   2007   2011      2015

Notes: All series in the figure are based on real time data. All series are at the semi-annual frequency. The Potential
output for IMF, OECD, and CBO is reported for the current calendar year. Potential output for Greenbooks is the
semiannual average of quarterly growth rates of potential output for the quarters in a given semester. Series for
Consensus Economics show the 6-10-year-ahead forecast for actual output growth rate (per year).




                                                                                                                    30
Figure 4: Real-time estimates of potential output growth rate and trends in actual output growth rate, USA.



            7                                                        Potential GDP (Orphanides 2004)
                                                                     Potential GDP (Greenbook)
                                                                     HP-filtered Actual GDP, =2M
            6


                                                                     MA(20) Actual GDP
                                                                     MA(20) TFP
            5
     percent per year
         3  2
            1
            0    4




                        1970   1975   1980      1985        1990        1995        2000        2005        2010


Notes: All series in the figure are based on real time data. All series are at the quarterly frequency. Potential output for
the pre-1987 period is taken from Orphanides (2004). Potential output for 1987-2011 is from the Federal Reserve Bank
of Philadelphia. Potential output is measured as the growth rate of potential output between a given quarter and the next
3 quarters. HP-filtered actual output for a given quarter is calculated as the value of the one-sided HP-filter trend for
the quarter given the first vintage of GDP data that covers the given quarter. The smoothing parameter for the HP filter
is set at 2,000,000. MA(20) actual output for a given quarter is calculated as the 20-quarter moving average running on
the current quarter and the preceding 19 quarters reported in the first vintage of GDP data that covers the given quarter.
MA(20) TFP for a given quarter is calculated as the 20-quarter moving average running on the current quarter and the
preceding 19 quarters. We use the latest vintage of TFP data.




                                                                                                                         31
                                                                                   Figure 5: Responses of Output and Greenbook Estimates of Potential Output in U.S. to Shocks.

                                                                                                                                                                                    Panel A: Supply Shocks
                                                                                 TFP shock (Fernald)                                                                          Tax shock (Romer and Romer 2010)                                                                          Oil supply shock (Kilian 2009)




                                                                                                                                                  .5
                                       2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                   output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                              output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     output growth rate, percent, annualized
                                                 1.5




                                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -1
                                     1




                                                                                                                                   -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -2
                        .5




                                                                                                                                                  -1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -3
                                       0




                                                               0    1        2       3        4          5   6   7        8                                               0    1        2       3       4       5   6   7        8                                             0   1        2       3       4       5   6   7        8

                                                                        Actual Output, (0.296) [0.020]           66% CI                                                            Actual Output, (0.106) [0.002]       66% CI                                                         Actual Output, (0.012) [0.018]       66% CI
                                                                        Poten. Output, (0.001) [0.126]           66% CI                                                            Poten. Output, (0.000) [0.000]       66% CI                                                         Poten. Output, (0.242) [0.894]       66% CI
                                                                        Actual=Poten., (0.962) [0.174]                                                                             Actual=Poten., (0.983) [0.001]                                                                      Actual=Poten., (0.002) [0.038]



                                                                                                                                                                                   Panel B: Demand Shocks
                                                              Monetary policy shock (Romer and Romer 2004)                                                                    Military spending shock (Ramey 2016)                                                                     Gov't spending shock (AG 2012)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                    1.5
                                                         .5
                   output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                              output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     output growth rate, percent, annualized
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                           1
                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                               .5
                                  -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -1
                                                                                                                                    0
                       -1




                                                                                                                                                  -.5
                                     -1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -2
                                                              0     1        2       3       4           5   6   7        8                                               0    1        2       3       4       5   6   7        8                                             0   1        2       3       4       5   6   7        8
                                                                        Actual Output, (0.533) [0.409]           66% CI                                                            Actual Output, (0.204) [0.000]       66% CI                                                         Actual Output, (0.922) [0.065]       66% CI
                                                                        Poten. Output, (0.035) [0.455]           66% CI                                                            Poten. Output, (0.029) [0.183]       66% CI                                                         Poten. Output, (0.017) [0.093]       66% CI
                                                                        Actual=Poten., (0.788) [0.446]                                                                             Actual=Poten., (0.506) [0.000]                                                                      Actual=Poten., (0.336) [0.030]




Notes: The figure reports impulse response functions (IRFs) estimated using equations (2) and (3). The estimation sample covers the longest possible period with non-missing
observations for shocks and potential output (output gap) available at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. In parentheses we report the p-value for a test of whether the
response of actual (potential) output is different from zero at the max horizon (8 quarters), while in square brackets we show the p-value for a test of whether the path of the
response of actual (potential) output is different from zero over the entire duration of the IRF. The last row of the legend reports p-values for a test of equality of responses of
actual and potential output at the max horizon (parentheses) and a test of equality of the paths of the responses for actual and potential output are equal across horizons.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         32
                                                                 Figure 6: Responses of Output and Greenbook Estimates of Potential Output in U.S. to Shocks: ADL specification.

                                                                                                                                                                                   Panel A: Supply Shocks
                                                                                TFP shock (Fernald)                                                                          Tax shock (Romer and Romer 2010)                                                                          Oil supply shock (Kilian 2009)


                                       2.5




                                                                                                                                                 .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                   output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                             output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    output growth rate, percent, annualized
                                                    2




                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                         1.5




                                                                                                                                                    -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                         -1
                                1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                               -1.5
                      .5




                                                                                                                                                 -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -3
                                       0




                                                             0     1        2       3       4           5   6   7        8                                               0    1        2       3       4       5   6   7        8                                             0   1        2       3       4       5   6   7        8
                                                                       Actual Output, (0.145) [0.016]           66% CI                                                            Actual Output, (0.273) [0.000]       66% CI                                                         Actual Output, (0.053) [0.191]       66% CI
                                                                       Poten. Output, (0.046) [0.669]           66% CI                                                            Poten. Output, (0.143) [0.047]       66% CI                                                         Poten. Output, (0.178) [0.389]       66% CI
                                                                       Actual=Poten., (0.435) [0.206]                                                                             Actual=Poten., (0.764) [0.513]                                                                      Actual=Poten., (0.122) [0.289]



                                                                                                                                                                                  Panel B: Demand Shocks
                                                             Monetary policy shock (Romer and Romer 2004)                                                                    Military spending shock (Ramey 2016)                                                                     Gov't spending shock (AG 2012)
                                    1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                   1.5
                   output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                             output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    output growth rate, percent, annualized
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                         1
                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                             .5
                            -1




                                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -1
                                                                                                                                                 -.5
                                    -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -2
                                                             0    1         2       3       4           5   6   7        8                                               0    1        2       3       4       5   6   7        8                                             0   1        2       3       4       5   6   7        8
                                                                       Actual Output, (0.317) [0.256]           66% CI                                                            Actual Output, (0.170) [0.000]       66% CI                                                         Actual Output, (0.954) [0.078]       66% CI
                                                                       Poten. Output, (0.050) [0.162]           66% CI                                                            Poten. Output, (0.559) [0.173]       66% CI                                                         Poten. Output, (0.032) [0.085]       66% CI
                                                                       Actual=Poten., (0.784) [0.506]                                                                             Actual=Poten., (0.276) [0.441]                                                                      Actual=Poten., (0.262) [0.098]




Notes: The figure reports impulse response functions (IRFs) estimated using equation (4), which is an auto-distributed lag specification. The estimation sample covers the longest
possible period with non-missing observations for shocks and potential output (output gap) available at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. In parentheses we report the p-
value for a test of whether the IRF of actual (potential) output is different from zero at the max horizon (8 quarters), while in square brackets we show the p-value for a test of
whether the path of the IRF of actual (potential) output is different from zero over the entire duration of the IRF. The last row of the legend reports p-values for a test of equality of
IRFs of actual and potential output at the max horizon (parentheses) and a test of equality of the paths of the responses for actual and potential output are equal across horizons.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        33
                                                                   Figure 7: Responses of Output and Greenbook Estimates of Potential Output in U.S. to Shocks: Extended Sample.

                                                                                                                                                                                    Panel A: Supply Shocks
                                                                                  TFP shock (Fernald)                                                                         Tax shock (Romer and Romer 2010)                                                                          Oil supply shock (Kilian 2009)


                                        1.5




                                                                                                                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                   output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                               output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     output growth rate, percent, annualized
                                                   1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                              0
                                       .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                 -1
                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -1
                                                                                                                                    -2
                                        -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -2
                                                                                                                                                  -3
                                                               0     1        2       3       4           5   6   7        8                                              0    1        2       3       4       5   6   7        8                                             0   1        2       3       4       5   6   7        8
                                                                         Actual Output, (0.687) [0.030]           66% CI                                                           Actual Output, (0.004) [0.000]       66% CI                                                         Actual Output, (0.067) [0.409]       66% CI
                                                                         Poten. Output, (0.067) [0.452]           66% CI                                                           Poten. Output, (0.027) [0.548]       66% CI                                                         Poten. Output, (0.000) [0.007]       66% CI
                                                                         Actual=Poten., (0.930) [0.048]                                                                            Actual=Poten., (0.070) [0.001]                                                                      Actual=Poten., (0.002) [0.136]



                                                                                                                                                                                   Panel B: Demand Shocks
                                                               Monetary policy shock (Romer and Romer 2004)                                                                   Military spending shock (Ramey 2016)                                                                     Gov't spending shock (AG 2012)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                     .5
                   output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                               output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     output growth rate, percent, annualized
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .5
                                                                                                                                                          0
                                           -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                              -.5
                           -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.5
                                                                                                                                   -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -1
                                                                                                                                                  -1.5
                                     -3




                                                               0    1         2       3       4           5   6   7        8                                              0    1        2       3       4       5   6   7        8                                             0   1        2       3       4       5   6   7        8

                                                                         Actual Output, (0.018) [0.000]           66% CI                                                           Actual Output, (0.728) [0.107]       66% CI                                                         Actual Output, (0.919) [0.012]       66% CI
                                                                         Poten. Output, (0.005) [0.001]           66% CI                                                           Poten. Output, (0.000) [0.002]       66% CI                                                         Poten. Output, (0.163) [0.901]       66% CI
                                                                         Actual=Poten., (0.100) [0.000]                                                                            Actual=Poten., (0.450) [0.264]                                                                      Actual=Poten., (0.479) [0.019]




Notes: The figure reports impulse response functions (IRFs) estimated using equation (2) and (3). The estimation sample covers the longest possible period with non-missing
observations for shocks and potential output (output gap) using output gap data starting in 1970. In parentheses we report the p-value for a test of whether the response of actual
(potential) output is different from zero at the max horizon (8 quarters), while in square brackets we show the p-value for a test of whether the path of the response of actual
(potential) output is different from zero over the entire duration of the IRF. The last row of the legend reports p-values for a test of equality of responses of actual and potential
output at the max horizon (parentheses) and a test of equality of the paths of the responses for actual and potential output are equal across horizons.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         34
                                                                                        Figure 8: Responses of Output and CBO Estimates of Potential Output in U.S. to Shocks.

                                                                                                                                                                           Panel A: Supply Shocks
                                                                              TFP shock (Fernald)                                                                      Tax shock (Romer and Romer 2010)                                                                      Oil supply shock (Kilian 2009)




                                                                                                                                                              .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .5
                                                        1
                 output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                      output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          output growth rate, percent, annualized
                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                             -.2
                                       .6




                                                                                                                                   -.4
                              .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -.5
                      .2




                                                                                                                          -.6
                                     0




                                                                                                                                         -.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -1
                                                              0           1                2             3        4                                                0          1                2             3        4                                                 0        1                2             3        4

                                                                     Actual Output , (0.041) [0.250]         66% CI                                                      Actual Output , (0.024) [0.000]         66% CI                                                     Actual Output , (0.227) [0.017]         66% CI
                                                                     Poten. (nowcast), (0.001) [0.000]       66% CI                                                      Poten. (nowcast), (0.001) [0.000]       66% CI                                                     Poten. (nowcast), (0.503) [0.959]       66% CI
                                                                     Poten. (5 years), (0.004) [0.083]       66% CI                                                      Poten. (5 years), (0.000) [0.000]       66% CI                                                     Poten. (5 years), (0.028) [0.086]       66% CI
                                                                     Actual=Poten. , (0.843) [0.916]                                                                     Actual=Poten. , (0.984) [0.000]                                                                    Actual=Poten. , (0.031) [0.036]



                                                                                                                                                                          Panel B: Demand Shocks
                                                              Monetary policy shock (Romer and Romer 2004)                                                             Military spending shock (Ramey 2016)                                                                 Gov't spending shock (AG 2012)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.5
                                                         .4




                                                                                                                                                             1
                 output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                      output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          output growth rate, percent, annualized
                                               .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                         .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .5
                       -.2         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                      0
                                    -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.5
                                                              0           1                2             3        4                                                0          1                2             3        4                                                 0        1                2             3        4
                                                                     Actual Output , (0.922) [0.994]         66% CI                                                      Actual Output , (0.006) [0.000]         66% CI                                                     Actual Output , (0.141) [0.290]         66% CI
                                                                     Poten. (nowcast), (0.844) [0.720]       66% CI                                                      Poten. (nowcast), (0.000) [0.000]       66% CI                                                     Poten. (nowcast), (0.001) [0.017]       66% CI
                                                                     Poten. (5 years), (0.114) [0.012]       66% CI                                                      Poten. (5 years), (0.001) [0.000]       66% CI                                                     Poten. (5 years), (0.131) [0.063]       66% CI
                                                                     Actual=Poten. , (0.959) [0.900]                                                                     Actual=Poten. , (0.636) [0.382]                                                                    Actual=Poten. , (0.922) [0.360]




Notes: The figure reports impulse response functions (IRFs) estimated using equations (2) and (3). The estimation sample covers the longest possible period with non-missing
observations for shocks and potential output (output gap) available from the Congressional Budget Office. In parentheses we report the p-value for a test of whether the response of
actual (potential) output is different from zero at the max horizon (8 quarters), while in square brackets we show the p-value for a test of whether the path of the response of actual
(potential) output is different from zero over the entire duration of the IRF. The last row of the legend reports p-values for a test of equality of responses of actual and potential
output (nowcast) at the max horizon (parentheses) and for a test of equality of the paths of the responses for actual and potential (nowcast) output are equal across horizons.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             35
              Figure 9: Responses of Greenbook Estimates of Potential Output, Moving-Average of Output, and HP-filtered Output in U.S. to Shocks.
                                                                                                                                                                                      Panel A: Supply Shocks
                                                                                   TFP shock (Fernald)                                                                         Tax shock (Romer and Romer 2010)                                                                              Oil supply shock (Kilian 2009)




                                                           1.5




                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                   output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                               output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       output growth rate, percent, annualized
                                                                                                                                                               -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .5
                                             1




                                                                                                                                                       -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                              -.6
                             .5




                                                                                                                                     -.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -.5
                                                                                                                             -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -1
                                      0




                                                                 0    1        2        3       4        5      6   7    8                                                 0    1         2       3        4       5      6   7    8                                               0   1        2        3        4       5      6   7    8
                                                                          RT Actual (5yr MA), (0.008) [0.488]       66% CI                                                          RT Actual (5yr MA), (0.285) [0.973]       66% CI                                                       RT Actual (5yr MA), (0.893) [0.993]       66% CI
                                                                          Potential Output , (0.001) [0.126]        66% CI                                                          Potential Output , (0.000) [0.000]        66% CI                                                       Potential Output , (0.242) [0.894]        66% CI
                                                                          RT Actual (HP fi.), (0.010) [0.514]       66% CI                                                          RT Actual (HP fi.), (0.001) [0.089]       66% CI                                                       RT Actual (HP fi.), (0.419) [0.998]       66% CI
                                                                          HP Actual=Potenti., (0.266) [0.951]                                                                       HP Actual=Potenti., (0.567) [0.344]                                                                    HP Actual=Potenti., (0.470) [0.910]



                                                                                                                                                                                     Panel B: Demand Shocks
                                                                 Monetary policy shock (Romer and Romer 2004)                                                                  Military spending shock (Ramey 2016)                                                                        Gov't spending shock (AG 2012)
                                                           .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                     .6
                   output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                             output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       output growth rate, percent, annualized
                                                                                                                                                            .4
                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                          0        .2
                             -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                -.2             -.4
                                      -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                 0    1        2        3       4        5      6   7    8                                                 0    1         2       3        4       5      6   7    8                                               0   1        2        3        4       5      6   7    8

                                                                          RT Actual (5yr MA), (0.884) [0.806]       66% CI                                                          RT Actual (5yr MA), (0.794) [0.999]       66% CI                                                       RT Actual (5yr MA), (0.000) [0.004]       66% CI
                                                                          Potential Output , (0.035) [0.455]        66% CI                                                          Potential Output , (0.029) [0.183]        66% CI                                                       Potential Output , (0.017) [0.093]        66% CI
                                                                          RT Actual (HP fi.), (0.640) [0.998]       66% CI                                                          RT Actual (HP fi.), (0.078) [0.779]       66% CI                                                       RT Actual (HP fi.), (0.010) [0.205]       66% CI
                                                                          HP Actual=Potenti., (0.001) [0.000]                                                                       HP Actual=Potenti., (0.963) [0.063]                                                                    HP Actual=Potenti., (0.986) [0.198]


Notes: The figure reports impulse response functions (IRFs) estimated using equations (2) and (3). The estimation sample covers the longest possible period with non-missing
observations for shocks and potential output (output gap) available at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. HP-filtered actual output for a given quarter is calculated as the
value of the HP-filter trend for the quarter given the first vintage of GDP data that covers the given quarter. The smoothing parameter for the HP filter is set at 2,000,000. 5-year
moving average (MA) actual output for a given quarter is calculated as the 20-quarter moving average running on the current quarter and the preceding 19 quarters reported in the
first vintage of GDP data that covers the given quarter. In parentheses we report the p-value for a test of whether the response of actual (potential) output is different from zero at
the max horizon (8 quarters), while in square brackets we show the p-value for a test of whether the path of the response of actual (potential) output is different from zero for all
horizons of the IRF. The last row of the legend reports p-values for a test of equality of responses of actual and potential output at the max horizon (parentheses) and for a test of
equality of the paths of the responses for actual and potential output are equal across horizons.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              36
                              Figure 10. Response of the growth rate for actual output and OECD’s measure of potential output (nowcast).
                                    Labor productivity shock                                                           Monetary policy shock (VAR)
         2.5




                                                                                               0
         2




                                                                                               -.2
         1.5
         1




                                                                                               -.4
         .5




                                                                                               -.6
         0




               0                1                   2                 3                 4            0                 1                   2                3                  4

                       Actual Output     , (0.000) [0.000]            66% CI                                  Actual Output     , (0.023) [0.080]            66% CI
                       Potential Output , (0.000) [0.003]             66% CI                                  Potential Output , (0.070) [0.470]             66% CI
                       HP Actual ( =800), (0.000) [0.001]            66% CI                                  HP Actual ( =800), (0.001) [0.044]            66% CI
                       HP Actual=Potenti., (0.004) [0.004]                                                    HP Actual=Potenti., (0.001) [0.052]




                              Gov't spending shock (AG 2013)                                                           Oil price shock (Kilian 2009)
         .8




                                                                                               .2
                                                                                               0
         .6




                                                                                               -.2
         .4




                                                                                               -.4
         .2




                                                                                               -.6
                                                                                               -.8
         0




               0                1                   2                 3                 4            0                 1                   2                3                  4

                       Actual Output     , (0.081) [0.002]            66% CI                                  Actual Output     , (0.445) [0.061]            66% CI
                       Potential Output , (0.000) [0.000]             66% CI                                  Potential Output , (0.081) [0.338]             66% CI
                       HP Actual ( =800), (0.000) [0.000]            66% CI                                  HP Actual ( =800), (0.313) [0.578]            66% CI
                       HP Actual=Potenti., (0.486) [0.577]                                                    HP Actual=Potenti., (0.361) [0.173]

Notes: The figure shows impulse response functions (IRFs) for growth rates of actual and potential output (nowcast). IRFs are estimated using equations (5) and (6). The
horizontal axis measures time in semesters (6 months). The vertical axis measures growth rate of output per year. In parentheses we report the p-value for a test of whether the
response of actual (potential) output is different from zero at the max horizon (8 quarters), while in square brackets we show the p-value for a test of whether the path of the
response of actual (potential) output is different from zero across all horizons of the IRF. The last row of the legend reports p-values for a test of equality of responses of actual and
potential output at the max horizon (parentheses) and for a test of equality of the paths of the responses for actual and potential output are equal across horizons.
                                                                                                                                                                                       37
                                Figure 11. Response of the growth rate for actual output and IMF’s measure of potential output (nowcast).

                                       Labor productivity shock                                                       Monetary policy shock (VAR)
            2




                                                                                               0
                                                                                               -.2
            1.5




                                                                                               -.4
            1




                                                                                               -.6
            .5




                                                                                               -.8
            0




                                                                                               -1
                  0                1                   2               3                 4            0               1                   2              3                 4

                          Actual Output     , (0.000) [0.000]          66% CI                                Actual Output     , (0.123) [0.000]          66% CI
                          Potential Output , (0.011) [0.046]           66% CI                                Potential Output , (0.036) [0.002]           66% CI
                          HP Actual ( =800), (0.128) [0.289]          66% CI                                HP Actual ( =800), (0.000) [0.003]          66% CI
                          HP Actual=Potenti., (0.272) [0.301]                                                HP Actual=Potenti., (0.433) [0.163]




                                Gov't spending shock (AG 2013)                                                        Oil price shock (Kilian 2009)
            .8




                                                                                               .5
            .6




                                                                                               0
            .4




                                                                                               -.5
            .2




                                                                                               -1
                                                                                               -1.5
            0




                  0                1                   2               3                 4            0               1                   2              3                 4

                          Actual Output     , (0.364) [0.033]          66% CI                                Actual Output     , (0.098) [0.001]          66% CI
                          Potential Output , (0.002) [0.001]           66% CI                                Potential Output , (0.101) [0.007]           66% CI
                          HP Actual ( =800), (0.000) [0.023]          66% CI                                HP Actual ( =800), (0.002) [0.004]          66% CI
                          HP Actual=Potenti., (0.430) [0.139]                                                HP Actual=Potenti., (0.000) [0.000]


Notes: The figure shows impulse response functions (IRFs) for growth rates of actual and potential output (nowcast). IRFs are estimated using equations (5) and (6). The
horizontal axis measures time in semesters (6 months). The vertical axis measures growth rate of output per year. In parentheses we report the p-value for a test of whether the
response of actual (potential) output is different from zero at the max horizon (8 quarters), while in square brackets we show the p-value for a test of whether the path of the
response of actual (potential) output is different from zero across all horizons of the IRF. The last row of the legend reports p-values for a test of equality of responses of actual and
potential output at the max horizon (parentheses) and for a test of equality of the paths of the responses for actual and potential output are equal across horizons.
                                                                                                                                                                                       38
                     Figure 12. Response of the growth rate for actual output and Consensus Economics’ 6-10-year ahead forecast for actual output.

                                          Labor productivity shock                                                      Monetary policy shock (VAR)
               2




                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                 -.2
               1.5




                                                                                                 -.4
               1




                                                                                                 -.6
               .5




                                                                                                 -.8
                                                                                                 -1
               0




                     0                1                   2              3                 4           0                1                   2             3                 4

                             Actual Output    , (0.000) [0.000]          66% CI                                Actual Output    , (0.000) [0.001]          66% CI
                             Potential Output , (0.019) [0.226]          66% CI                                Potential Output , (0.418) [0.938]          66% CI
                             HP Actual (=800), (0.001) [0.043]          66% CI                                HP Actual (=800), (0.070) [0.073]          66% CI
                             HP Actual=Potenti., (0.001) [0.051]                                               HP Actual=Potenti., (0.057) [0.074]




                                   Gov't spending shock (AG 2013)                                                       Oil price shock (Kilian 2009)
               .6




                                                                                                 .6
                                                                                                 .4
               .4




                                                                                                 .2
               .2




                                                                                                 0
               0




                                                                                                 -.2
               -.2




                                                                                                 -.4



                     0                1                   2              3                 4           0                1                   2             3                 4

                             Actual Output    , (0.986) [0.025]          66% CI                                Actual Output    , (0.707) [0.116]          66% CI
                             Potential Output , (0.002) [0.074]          66% CI                                Potential Output , (0.003) [0.020]          66% CI
                             HP Actual (=800), (0.000) [0.006]          66% CI                                HP Actual (=800), (0.075) [0.511]          66% CI
                             HP Actual=Potenti., (0.000) [0.018]                                               HP Actual=Potenti., (0.842) [0.794]


Notes: The figure shows impulse response functions (IRFs) for growth rates of actual output and 6-10-year ahead forecast for actual output growth rate (Consensus Economics). IRFs
are estimated using equation (5) and (6). The horizontal axis measures time in semesters (6 months). The vertical axis measures growth rate of output per year. In parentheses we
report the p-value for a test of whether the IRF of actual (potential) output is different from zero at the max horizon (8 quarters), while in square brackets we show the p-value for a test
of whether the path of the IRF of actual (potential) output is different from zero across all horizons of the IRF. The last row of the legend reports p-values for a test of equality of
responses of actual and potential output at the max horizon (parentheses) and for a test of equality of the paths of the responses for actual and potential output are equal across horizons.
                                                                                                                                                                                          39
                                                              Figure 13: Response of the growth rate for actual output and SVAR identified historical supply component of actual output.

                                                                                                                                                                               Panel A: Supply Shocks
                                                                              TFP shock (Fernald)                                                                                  Tax shock (R&R 2010)                                                                                 Oil supply shock (Kilian 2009)




                                                                                                                                           1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .5
                                                      2
               output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                          output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  output growth rate, percent, annualized
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                         0
                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -.5
                                                                                                                                            -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -1
                        0




                                                                                                                               -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -1.5             -2
                                 -1




                                                                                                                                           -3
                                                          0      1        2          3        4       5      6   7    8                                             0    1        2          3        4       5      6   7    8                                                0   1        2          3        4       5      6   7    8

                                                                     Actual Output       , (0.528) [0.012]       66% CI                                                      Actual Output       , (0.004) [0.000]       66% CI                                                        Actual Output       , (0.081) [0.315]       66% CI
                                                                     BQ supply compo., (0.045) [0.014]           66% CI                                                      BQ supply compo., (0.058) [0.018]           66% CI                                                        BQ supply compo., (0.011) [0.012]           66% CI
                                                                     Actual=BQ supply, (0.271) [0.149]                                                                       Actual=BQ supply, (0.489) [0.008]                                                                         Actual=BQ supply, (0.714) [0.319]



                                                                                                                                                                              Panel B: Demand Shocks
                                                                 Monetary policy shock (R&R 2004)                                          1.5                          Military spending shock (Ramey 2016)                                                                           Gov't spending shock (AG 2012)
                                 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
               output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                          output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  output growth rate, percent, annualized
                                                                                                                                                            1
                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                   .5
                                 -1




                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                               -.5
                    -2




                                                                                                                                           -1
                                 -3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -1
                                                          0      1        2          3        4       5      6   7    8                                             0    1        2          3        4       5      6   7    8                                                0   1        2          3        4       5      6   7    8

                                                                     Actual Output       , (0.032) [0.000]       66% CI                                                      Actual Output       , (0.842) [0.100]       66% CI                                                        Actual Output       , (0.665) [0.006]       66% CI
                                                                     BQ supply compo., (0.755) [0.543]           66% CI                                                      BQ supply compo., (0.498) [0.300]           66% CI                                                        BQ supply compo., (0.601) [0.113]           66% CI
                                                                     Actual=BQ supply, (0.110) [0.000]                                                                       Actual=BQ supply, (0.222) [0.623]                                                                         Actual=BQ supply, (0.822) [0.068]


Notes: The figure reports impulse response functions (IRFs) estimated using equation (2) and (3). The “BQ Supply compo.” is the historical contribution of supply-side shocks
(identified as in Blanchard and Quah 1989) to output growth rate. The estimation sample covers the longest possible period with non-missing observations for shocks and potential
output (output gap) using output gap data starting in 1970. In parentheses we report the p-value for a test of whether the response of actual (potential) output is different from zero
at the max horizon (8 quarters), while in square brackets we show the p-value for a test of whether the path of the response of actual (potential) output is different from zero across
all horizons of the IRF. The last row of the legend reports p-values for a test of equality of responses of actual and potential output at the max horizon (parentheses) and for a test
of equality of the paths of the responses for actual and potential output are equal across horizons.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            40
                                                    Figure 14: Revisions in Estimates of U.S. Potential Output from Blanchard-Quah (1989) approach.



                                                             BQ 2007                            BQ 2009
                           .3
                                                             BQ 2011                            BQ 2013
                                                             BQ 2015                            BQ 2017
                                    .2 .25

                                                             Actual
              log deviation from 2007Q1
             0    .05    .1 .15
                           -.05
                           -.1




                                             2004         2006              2008             2010    2012                       2014              2016
                                                                                                Year

Notes: The figure plots estimates of U.S. potential output made at different time periods using the Blanchard and Quah (1989) methodology estimated in real-time. The
solid black line represents real GDP in the U.S.


                                                                                                                                                                  41
                                    Figure 15: Alternative Approaches to Estimating Potential GDP in Real-Time during the Great Recession

                                    Panel A: Revisions using Gali (1999)                                                                      Panel B: Revisions using Cochrane (1994)

                                            GA 2007                        GA 2009                                                              CH 2007           CH 2009




                                                                                                                       .3
             .3




                                            GA 2011                        GA 2013                                                              CH 2011           CH 2013
                                                                                                                                                CH 2015           CH 2017




                                                                                                                 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25
                                            GA 2015                        GA 2017
      .05 .1 .15 .2 .25




                                            Actual                                                                                              Actual




                                                                                                           log deviation from 2007Q1
 log deviation from 2007Q1




                                                                                                             0
 0




                                                                                                                       -.05
             -.05




                                                                                                                       -.1
             -.1




                             2004      2006                        2008   2010    2012   2014    2016                                  2004    2006       2008   2010    2012   2014   2016
                                                                             Year                                                                                   Year




                                                                      Panel C: Estimates of Potential Output (2017 vintage) across Approaches

                                                                              Phillips                             Blanchard
                                                  .3




                                                                              Gali                                 Cochrane
                                                                              CBO                                  Actual
                                           .05 .1 .15 .2 .25




                                                                              Pre-crisis est.
                                      log deviation from 2007Q1
                                       0          -.05
                                                  -.1




                                                                  2004      2006         2008           2010    2012                                      2014        2016
                                                                                                           Year

Notes: Panels A and B plot the real-time estimates and forecasts of potential GDP following Gali (1999) in Panel A and
Cochrane (1994) in Panel B for different vintages of available data. Panel C plots the 2017 estimates of the path of potential
GDP from these approaches as well as the Blanchard and Quah (1989, “Blanchard”) approach, the Phillips curve
(“Phillips”), the CBO estimates of 2017 (“CBO”) and 2007 (“Pre-crisis est.”). In each panel, “Actual” denotes the path of
Real GDP. See section 5.2 for details.



                                                                                                                                                                                              42
 Table 1. Data coverage for cross-country analysis.

                                                      Monetary                                         Potential        Actual         Potential
    Country          Prod. Shock      Oil Shock                     Fiscal Shock    Actual IMF                                                         Actual C.E.
                                                       Shock                                             IMF            OECD             OECD
Australia              1981-2018       1980-2016      1983-2016       1998-2014       2003-2016        2003-2016       1986-2016        1989-2016           No data
Austria                  No data       1980-2016      1989-2016       1998-2014       2003-2016        2003-2016       1986-2016        1989-2016           No data
Belgium                1981-2018       1980-2016      1984-2016       1998-2013       2003-2016        2003-2016       1986-2016        1989-2016           No data
Canada                 1981-2018       1980-2016      1994-2016       1987-2014       2003-2016        2003-2016       1986-2016        1989-2016        1989-2016
Switzerland              No data       1980-2016      1994-2016       1998-2014          No data          No data      1986-2016        1989-2016        1998-2016
Cyprus                   No data       1980-2015      2001-2016           No data     2003-2016        2009-2016          No data          No data          No data
Czech Republic         1994-2018       1990-2016      1996-2016       1998-2009          No data          No data      1996-2016        2005-2016           No data
Germany                1992-2018       1980-2016      1994-2016       1987-2014       2003-2016        2003-2016       1986-2016        1989-2016        1989-2016
Denmark                  No data       1980-2016      1984-2016       1998-2010       2003-2016        2009-2016       1986-2016        1989-2016           No data
Spain                    No data       1980-2016      1987-2016       1998-2012       2003-2016        2003-2016       1986-2016        1989-2016        1995-2016
Estonia                1996-2018       1990-2016      1995-2016       2010-2014       2003-2016        2012-2016       2008-2016        2011-2016           No data
Finland                1981-2018       1980-2016      1989-2016       1998-2014       2003-2016        2003-2016       1986-2016        1989-2016           No data
France                 1981-2018       1980-2016      1983-2016       1987-2014       2003-2016        2003-2016       1986-2016        1989-2016        1989-2016
United Kingdom         1981-2018       1980-2016      1990-2016       1987-2014       2003-2016        2003-2016       1986-2016        1989-2016        1989-2016
Greece                   No data       1980-2016         No data      1998-2001       2003-2016        2009-2016       1986-2016        1989-2016           No data
Hungary                  No data       1980-2016      2002-2016       1998-2003          No data          No data      1996-2016        2005-2016           No data
Ireland                1991-2018       1980-2016      2000-2016       1998-2014       2003-2016        2003-2016       1996-2016        1996-2016           No data
Iceland                1981-2018       1980-2016      1999-2016       1998-2014          No data          No data      1986-2016        2000-2016           No data
Italy                  1981-2018       1980-2016      1984-2016       1987-2014       2003-2016        2003-2016       1986-2016        1989-2016        1989-2016
Japan                  1981-2018       1980-2016      1994-2016       1987-2014       2003-2016        2003-2016       1986-2016        1989-2016        1989-2016
Korea                  1981-2018       1980-2016      1994-2016       1999-2014       2003-2016        2012-2016       1997-2016        2005-2016           No data
Luxembourg             1986-2018       1980-2016      1997-2016       1998-2014       2003-2016        2012-2016       1986-2016        2005-2016           No data
Malta                    No data       1980-2015         No data          No data     2003-2016        2009-2016          No data          No data          No data
Netherlands            1981-2018       1980-2016      1984-2016       1998-2014       2003-2016        2003-2016       1986-2016        1989-2016        1995-2016
Norway                 1981-2018       1980-2016      1981-2016       1998-2014       2003-2016        2003-2016       1986-2016        1989-2016        1998-2016
New Zealand            1990-2018       1980-2016      1987-2016       1998-2014       2003-2016        2003-2016       1986-2016        1989-2016           No data
Poland                   No data       1980-2016      1997-2015       1998-2011          No data          No data      1996-2016        2005-2016           No data
Portugal               1981-2018       1980-2016      1993-2016       1998-2014       2003-2016        2003-2016       1986-2016        1994-2016           No data
Slovak Republic          No data       1980-2016      2001-2016       2008-2009       2003-2016        2009-2016       2000-2016        2005-2016           No data
Slovenia                 No data       1992-2016      1997-2016       2014-2014       2003-2016        2009-2016       2008-2016        2010-2016           No data
Sweden                 1981-2018       1980-2016      1984-2016       1998-2014       2003-2016        2003-2016       1986-2016        1989-2016        1995-2016
Turkey                   No data       1980-2016      2001-2016       1998-2002          No data          No data      1986-2016        2005-2016           No data
United States          1981-2018       1980-2016      1981-2016       1987-2014       2003-2016        2003-2016       1986-2016        1989-2016        1989-2016
Notes: The table describes time periods for which shocks and measures of potential output are available for each country and source of data. “C.E.” are forecasts of 6-10 year
ahead GDP growth. See section 2 for descriptions of measures of potential GDP, and sections 3 and 4 for details on construction of shocks.



                                                                                                                                                                                 43
                           Table 2. Comparison of IMF, OECD and Consensus Economics.
                                                          Institution and output measure
                                                                                       Consensus
                                                  IMF,              OECD,
                                                                                      Economics,
                                            potential output potential output
                                                                                    6-10 year ahead
                                              growth rate        growth rate
                                                                                   forecast for actual
                                               (nowcast)          (nowcast)
                                                                                  output growth rates

           Observations                               607                  1358                    581
           Mean                                       1.64                 2.30                    2.22
           St. Deviation                              1.10                 1.25                    0.54
           Correlation
               IMF                                    1.00
               OECD                                   0.87                 1.00
               Consensus Economics                    0.72                 0.78                    1.00
Notes: The table reports moments of measures of potential output from the IMF and OECD across countries described in
Table 1, as well as moments of forecasted growth rates of GDP 6-10 years ahead from Consensus Economics. See section
2.6 for details.



                       Table 3. Predictability of Revisions in Estimates of Potential GDP.
                                                                     Source
            Dependent variable:                                                            Consensus
                                            CBO       Greenbook OECD             IMF
                log ∗|   log ∗|                                                            Economics
                                             (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)

             log   ∗
                       |      log   ∗
                                        |        0.204        0.294***     -0.066      -0.154***     -0.355***
                                                (0.132)      (0.086)       (0.040)     (0.044)       (0.045)

            Observations                            42          96          1,282        548            566
            R-squared                            0.065       0.085          0.163        0.351          0.288
            Number of countries                                                31          27            12
Notes: The table presents regressions of the revision in estimates of potential GDP on the previous revision in estimate of
potential GDP (equation 1). Newey-West standard errors are in parentheses. “Source” indicates where estimates of potential
output come from: Congressional Budget Office (CBO), Greenbooks of the Federal Reserve Board (FED), the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), the International Monetary Fund (IMF) or Consensus Economics
(CE). For the latter, revisions are for growth rate of GDP at horizons of 6-10 years. Columns (3)-(5) are across countries and
include time and country fixed effects. Within R2 is reported for columns (3)-(5).




                                                                                                                           44
Appendix




           45
                                                                         Appendix Figure 1: Responses of Moving-Averages of Real-Time U.S. Output to Shocks.


                                                                                                                                                     Panel A: Supply Shocks
                                                                TFP shock (Fernald)                                                             Tax shock (Romer and Romer 2010)                                                              Oil supply shock (Kilian 2009)
                            3




                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
       output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                  output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                                                                                           output growth rate, percent, annualized
                                        2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                               0
                         1




                                                                                                                                                                                                           -1
                                                                                                          -1
         0




                                                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Potential Output           90% CI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Actual 2yr MA              Actual 5yr MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Actual 8yr MA              Actual 10yr MA
                            -1




                                                                                                                      -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                               -3
                                                 0     1    2      3     4    5       6   7   8                                             0    1     2    3    4     5      6   7    8                                             0   1       2       3      4   5       6       7    8



                                                                                                                                                     Panel B: Demand Shocks
                                                 Monetary policy shock (Romer and Romer 2004)                                                   Military spending shock (Ramey 2016)                                                         Gov't spending shock (AG 2012)
                                                                                                                      2
                         1




                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
       output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                  output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                                                                                           output growth rate, percent, annualized
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                               1
                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                          0
             -1




                                                                                                                                                                                            -1
                         -2




                                                                                                                      -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                               -2
                                                 0    1     2      3    4     5       6   7   8                                             0    1     2    3    4     5      6   7    8                                             0   1       2       3      4   5       6       7    8




Notes: The figure reports impulse response functions (IRFs) estimated using equations (2) and (3). The estimation sample covers the longest possible period with non-
missing observations for shocks and potential output (output gap) available at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             46
                                                                             Appendix Figure 2: Responses of HP-filters of Real-Time U.S. Output to Shocks.


                                                                                                                                                     Panel A: Supply Shocks
                                                                TFP shock (Fernald)                                                             Tax shock (Romer and Romer 2010)                                                              Oil supply shock (Kilian 2009)
                            3




                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
       output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                  output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                                                                                           output growth rate, percent, annualized
                                         2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                               0
                         1




                                                                                                                                                                                                           -1
                                                                                                          -1
         0




                                                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Potential Output              90% CI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Actual HP =1,600             Actual HP =15,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Actual HP =175,000           Actual HP =2 mill.
                            -1




                                                                                                                      -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                              -3
                                                 0     1    2      3     4    5       6   7   8                                             0    1     2    3    4     5      6   7    8                                             0   1        2       3        4   5     6       7       8



                                                                                                                                                     Panel B: Demand Shocks
                                                 Monetary policy shock (Romer and Romer 2004)                                                   Military spending shock (Ramey 2016)                                                         Gov't spending shock (AG 2012)
                                                                                                                      2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                         1
       output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                  output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                                                                                           output growth rate, percent, annualized
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                               1
                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                          0
            -1




                                                                                                                                                                                             -1
                         -2




                                                                                                                      -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -2
                                                 0    1     2      3    4     5       6   7   8                                             0    1     2    3    4     5      6   7    8                                             0   1        2       3        4   5      6      7       8




Notes: The figure reports impulse response functions (IRFs) estimated using equations (2) and (3). The estimation sample covers the longest possible period with non-
missing observations for shocks and potential output (output gap) available at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 47
                                                                           Appendix Figure 3: Robustness of Responses to Identification of Monetary Shocks.

                                                                1987-2011 sample (current quarter)                                                                  1969-2011 sample (Orphanides; 3-quarters ahead)


                                                                  Monetary policy shock (VAR)                                                                                      Monetary policy shock (VAR)




                                                                                                                      output growth rate, percent, annualized
         output growth rate, percent, annualized




                                                                                                                                                            1
                                       0      .5




                                                                                                                                                   0
                               -.5




                                                                                                                                        -1
                        -1




                                                                                                                               -2
               -1.5




                                                                                                                      -3
         -2




                                                   0   1           2        3        4      5    6       7   8                                                  0       1           2        3        4      5    6       7   8

                                                           Actual Output, (0.207) [0.854]       66% CI                                                                      Actual Output, (0.000) [0.000]       66% CI
                                                           Poten. Output, (0.006) [0.029]       66% CI                                                                      Poten. Output, (0.064) [0.154]       66% CI
                                                           Actual=Poten., (0.800) [0.937]                                                                                   Actual=Poten., (0.001) [0.000]




Notes: The figure reports impulse response functions (IRFs) estimated using equations (2) and (3). The estimation sample covers the longest possible period with non-
missing observations for shocks and potential output (output gap) available at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia (left panel) and the extended measure of
potential GDP from Orphanides (2004) in right panel. Monetary shocks are identified from a trivariate VAR(4) using Cholesky restrictions.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  48
                                     Appendix Table 1. P-values for tests for U.S. data
                                                                                                             Equality of IRFs for
                                                     Measure of actual
                                                                                   Potential output          measure of actual and
                                                         output
                                                                                                               potential output
Shocks                                          IRF is           IRF is           IRF is       IRF is
                                                                                                                            at the
                                               equal to          zero at         equal to      zero at
                                                                                                             pointwise       max
                                                 zero           the max            zero       the max
                                                                                                                           horizon
                                              pointwise         horizon         pointwise     horizon
                                                  (1)              (2)              (3)          (4)            (5)          (6)
Panel A. Greenbook, 1987-2011, Measure of actual = actual
 TFP shock                                      0.020             0.296           0.126        0.001           0.174        0.962
 Government spending shock, (AG 2012)           0.065             0.922           0.093        0.017           0.030        0.336
 Tax shock (RR 2010)                            0.002             0.106           0.000        0.000           0.001        0.983
 Military spending shock (Ramey 2016)           0.000             0.204           0.183        0.029           0.000        0.506
 Oil price shock (Kilian 2009)                  0.018             0.012           0.894        0.242           0.038        0.002
 Monetary policy shock (RR 2004)                0.409             0.533           0.455        0.035           0.446        0.788

Panel B. Greenbook, 1969-2011, Measure of actual = actual
 TFP shock                                       0.030            0.687           0.452        0.067           0.048        0.930
 Government spending shock, (AG 2012)            0.012            0.919           0.901        0.163           0.019        0.479
 Tax shock (RR 2010)                             0.000            0.004           0.548        0.027           0.001        0.070
 Military spending shock (Ramey 2016)            0.107            0.728           0.002        0.000           0.264        0.450
 Oil price shock (Kilian 2009)                   0.409            0.067           0.007        0.000           0.136        0.002
 Monetary policy shock (RR 2004)                 0.000            0.018           0.001        0.005           0.000        0.100

Panel C1. Greenbook, 1987-2011, Measure of actual = 5yr MA of last vintage of actual
 TFP shock                                      0.441      0.016            0.126              0.001           0.991        0.935
 Government spending shock, (AG 2012)           0.041      0.001            0.093              0.017           0.408        0.069
 Tax shock (RR 2010)                            0.977      0.868            0.000              0.000           0.096        0.077
 Military spending shock (Ramey 2016)           0.955      0.218            0.183              0.029           0.539        0.020
 Oil price shock (Kilian 2009)                  0.967      0.296            0.894              0.242           0.236        0.002
 Monetary policy shock (RR 2004)                0.313      0.461            0.455              0.035           0.000        0.012

Panel C2. Greenbook, 1987-2011, Measure of actual = 5yr MA of real time actual
 TFP shock                                      0.488      0.008           0.126               0.001           0.980        0.567
 Government spending shock, (AG 2012)           0.004      0.000           0.093               0.017           0.079        0.011
 Tax shock (RR 2010)                            0.973      0.285           0.000               0.000           0.334        0.363
 Military spending shock (Ramey 2016)           0.999      0.794           0.183               0.029           0.776        0.116
 Oil price shock (Kilian 2009)                  0.993      0.893           0.894               0.242           0.953        0.140
 Monetary policy shock (RR 2004)                0.806      0.884           0.455               0.035           0.000        0.008

Panel C3. Greenbook, 1987-2011, Measure of actual = HP of real time actual
 TFP shock                                      0.514       0.010                 0.126        0.001           0.951        0.266
 Government spending shock, (AG 2012)           0.205       0.010                 0.093        0.017           0.198        0.986
 Tax shock (RR 2010)                            0.089       0.001                 0.000        0.000           0.344        0.567
 Military spending shock (Ramey 2016)           0.779       0.078                 0.183        0.029           0.063        0.963
 Oil price shock (Kilian 2009)                  0.998       0.419                 0.894        0.242           0.910        0.470
 Monetary policy shock (RR 2004)                0.998       0.640                 0.455        0.035           0.000        0.001

Panel D. CBO, 1991-2011, Measure of actual = actual
 TFP shock                                       0.250            0.041           0.000        0.001           0.916        0.843
 Government spending shock, (AG 2012)            0.290            0.141           0.017        0.001           0.360        0.922
 Tax shock (RR 2010)                             0.000            0.024           0.000        0.001           0.000        0.984
 Military spending shock (Ramey 2016)            0.000            0.006           0.000        0.000           0.382        0.636
 Oil price shock (Kilian 2009)                   0.017            0.227           0.959        0.503           0.036        0.031
 Monetary policy shock (RR 2004)                 0.994            0.922           0.720        0.844           0.900        0.959

   Notes: The table reports p-values for different statistics of responses of actual GDP (columns 1-2) or estimates of potential
   GDP (columns 3-4) in response to shocks listed in the table using different measures of potential GDP as well as different

                                                                                                                             49
measures of actual GDP. Column 1 tests null that actual GDP is always zero in IRFs while column 2 tests null that its response
is zero at the maximum horizon of IRFs. Columns 3 and 4 are equivalent but for responses of the estimates of potential GDP.
Column 5 tests the null that the IRFS of actual GDP and estimated potential are the same at all horizons while column 6 tests
the null they are the same at the final horizon. See section 3 for details. Notice that panels A and C (1, 2 and 3) use the same
measure of potential GDP (Greenbook 1987-2001), that is why the p-values for potential output are the same in these four
panels, what changes between these panels is the measure of actual GDP (panel A uses the last vintage of actual output, panel
C1 uses a 5 year moving average of the last vintage of actual output, panel C2 uses a 5 year moving average of actual output in
real time and panel C3 uses an actual output in real time filtered with the Hodrick and Prescott method).




                                                                                                                             50
                                 Appendix Table 2. P-values for tests for international data

                                                                                                              Equality of IRFs for
                                                     Measure of actual
                                                                                   Potential output            measure of actual
                                                         output
                                                                                                              and potential output
Shocks                                               IRF is       IRF is           IRF is       IRF is
                                                                                                                             at the
                                                    equal to      zero at         equal to      zero at
                                                                                                              pointwise       max
                                                      zero       the max            zero       the max
                                                                                                                            horizon
                                                   pointwise     horizon         pointwise     horizon
                                                       (1)          (2)              (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)
Panel A. IMF, Measure of actual = actual
 TFP shock                                           0.000        0.000            0.046        0.011           0.000        0.000
 Oil price shock (Kilian 2009)                       0.001        0.098            0.007        0.101           0.008        0.171
 Monetary policy shock (VAR)                         0.000        0.123            0.002        0.036           0.000        0.128
 Government spending shock, (AG 2012)                0.033        0.364            0.001        0.002           0.086        0.825

Panel B. IMF, Measure of actual = HP of real time actual
 TFP shock                                   0.289       0.128                     0.046        0.011           0.301        0.272
 Oil price shock (Kilian 2009)               0.004       0.002                     0.007        0.101           0.000        0.000
 Monetary policy shock (VAR)                 0.003       0.000                     0.002        0.036           0.163        0.433
 Government spending shock, (AG 2012)        0.023       0.000                     0.001        0.002           0.139        0.430

Panel C. OECD, Measure of actual = actual
 TFP shock                                           0.000        0.000            0.003        0.000           0.000        0.000
 Oil price shock (Kilian 2009)                       0.061        0.445            0.338        0.081           0.117        0.955
 Monetary policy shock (VAR)                         0.080        0.023            0.470        0.070           0.289        0.118
 Government spending shock, (AG 2012)                0.002        0.081            0.000        0.000           0.002        0.583

Panel D. OECD, Measure of actual = HP of real time actual
 TFP shock                                 0.001       0.000                       0.003        0.000           0.000        0.004
 Oil price shock (Kilian 2009)             0.578       0.313                       0.338        0.081           0.173        0.361
 Monetary policy shock (VAR)               0.044       0.001                       0.470        0.070           0.052        0.001
 Government spending shock, (AG 2012)      0.000       0.000                       0.000        0.000           0.577        0.486

Panel E. Consensus Economics, Measure of actual = actual
 TFP shock                                 0.000      0.000                        0.226        0.019           0.000        0.000
 Oil price shock (Kilian 2009)             0.116      0.707                        0.020        0.003           0.065        0.370
 Monetary policy shock (VAR)               0.001      0.000                        0.938        0.418           0.027        0.001
 Government spending shock, (AG 2012)      0.025      0.986                        0.074        0.002           0.018        0.583

Panel F. Consensus Economics, Measure of actual = HP of real time actual
 TFP shock                                 0.043      0.001          0.226                      0.019           0.051        0.001
 Oil price shock (Kilian 2009)             0.511      0.075          0.020                      0.003           0.794        0.842
 Monetary policy shock (VAR)               0.073      0.070          0.938                      0.418           0.074        0.057
 Government spending shock, (AG 2012)      0.006      0.000          0.074                      0.002           0.018        0.000

   Notes: The table reports p-values for different statistics of responses of actual GDP (columns 1-2) or estimates of potential
   GDP (columns 3-4) in response to shocks listed in the table using different measures of potential GDP. Column 1 tests null
   that actual GDP is always zero in IRFs while column 2 tests null that its response is zero at the maximum horizon of IRFs.
   Columns 3 and 4 are equivalent but for responses of the estimates of potential GDP. Column 5 tests the null that the IRFS of
   actual GDP and estimated potential are the same at all horizons while column 6 tests the null they are the same at the final
   horizon. See section 4 for details. Notice also that the measure of potential output is the same in panels A and B, in panels C
   and D and in panels E and F, what differs between these pairs is that the first uses the last vintage of actual output as a
   measure of actual output while the second uses real time actual output filtered with an HP filter with      800.

                                                                                                                               51
