                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE ARRIVAL OF FAST INTERNET AND EMPLOYMENT IN AFRICA

                                         Jonas Hjort
                                        Jonas Poulsen

                                     Working Paper 23582
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23582


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           July 2017, Revised January 2018




We are grateful to Editor Marianne Bertrand and five anonymous referees for insightful
comments that significantly improved the paper. We also thank Adrian Adermon, Sebastian
Axbard, Niklas Bengtsson, Martina Björkman-Nyqvist, Greg Bruich, Esther Duflo, Ray Fisman,
Oded Galor, Francois Gerard, Amit Khandelwal, Erik Lindqvist, Mushfiq Mobarak, Kalle
Moene, Eva Mörk, Anders Olofsgård, Michel Serafinelli, Kjetil Storesletten, Eric Verhoogen,
Tim Waters, Frank Windmeijer, Chris Woodruff, and especially Henrik Sigstad and Matthieu
Teachout for many helpful conversations, and seminar participants at the Barcelona Summer
Forum, Bocconi, Brown, Columbia, Harvard, IGC Growth Week, NBER Summer Institute, Oslo,
Oxford, Stockholm School of Economics, UBC, and Uppsala for comments and suggestions.
Sawal Acharya, Patrick Kennedy, and Roxanne Rahnama provided great research assistance. We
thank Akamai, Steve Song, and the World Bank for data access. Hjort thanks the Center for
Development Economics and Policy at Columbia University for financial support. Any errors are
our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Jonas Hjort and Jonas Poulsen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Arrival of Fast Internet and Employment in Africa
Jonas Hjort and Jonas Poulsen
NBER Working Paper No. 23582
July 2017, Revised January 2018
JEL No. D20,J20,O10

                                         ABSTRACT

To show how fast Internet affects employment in Africa, we exploit the gradual arrival of
submarine Internet cables on the coast and maps of the terrestrial cable network. Robust
difference-in-differences estimates from three datasets covering 12 countries show large positive
effects on employment rates—also for less educated worker groups—with little or no job
displacement across space. The sample-wide impact is driven by increased employment in
higher-skill occupations, but less educated workers’ employment gain less so. Firm level data
available for some countries indicate that increased firm entry, productivity, and exporting
contribute to higher net job-creation. Average incomes rise.


Jonas Hjort
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 622
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
hjort@columbia.edu

Jonas Poulsen
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 116
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
jonas.poulsen@nek.uu.se
1     Introduction
Traditional trade theory predicts a decrease in inequality in developing countries during periods of inte-
gration in the global economy. The slow economic progress of poor workers in many parts of Africa, Asia,
and Latin America during the last few decades therefore surprised economists. Two potential explana-
tions were proposed and compared: skill-biased technological change (SBTC) and features of international
trade—such as outsourcing (see e.g. Feenstra & Hanson, 1996, 1999, 2003) and quality upgrading (see e.g.
Verhoogen, 2008; Frías et al. , 2009)—that could alter the logic underlying expectations of job growth and
greater equality in unskilled labor-abundant countries post-integration (Feenstra & Hanson, 2003; Goldberg
& Pavcnik, 2007; Harrison et al. , 2011; Goldberg, 2015). Two decades of research led to wide agreement that
both explanations play a role, and that they probably interact (Wood, 1995; Acemoglu, 2003; Attanasio et al.
, 2004; Burstein et al. , 2013; Koren & Csillag, 2016; Raveh & Reshef, 2016). But this conclusion was built on
studies of trade-induced technological change. To date, there is no direct evidence on the average and dis-
tributional economic effects in poor countries of the spread of the modern information and communication
technologies (ICT) that help explain increasing inequality in rich countries’ labor markets.
    In this paper, we estimate how fast Internet—“the greatest invention of our time” (The Economist,
2012)—affects poor countries’ economies.1 To do so, we compare individuals and firms in locations in
Africa that are on the terrestrial network of Internet cables to those that are not. We compare these two
groups during the gradual arrival on the coast of submarine cables from Europe that greatly increase speed
and capacity on the terrestrial network. We show how employment rates, occupational employment shares,
job inequality across the educational attainment range, and the underlying extensive (Internet take-up) and
intensive (Internet speed) margin, respond. We also show evidence on three particular mechanisms through
which take-up and speed may affect employment: changes in firm entry; changes in productivity in exist-
ing firms; and changes in exporting. Finally, we show how average incomes in locations that see changes in
employment patterns with the arrival of fast Internet respond.
    It has been difficult to study SBTC directly because, other than in local experiments, ICT technologies
are not randomly allocated, but introduced where economic benefits are expected. While this is true every-
where, developing countries additionally tend to lack systematic and detailed labor market and firm level
data, especially in the poorest regions of the world, where the economic environment differs the most from
the West (see Katz & Autor (1999); Bond & Van Reenen (2007); Goldin & Katz (2007) for overviews of the
SBTC literature on rich countries). We overcome the first obstacle by interacting time variation generated by
the gradual arrival of submarine Internet cables at landing points on Africa’s coast in the late 2000s and early
2010s with cross-sectional variation in whether a given location is connected to the terrestrial “backbone”
network that starts at the landing point cities.2 We overcome the second obstacle by combining employment
data from representative household surveys (panels at location level) from 12 African countries with a com-
bined population of roughly half a billion people with firm level datasets (panels at firm or location level)
from Ethiopia, South Africa, and a group of six African countries.3 We use the firm level data to show evi-
dence on three especially important mechanisms—firm entry, productivity, and exporting—through which
   1 We are not aware of existing causal evidence on this relationship. See World Bank (2016) for an overview of the existing correla-

tional evidence, and more details below.
   2 During this period, each coastal country effectively had its own separate backbone network, as explained in Section 2.
   3 One household survey (Afrobarometer) covers Benin, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal, Tanzania, and

South Africa; and the other (DHS) Benin, D.R. Congo, Ghana, Kenya, Namibia, Nigeria, Togo, and Tanzania. We refer to these 12
countries jointly as “Africa” for simplicity. We also use a labor force survey from South Africa, and firm data from Ethiopia and Ghana,
Kenya, Mauritania, Nigeria, Senegal, and Tanzania.




                                                                   2
fast Internet may affect employment.4 We also use data on Internet speed and take-up of the Internet to tie
the reduced form estimates to the intensive and extensive margin of use. Finally, we use data on night lights
from satellite images to study how fast Internet ultimately affects average incomes.5
    Our approach differs from much of the related literature in that employment rates, rather than wages
(among the employed), are our primary outcomes of interest. This is partly for data availability reasons,
but it is also a sensible choice in a developing region context. “Job inequality” captures inequality in human
capital accumulation, future labor market prospects, and income that is due to (i) current (un)employment—
a component of first order importance in Africa that focusing on wage inequality would miss (see e.g.
Magruder, 2012; Hardy & McCasland, 2015)—and (ii) the “quality” of the individual’s job (if any) (see also
Davis & Harrigan, 2011; Card et al. , 2013, 2016). Moreover, changes in the probability of a worker being
employed in a position belonging to a given type of occupation are informative not only of demand for
qualified workers, but also of trends in structural change in developing economies.
    Our three main sets of results are as follows.6 First, we find that the probability that an individual is
employed increases by 6.9 and 13.2 percent in the two groups of countries covered by our household survey
datasets, and by 3.1 percent in South Africa, when fast Internet becomes available. We show that the increase
in employment in connected areas is not due to displacement of jobs in unconnected areas.
    Second, in both South Africa and the eight poorer countries covered by a household survey that records
occupation information, we find that the probability of being employed in a position belonging to a skilled
occupation increases substantially, but the probability of holding an unskilled job is unaffected, when fast
Internet becomes available. While the impact on overall trends in structural change is likely modest, fast
Internet thus appears to shift employment shares towards higher-productivity occupations.
    Third, employment inequality if anything falls when fast Internet arrives in Africa. The percentage
point increase in the probability of having a job is, for example, of comparable magnitude for those who
only completed primary school and those with secondary or tertiary education in all three of our samples.
The estimated increase in employment in a skilled occupation is biggest for those with tertiary education in
the group of countries covered by a detailed household survey, but is comparable in magnitude across the
educational attainment range in South Africa. In both these samples, those with only primary school see
increased employment in unskilled occupations.
    To compare these results to the existing evidence on recent SBTC in developed countries, we distinguish
between the skill level of jobs and workers. Our findings suggest that fast Internet in Africa affects employers’
relative demand for skilled and unskilled positions similarly to “computerization” and broadband Internet
in rich countries (Autor et al. , 1998, 2003, 2008; Goos et al. , 2014; Katz & Margo, 2014; Akerman et al.
, 2015), although the increase in overall employment and employment in skilled occupations is notably
bigger in Africa. In contrast, while ICT tends to increase inequality across the educational attainment range
in rich countries, fast Internet if anything decreases (un)employment inequality in Africa.7 These results
    4 We study a diverse subset of the world’s poorest countries and a transformative technology that may affect employment patterns

through many different channels. Data limitations thus prevent us from investigating all such potential channels, or determining
what share of the identified changes in employment patterns firm entry, productivity, and exporting account for. The literature on
information frictions in developing countries, for example, hints at additional mechanisms that may also play a role (Bloom et al. ,
2007; Antrás et al. , 2008; Magruder, 2010; Beaman & Magruder, 2012; Allen, 2014; Eaton et al. , 2015; Hardy & McCasland, 2015; Atkin
et al. , 2017; Mitra et al. , 2016).
    5 See Henderson et al. (2012); Bleakley & Lin (2012); Michalopoulos & Papaioannou (2013, 2018); Lowe (2014) on night lights as a

proxy for average incomes.
    6 That a given cable reaches different countries at different times and in a geographically determined order, and that we consider 10

different cables, a priori lowers concerns about non-parallel prior trends in economic outcomes in locations on versus off the backbone
network. The collection of datasets we use enables an extensive battery of tests that supports a causal interpretation of our results.
    7 Interestingly, Atasoy (2013) finds a relatively large correlation between Internet access and employment also in the U.S.—




                                                                   3
underscore that the factor bias of new technologies varies by context.
    The changes in employment patterns observed when submarine Internet cables arrive in Africa occur
through a combination of extensive margin (new users) and intensive margin (different use of the Internet by
existing users) responses. We find a large and significant increase in net firm entry (in South Africa), notably
in sectors that use ICT extensively (e.g. finance), and in the productivity of existing manufacturing firms (in
Ethiopia). The latter finding comes from a procedure where we first estimate how factor output elasticities
change with fast Internet, controlling for a possible simultaneous change in firm level productivity (see
De Loecker, 2011) to uncover the technology’s (positional) skill bias in Ethiopia. In the last step of the
procedure, we impose additional structure to estimate how firm level productivity responds, and find a
significant increase. We also use World Bank Enterprise Survey data to show that firms in Ghana, Kenya,
Mauritania, Nigeria, Senegal, and Tanzania export more; communicate with clients online more; and train
employees more, after they get access to fast Internet.
    In sum, the evidence we present indicates that greater and cheaper access to information and commu-
nication due to availability of fast Internet increases employment rates in Africa, and that in at least some
countries, this happens in part due to the technology’s impact on firm entry, productivity, and exports. In
the final part of the paper, we show that, as expected, average incomes rise in the areas that see changes in
employment when fast Internet arrives.
    This paper contributes to the literatures on the relationship between globalization and jobs, poverty, and
inequality; structural change; and constraints on firm growth in developing countries. The “new” features
of international trade uncovered in the recent body of work on globalization (see Feenstra & Hanson (2003);
Goldberg & Pavcnik (2007); Harrison et al. (2011); Goldberg (2015) for overviews) are important in part
because they alter traditional models’ prediction that locally relatively abundant factors necessarily gain
the most from global integration.8 A parallel literature convincingly demonstrates SBTC’s role in slowing
wage growth and rising unemployment among less educated workers in rich countries.9 However, to our
knowledge there was never any direct evidence on the causal relationship between employment rates, in-
equality, and incomes in developing countries and the ICT technologies that were shown to adversely affect
the relative labor market outcomes of low-skill workers in rich countries (Goldberg & Pavcnik, 2007).10
specifically, that a county gaining access to broadband services is associated with a 1.8 percentage points higher employment rate,
and that the correlation is even bigger in rural and isolated areas, among college-educated workers, and in industries and occupations
that more heavily utilize college-educated workers. Acemoglu & Autor (2011) and Michaels et al. (2014) find that, if three skill levels
are considered, ICT technologies substitute most for middle-skill workers in rich countries. Of course, the types of positions that exist
within a given skill category in Africa may differ from those in rich countries.
   8 Most existing studies find that trade liberalization tends to increase productivity in developing countries (Goldberg & Pavcnik,

2007), with more varied effects on poverty (Topalova, 2010; Winters et al. , 2004) and employment rates (see e.g. Currie & Harrison,
1997; Revenga, 1997; Harrison & Revenga, 1998; Marquez & Pages-Serra, 1998; Levinsohn, 1999; Moreira & Najberg, 2000). Currie &
Harrison (1997) is an exception in that they study (trade reform in) Africa (Morocco). Fajgelbaum & Khandelwal (2015) show that trade
benefits the poor through another channel, i.e. because their consumption is relatively concentrated in traded goods.
   9 The relative demand for college graduates increased from the late 1980s onwards with take-up of computers in Europe and the

U.S. (Krueger, 1993; Berman et al. , 1994; DiNardo & Pischke, 1997; Autor et al. , 1998; Machin & Van Reenen, 1998; Autor et al. , 2003;
Beaudry & Green, 2003, 2005; Beaudry et al. , 2010; Acemoglu & Autor, 2011; Goos et al. , 2014; Katz & Margo, 2014; Michaels et al. ,
2014). The explanation lies not only in “direct” factor complementaries, but also in associated worker sorting and organizational change
(Bartel & Sicherman, 1999; Caroli & Van Reenen, 2001; Bresnahan et al. , 2002; Crespi et al. , 2007; Bloom et al. , 2012). Akerman et al.
(2015) document an increase in the relative wages and productivity of high-skill workers when broadband Internet became available
in Norway. More generally, SBTC studies that focus on advanced Internet technology in rich countries find positive correlations with
local wage levels (see e.g. Czernich. et al. , 2011; OECD, 2013), and mixed results for the relative wage effects in richer versus poorer
U.S. counties (Forman et al. , 2012; Champion et al. , 2012; Atasoy, 2013). De Stefano et al. (2014) find no significant effect of broadband
Internet on the performance of British firms.
  10 There are important existing studies of mobile phones, mobile money, and TV in poor countries that focus on price variation

across space, risk sharing, and cultural change as outcomes (Jensen, 2007; Jensen & Oster, 2009; Aker, 2010; Chong et al. , 2012; Jack
& Suri, 2014). Jensen (2007)’s innovative study also shows that fishermen’s profits increased and consumer prices decreased when
mobile phones helped eliminate price dispersion across markets in Kerala. There is also important indirect evidence on SBTC in
developing countries from studies that use trade liberalization episodes or exchange rate variation that simultaneously affect trade



                                                                     4
    To date, research on the factor bias of new technologies in developing countries has largely focused on
how technology-driven improvements in agricultural productivity affect the movement of labor in and out
of agriculture (see Syrquin (1988) and Foster & Rosenzweig (2008) for overviews, and Bustos et al. (2016)
for a prominent recent example). Such movement is a form of structural change (Clark, 1940; Lewis, 1955;
Banerjee & Newman, 1993; Baumol, 2012; Herrendorf et al. , 2014), i.e. a persistent change in the relative size
of different sectors and occupations. Beyond the role of agricultural productivity and openness to trade, the
drivers of structural change are not well understood.11
    The literature on firms in developing countries has made considerable progress in the last decade and a
half. The benefits of importing, exporting, and winning government contracts suggest that the size of the
input and output markets that can be accessed is important even conditional on a firm’s initial productiv-
ity (see e.g. Frías et al. , 2009; Goldberg et al. , 2010a,b; Amiti & Davis, 2012; Brambilla et al. , 2012; Atkin
et al. , 2015; Ferraz et al. , 2015). Greater demand from richer consumers abroad has in turn been shown to
enable firms to learn, and to produce higher quality products that may require more skilled workers (Ver-
hoogen, 2008; Frías et al. , 2009; Atkin et al. , 2015; Hansman et al. , 2017). Existing evidence also indicates
that firms’ financial performance is enhanced by improved coordination with suppliers, access to credit,
and good management (Bloom et al. , 2007; McKenzie et al. , 2008; Bloom et al. , 2013; Casaburi et al. , 2013;
Macchiavello & Miquel-Florensa, 2015). However, we know little about what drives job creation, produc-
tivity, and exporting among firms in developing countries. This is especially true when the focus is on the
poorest countries and/or the role of specific technologies or inputs. The existing literature reviewed here,
the role of ICT in the resurgence of U.S. productivity growth (Draca et al. , 2007; Oliner et al. , 2007; Jorgenson
et al. , 2008; Syverson, 2011), and a considerable body of important correlational evidence from developing
countries all underscore the promise of fast Internet.12
    We make three main contributions to the literature. First, we use quasi-random variation in access to
ICT technology to provide direct evidence on its impact on employment rates, job inequality, and incomes
in 12 developing countries. These findings are important because they suggest that the factor bias of mod-
ern technologies differs in Africa. This implies that the primary explanation for rising inequality in poor
countries may not be SBTC.
    Second, we provide evidence on the relationship between structural change and ICT technology. This
represents a first step towards understanding what drives structural change beyond the role of agricultural
productivity and openness to trade. Our results qualify negative views of (other manifestations of) global-
ization in that fast Internet appears to increase both the share of skilled jobs and average incomes in Africa,
and technological change for identification, including Harrison & Hanson (1999); Acemoglu (2003); Attanasio et al. (2004); Aghion
et al. (2005); Amiti & Cameron (2012); Frazer (2013); Raveh & Reshef (2016). Another indirect form of evidence that has been taken to
suggest that SBTC has occurred in Latin America and India in recent decades is that the share of skilled workers has increased in most
industries there (see Goldberg & Pavcnik (2007, p. 27)). Goldberg & Pavcnik (2007) note that the skill premium increased around the
same time as trade reform occurred in several Latin American countries and India, but that inequality decreased in several South East
Asian countries and China when they opened up their markets (see also Wood, 1999; Wei & Wu, 2002). Interestingly, while income
inequality has increased in many African countries in recent decades, the picture for Africa as a whole is less clear than for Asia and
Latin America (Harrison et al. , 2011; Dabla-Norris et al. , 2015).
   11 Recent work on structural change has emphasized the importance of the manufacturing sector (Gollin et al. , 2002; Lagakos &

Waugh, 2013; Gollin et al. , 2014; Rodrik, 2015); improvements in trends in structural change in Africa in the 2000s (McMillan &
Harttgen, 2014; McMillan & Rodrik, 2014); and how trade liberalization can shift workers across sectors and across firms within sectors
(see e.g. Attanasio et al. , 2004; Davis & Harrigan, 2011; Young, 2014).
   12 Qiang & Rossotto (2009) find that, across developing countries, a 10 percent increase in broadband penetration is associated with

a 1.38 percentage point higher GDP per capita growth rate. Clarke & Wallsten (2006) find that a 1 percentage point increase in Internet
users is associated with 3.8 percentage points higher exports from low-income to high-income countries. Paunov & Rollo (2015) find
that use of the Internet correlates positively with firm performance in a range of poor countries. Basant et al. (2011), using more
detailed data on Brazilian and Indian manufacturing firms and more extensive controls, find the same for ICT technologies. Their
novel results point to much higher rates of return to investment in ICT in Brazil and India than in developed countries.




                                                                  5
and—at least in the Ethiopian context—productivity and employment in manufacturing.
    Finally, we demonstrate how fast Internet affects employment, productivity, and exporting in African
firms, expanding the body of evidence on why firms tend to grow slowly, and ways to stimulate job growth,
in poor countries. Our findings on fast Internet and exports represent evidence of an interaction between
technological change and trade that differs from trade-induced SBTC as analyzed by the existing literature.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we lay out the background on Internet and
jobs in Africa, and discuss examples of job creation often attributed to the submarine cables. In Section 3 we
present our data, and in Section 4 the empirical strategy. The paper’s main results are in Section 5, and in
Section 6 we analyze how fast Internet affects employment in Africa. Section 7 explores the ultimate impact
on incomes. Section 8 concludes.


2     Background
2.1    Internet infrastructure and use in Africa
In 2000, Africa as a whole had less international Internet bandwidth than the country of Luxembourg (ITU,
2000). By 2013, 13 percent of all Africans used the Internet, compared to 36 percent globally (Internet So-
ciety, 2013), and more than half of urban African adults owned Internet-capable devices (McKinsey Global
Institute, 2013). Listed in decreasing order of average speeds and increasing order of frequency in Africa,
the forms of Internet infrastructure that reach users—the “last mile”—are fiber cables, copper cables, wire-
less transmission using cell towers, and satellites (de M. Cordeiro et al. , 2003; Gallaugher, 2012). Prior to the
last mile, Internet traffic travels through a national “backbone” of bigger (typically fiber) cables, as depicted
in Figure I for South Africa. The backbone was built by a national telecom in almost all countries, some-
times with “branches” added by private telecoms. Since Internet traffic was initially transmitted through
telephone cables, the majority of the backbone network cables date back many decades (ITU, 2013).
    In the 2000s, submarine Internet cables from Europe were built by consortia made up of private in-
vestors, African governments, and/or multilateral organizations (OECD, 2014).13 The submarine cables
were brought to shore at landing points along the coast, typically one in each country passed by the cable.
These were usually located just outside of a big city that was connected to the national backbone. Figure II
shows the 10 submarine cables that arrived in Africa during 2006-2014, as reported by Mahlknecht (2014).
    Once plugged in, the submarine cables brought much faster speed and traffic capacities on Internet traffic
to and from other continents to locations in Africa connected to the terrestrial network.14 On a fiber-optic ca-
ble network, the technologically feasible increase in speeds and traffic post-submarine cable plug-in decays
with cable length to the landing point to a negligible extent. In general, technological bottlenecks there-
fore arise at the backbone level only where networks owned by different owners connect to each other. In
such cases, the Internet service providers (ISPs) operating on network A will transmit content to (physically
connected) network B directly only if the two networks are collaborating, for example through “peering”
(ITU, 2013). If not, the fees that African networks charge each other for the exchange of traffic (“transit”)
are such that content stored on network A would likely be sent via other continents to users on network
B (“tromboning”). This partly explains the submarine cables’ predicted effect on “experienced” speed and
  13 One of the 10 submarine cables that arrived in Africa during our data period connected the continent with both Europe and India,

and another one with the U.A.E. We refer to the connection point of the submarine cables outside of Africa as “Europe” for simplicity.
  14 Being reached by submarine Internet cables from Europe implies a faster connection also to North America and other continents

because of the extensive Internet infrastructure that connects Europe with other continents.




                                                                  6
capacity, but a more important contributor is that “in Africa very little Internet content is sourced locally,
with the vast majority sourced internationally—including local content that is hosted overseas.” (Kende
& Rose, 2015, p. 15).15 For example, Chavula et al. (2014) found that on average 75 percent of the traffic
originating in Africa that is destined for African universities traverse links outside the continent, and Kende
& Rose (2015) report that all of the top 14 commercial websites in Rwanda are hosted in Europe or the U.S.
    The need for African Internet traffic to travel overseas is important for this paper. In combination with
each country being covered by a single backbone network, the lack of spillovers from one coastal country’s
submarine connection to neighboring countries means that each country has a specific treatment date—the
date when the first cable has arrived at the country’s landing point and is plugged in.16
    In Table I we show the mean and standard deviation of Internet speeds and use of the Internet across
locations in Africa before the submarine cables arrived. The average (measured) speed was 430 kbps, with
a standard deviation of 419 kbps.17 These relatively high numbers partly reflect the fact that our speed
data measure non-mobile connections. (In Section 3 we describe the data in detail; some limitations of the
speed measure are discussed in Sub-section 5.1). The proportion of individuals in the countries covered by
one of our household survey datasets who used the Internet daily and weekly was 10 and 20 percent on
average, with standard deviations of 30 and 40 percent. 38 percent of firms in the multi-country firm dataset
communicated with clients via email, while 12 percent used a website.


2.2    Jobs and firms in Africa
The 2006-2014 period we focus on was a period of high growth in many African countries.18 Given their
diversity, we do not attempt to describe an average labor market among the 12 countries in our sample here.
Instead the second panel of Table I displays, for the groups of countries covered by our respective datasets,
and focusing again on the period before fast Internet became available, the proportion of individuals that
have a job, and the proportion that have a job in a skilled occupation. In Benin, D.R. Congo, Ghana, Kenya,
Namibia, Nigeria, Togo, and Tanzania (the DHS sample), the employment rate is on average 68 percent, with
a standard deviation of 47 percent. In Benin, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal,
Tanzania, and South Africa (the Afrobarometer sample), the employment rate is on average 58 percent,
with a standard deviation of 49 percent. In South Africa, the employment rate is 71 percent, with a standard
deviation of 45 percent.
    In the first group of countries, 58 percent have a job that belongs to a skilled occupation as defined by
the International Labour Organization (ILO), with a standard deviation of 49 percent.19 We also observe
the type of occupation to which an individual’s job belongs—and several additional employment related
outcomes—in South Africa. There, 50 percent have a skilled job (s.d. = 50 percent); average hours worked
per week among the employed are 45 (s.d. = 15 hours); 66 percent “want to work more” (s.d. = 47 percent);
48 percent have a formal job (s.d. = 50 percent); and 12 percent have an informal job (s.d. = 33 percent).
    In the third panel of Table I, we show the average number of workers, and workers in skilled positions,
per firm in respectively Ethiopia and Ghana, Kenya, Mauritania, Nigeria, Senegal, and Tanzania (World
Bank Enterprise Survey countries. See Section 3 for information on the firms included). In the latter group
  15 The main reason is cost: “one content developer reported spending USD 49.99 per year for up to 150GB capacity overseas, com-

pared to a Rwandan offer of over USD 900 for 50GB capacity” (Kende & Rose, 2015, p. 3). Africa pays over USD 600 million a year for
within-Africa traffic exchange that is carried outside the continent (Internet Society, 2013).
  16 We exclude landlocked countries from analysis because the extent to which they get treated (through coastal neighbors) is unclear.
  17 These numbers exclude the four biggest cities in each country (see Table II).
  18 However, some countries in our sample, especially South Africa, were badly affected by the 2008 global financial crisis.
  19 ILO’s definition of skilled occupations is fairly broad; in Section 5.5 we consider each of the underlying sub-categories.




                                                                  7
of countries, firms have 31 employees on average, with a standard deviation of 95 across firms, while large-
and medium-sized Ethiopian manufacturing firms have 76 employees on average, with a standard deviation
of 192. The number of skilled positions per firm, as proxied respectively by high salary positions and non-
production positions, is 24 in Ethiopia and 10 in the first group of countries.
    We return to the comparison between eventually treated and untreated locations in Section 4.


2.3   Examples of new job creation after the arrival of fast Internet
Many media articles and case studies illustrate new, and new types, of jobs in Africa being created after
the arrival of fast Internet. Scruggs (2015) reports that “In 2009, a submarine fiber-optic cable landed in
Mombassa [...] Six years later, Nairobi is bursting with technology startups like Shop Soko, a sort of Etsy for
Africa that allows shopkeepers to sell handmade goods to consumers worldwide. The Kenyan capital has
also emerged as [a] base for high-tech heavyweights such as Google, IBM and Intel. From 2002 to 2010, the
value of Kenya’s tech exports rose from USD 16 million to USD 360 million.” Nairobi’s iHub incubator had
helped develop more than 150 new businesses by 2013 (McKinsey Global Institute, 2013). Similarly, Harris
(2012) reports that “With the landing of new submarine telecom cables off South Africa’s coastline starting
in 2009, bandwidth prices began to tumble, removing one of the most significant barriers to the global
competitiveness of the country’s IT industry. That was a catalyst for the explosion of Cape Town’s tech scene
[...] [and] stature as a business process outsourcing [BPO] and offshoring hub.” In 2013 there were more than
54,000 jobs in South Africa’s new BPO sector, and Morocco’s was at similar scale (McKinsey Global Institute,
2013). Growth in the technology sector also has add-on benefits in other sectors, e.g. construction.20
     Nigeria is one of the African countries where “eCommerce” has taken off, driven in part by major online
retailers that also operate e.g. in Egypt, Ivory Coast, Kenya, and Morocco (Rice, 2013). Online purchases in
Nigeria stood at more than USD 1 billion in 2014, tripling in three years (Atuanya & Augie, 2013). Adepetun
(2014) of the online news site AllAfrica.com argues, based on interviews with officials and industry execu-
tives, that Nigeria’s ICT sector from 2004 to 2014 created 100,000 direct jobs, and 1.1 million jobs indirectly,
and that eCommerce and ICT’s success in Nigeria is due in part to the arrival of the submarine cables.
     Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa all now have a manufacturing sector producing Internet-capable de-
vices for the African market, such as low-cost cell phones and computers (McKinsey Global Institute, 2013).
     There are also signs that the arrival of fast Internet helped make supply chain coordination easier.
Mozambican moWoza and similar start-ups elsewhere use apps and websites to deploy drivers to deliver
parcels from wholesalers to traders, and doing the bureaucracy required to import and export in Ghana on-
line has decreased delays considerably (McKinsey Global Institute, 2013). Such supply chain improvement
is believed to enhance productivity in agribusiness and manufacturing. For example, the adoption of cloud-
based supply-chain management solutions by the Kenyan Tea Development Agency connected around 60
tea factories with the farmers that supply them. This reportedly reduced delays at collection points and
fraud, and increased tea factories’ productivity and farmers’ incomes (Business Daily, 2009; GIZ, 2014).
     Technology start-ups, BPO, eCommerce, new forms of manufacturing, and innovative supply-chain
management companies and regulatory agencies that make doing business easier for factories and farm-
ers are of course only examples of the ways in which fast Internet may enable greater job creation. But the
technology may also eliminate jobs in some occupations—or conceivably even on average—for example
due to automation or increased exposure to Asian competition. In the next section we present the data that
we use to investigate the causal impact of fast Internet on employment in Africa.
 20 Scruggs   (2015): “In Nairobi’s Kilimani area, where the tech scene is centered, ten-story office buildings are shooting up.”


                                                                     8
3       Data
Our outcome data come from the following sources:
    Afrobarometer surveys are nationally representative repeated cross-sections conducted every two-three
years in many African countries. The order in which locations are surveyed is randomly determined. We
geo-code the location based on information provided on the respondent’s residence. Men and women of
voting age are interviewed. The survey asks socioeconomic questions. We use Afrobarometer data from
coastal countries that had survey rounds both before and after submarine cable arrival in the relevant coun-
try: Benin, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal, Tanzania, and South Africa.
    From Afrobarometer we construct an outcome variable for the individual being employed.21 We also
use variables on educational attainment and Internet use.
    Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) are nationally representative repeated cross-sections. The or-
der in which sampling clusters are surveyed is randomly determined. GPS coordinates for sampling clusters
are recorded. Women and men between 15 and 49 years old are interviewed.22 The survey asks questions
about labor market participation, health, and demographic background. We use DHS data from coastal
countries that had survey rounds both before and after submarine cable arrival in the relevant country:
Benin, D.R. Congo, Ghana, Kenya, Namibia, Nigeria, Togo, and Tanzania.
    From DHS we construct outcome variables for the individual being employed23 , and for being employed
in a specific type of occupation. We also use educational attainment variables.
    The South Africa Quarterly Labor Force Survey (QLFS) is a nationally representative repeated cross-
section. Unlike in Afrobarometer and DHS, QLFS surveys are carried out every quarter. GPS coordinates
for enumeration areas are recorded. The current version of the survey began in 2008.24
    From QLFS we construct outcome variables for the individual being employed25 , and for being em-
ployed in a specific type of occupation. We also use educational attainment and other employment-related
variables.
    South African companies are required to register with the Companies and Intellectual Property Com-
mission (CIPC) Firm Registry. We use the resulting zip-code×date level panel registry, which captures
entry and exit of formal firms. CIPC provided us with data from 2007 quarter 1 to 2014 quarter 4. We code
up each firm’s sector when its name contains sufficient information to do so.26
    The Ethiopia Large and Medium Scale Manufacturing Industries Survey (LMMIS) is an annual sur-
vey of all Ethiopian manufacturing establishments that engage 10 or more persons and use power-driven
machines. We use the 2006 to 2013 rounds. The survey collects information on employees, inputs, produc-
tion, sales, and assets, and is used to construct the country’s national accounts.
    From LMMIS we construct an outcome variable for the number of employees per firm. As proxies for
skilled and unskilled positions, we use high-salary and low-salary positions.27 When estimating production
    21 Thequestion is “Do you have a job that pays a cash income?”.
    22 DHS surveys both women and men, but its primary focus is on women (and children) and fewer men are surveyed. About 30
percent of the DHS sample we use is male. Note also that, for two of the countries in our DHS sample (Tanzania and Togo), the pre-
treatment survey round we use was conducted in the late 1990s, rather than in the years preceding the arrival of submarine cables as
for the other countries (these two countries did not have a survey round in the years preceding the arrival of submarine cables). Our
results are essentially unchanged if these two countries are excluded. In Afrobarometer, Tanzania was surveyed in 2008.
   23 The question is “Aside from your own housework, have you done any work in the last seven days?”.
   24 From 2010 quarter 3 onwards, the QLFS changed the way observations are linked to enumeration areas and locations. We thus

restrict attention to the period prior to then.
   25 The question is “In the last week, did you work for a wage, salary, commission or any payment in kind (including paid domestic

work), even if it was only one hour?”.
   26 The procedure is described in the Appendix. We were able to assign a sector to 67 percent of the firms based on their names.
   27 LMMIS does not contain information on occupational categories. Skilled (high-salary) / unskilled (low-salary) positions are de-




                                                                 9
functions, we also use measures of output (value added), capital (total book value), and intermediate inputs.
    The World Bank Enterprise Survey (WBES) is a nationally representative sample of formal firms from
all sectors with five or more employees. The survey asks about the business environment, operations, out-
put, and input use. We use WBES data from coastal countries that had survey rounds both before and after
submarine cable arrival in the relevant country: Ghana, Kenya, Mauritania, Nigeria, Senegal, and Tanzania.
The surveys for these countries were carried out in 2006, 2007, 2013, and 2014.
    From WBES we use an outcome variable for the number of employees per firm. As proxies for skilled
and unskilled positions, we use non-production and production positions. We also use measures of sales per
unit of labor costs; national sales, indirect exports, and direct exports; communication with clients through
a website and email; and whether the firm provides training to its employees.
    We also use Internet infrastructure and speed data. We use Mahlknecht’s map of submarine cables to
measure landing points and -times (Mahlknecht, 2014), and www.africabandwidthmaps.com and AfTerFi-
bre (AfTerFibre, 2014)’s maps of terrestrial backbone networks to measure locations’ connectivity.28
    Our data on Internet speeds come from the content delivery network Akamai Technologies, Inc., which
owns servers worldwide and serves 15-30 percent of all Internet traffic. Akamai averages the speeds
recorded for residential users, educational institutions, government offices, and firms in a given location×
quarter, excluding those who connect via mobile networks. (We discuss a limitation of this measurement
method in Sub-section 5.1). Akamai provided us with quarterly data on average connection speeds for ∼900
African locations during the 2007-2014 period. These locations are shown in Appendix Figure AI.


4     Empirical Strategy
We analyze the relationship between employment patterns in a given location and time period on the one
hand and whether or not the location is connected to submarine Internet cables from Europe via the terres-
trial backbone network on the other. We run

         yij(i)c(i)t = α + βSubmarineCablesc(i)t × Connectedi + δj(i) × Connectedi + γc(i)t + ij(i)c(i)t                            (1)

where yij(i)c(i)t is an outcome for individual i in grid-cell j(i), country c(i), and time period t. SubmarineCablesc(i)t
is a dummy variable equal to one if the backbone network in country c(i) has been connected to at least one
submarine cable at t, and Connectedi is a dummy variable equal to one if individual i’s location is connected
to the backbone network. In some parts of our analysis, i represents a firm or geographical location rather
than an individual.
    The interaction between 0.1×0.1 degree (∼10×10 km) grid-cell fixed effects—δj(i) —and the Connectedi
indicator controls for any time-invariant differences in employment outcomes that may be correlated with
access to fast Internet. These can be included because all our datasets are panels at “δj(i) × Connectedi
level”. Some of our datasets are sufficiently balanced across time at the lowest geographical level at which
i’s location is reported—e.g. an enumeration area—that δj(i) × Connectedi can be replaced with location
fixed effects defined at that level.29
fined as those where salary is higher/lower than 800 Birr per year, approximately the sample salary median.
   28 We consider Ethiopia “treated” because it is well-documented that its backbone became internationally connected via the subma-

rine cable landing in Djibouti, which was planned and built to also cover Ethiopia (Giorgis, 2010; Oxford Business Group, 2015).
   29 In such cases there is no need to include interactions between location fixed effects and Connected because the lowest geographical
                                                                                                         i
level at which i’s location is reported is either connected or not in these datasets. On the other hand, in DHS and Afrobarometer,
information on an individual’s village or neighborhood is reported, but during our data period specific villages/neighborhoods rarely



                                                                   10
    Country-specific time period (quarter or year) fixed effects—γc(i)t —control for any within-country-location-
invariant differences in employment outcomes that may be correlated with access to fast Internet.30 The
effect of fast Internet is thus identified off of the comparison between the change in outcomes for locations
that gain access to fast Internet in a given quarter or year and the change in outcomes for other locations in
the same country that do not gain access at the same point in time.
    We cluster the standard errors at location—ie., j(i)—level. Most of our outcome variables are 0/1; the
ones that are not are highly skewed. We transform these using the inverse hyperbolic sine (asinh).31
    Since we lack information on last mile infrastructure at the local level32 , we define i’s location as con-
nected if it is near infrastructure that makes availability of fast Internet possible, i.e. the country’s backbone
network. (We refer to a location as “treated” at t if additionally at least one submarine cable has arrived
in the country at t). We use maps of Africa’s backbone networks prior to the arrival of the 10 submarine
cables to measure such connectivity.33 Specifically, we define as connected those locations that are less than
500 meters from the backbone network. Dividing the sample into two groups facilitates easy inspection of
possible differences in pre-trends in the outcomes across connected versus unconnected locations, and this
approach also simplifies interpretation of the estimates. In Section 5, we show that our results are robust to
varying the radius used to define connectivity, and to relaxing the binary definition of connectivity.34
    We exclude locations that are further from 10 km from the backbone network. The identifying assump-
tion is thus that locations close to and somewhat further away from the terrestrial backbone network were
on parallel trends in employment outcomes prior to the arrival of submarine Internet cables in Africa, and
did not experience systematically different idiosyncratic shocks after the cables arrived. To illustrate the ge-
ographical variation we exploit, Figures I and III display points where we observe individuals’ location, the
backbone networks, and the areas we use to define location fixed effects, for two specific areas and datasets
(Southwestern South Africa for the QLFS dataset, and Southern Ghana for the Afrobarometer dataset).
    Table I shows, in addition to the overall employment rates by groups of countries covered by our respec-
appear in two different survey rounds of which one is conducted before and one after submarine cable arrival. The connected and
unconnected parts of 10×10 km grid-cells, however, often do. Note that δj(i) × Connectedi is shorthand in (1) in the sense that we
interact δj(i) both with the Connectedi dummy and the converse dummy for not being connected.
  30 Appendix Table AI lists when the countries in our sample were surveyed and when they were reached by submarine cables. We use

the quarter in which the survey was conducted (or to which the observation belongs) to designate a given observation as pre- versus
post- submarine cable arrival in all our outcome datasets as this is the time level at which Mahlknecht (2014)’s map of submarine cables
reports arrival times in the various landing point cities along the coast.
  31 Our results are robust to instead clustering the standard errors at the level of administrative units and to computing standard

errors using methods designed to account for spatial correlation, as discussed in Section 5. The asinh function closely parallels the
natural logarithm function, but is well defined at 0 (see Card & DellaVigna, 2017).
  32 In Sub-section 2.1 we discussed how the technologically feasible increase in traffic and speeds post-submarine cable arrival decays

with cable length along fiber backbone networks to a negligible extent. Connectivity is lower further away from than close to the
backbone network, but the connectivity reach beyond the backbone network depends on the last mile infrastructure in place in a given
area (Commonwealth Telecommunications Organisation, 2012; Banerji & Chowdhury, 2013).
  33 To construct our map of the initial backbone network, we start with AfTerFibre’s 2013 map (which is publicly and freely

available, and for which corresponding GIS shape files are provided). We then use a map of backbone networks in Africa from
www.africabandwidthmaps.com that is available (for purchase, and without shape files) both for 2009 quarter 2 and 2013 quarter 2 to
identify the (few) backbone segments built during that period. Finally, we “remove” these new segments from the AfTerFibre map. We
calculate the distance between an individual, firm or location in the sample and the nearest point on the country’s backbone network.
(For QLFS, we observe the location of the ( ∼80,000) enumeration areas individuals belong to. In QLFS we thus define the location of
the individual as the GPS coordinates of the centroid of his or her enumeration area).
  34 Given that backhaul networks (such as metropolitan loops) were generally lacking in Sub-Saharan Africa during our data period,

most telephone and Internet exchange points were likely located along the national backbones. Technological considerations indicate
that 500 meters is a reasonable proxy for potential fast Internet “reach” beyond the backbone cables for copper-cable last mile tech-
nologies. (For last mile transmission via microwaves, the distance-connectivity relationship beyond the backbone is less clear-cut. We
thus choose a conservative radius based on copper-cable technologies.) Our empirical strategy may underestimate the true effect of
fast Internet in treated locations since locations further than 500 meters from the backbone network may also benefit from the arrival of
submarine cables, even if they do so to a lesser extent. It is also possible that neighboring locations suffer (or benefit) from the greater
increase in access to fast Internet in connected locations. In Section 5 we vary the assumed connectivity radius and also compare
locations at varying distances to the backbone network.


                                                                    11
tive datasets, the breakdown by connected versus unconnected areas. Differences in employment rates are
small in most countries; in the DHS and Afrobarometer countries the employment rate is respectively two
and three percentage points higher in unconnected areas, while in South Africa the employment rate is six
percentage points higher in connected areas. The rate of employment in skilled positions is one percentage
point higher in unconnected areas in the DHS countries, and six percentage points higher in connected ar-
eas in South Africa. Firms on average employ 33/14 and 11/3 workers overall and in skilled positions in
connected/unconnected areas WBES countries, and 74/81 and 24/24 workers overall and in skilled posi-
tions in connected/unconnected areas in Ethiopia. Internet speeds are slightly higher in connected areas,
whereas take-up rates are slightly higher in unconnected areas.
    In Sub-section 5.3 we investigate possible violations of the identifying assumption of parallel trends.
We show that our results are robust to varying the radius around the backbone network used to define
connectivity status; to varying the size of the grid-cells used to define location fixed effects; to defining the
backbone network as the intersection of cables reported by two different data sources; to excluding landing
point locations; to including placebo treatments that interact SubmarineCablesit with proximity to roads,
electricity networks or 3G coverage; to controlling for location-specific linear and non-linear trends in the
outcomes; to including leads and lags of SubmarineCablesit ; and to alternative ways to compute standard
errors. We also show direct evidence of parallel pre-trends, and that our estimates remain significant if we
use a non-parametric permutation test for inference.
    Figure II shows the submarine cables that had arrived in different landing point locations along the coast
at various times during our data period. The figure illustrates two important aspects of the identifying
variation we exploit. First, submarine cables arrive at many different points in time, and at different points
in time in different countries. This means that we compare connected and unconnected locations across
many different points in time rather than a single date. Second, the order in which different countries are
reached by a given submarine cable is geographically determined. It is thus a priori unlikely that arrival
times correlate with temporal variation across countries in differences between the economic trajectories of
connected and unconnected areas.


5     Results
5.1    Submarine cable arrival and Internet speed and use
Before analyzing how access to fast Internet affects employment in Africa, we document that the arrival of
submarine cables increases both average speeds and use of the Internet. Columns 1 to 3 of Table II show
results from running (1) with the outcome defined as the average Internet speed in a given location×quarter
as measured in Akamai’s data. We find that cable arrival increases measured speed in connected locations,
relative to unconnected locations, by around 35 percent in the full sample; 36 percent when we leave out the
biggest cities in each country; and by around 38 percent when we also control for interactions between the
Connectedi indicator and the time period fixed effects. (We motivate this control in Sub-section 5.3).35
    Akamai informed us that, because only a fraction of their African speed tests were “sent” to servers on
other continents during our data period, the coefficients estimated in columns 1 to 3 of Table II are likely
much smaller than the true effect of the submarine cables on speeds experienced by users.36 This is in line
   35 We display results excluding the biggest cities because the 500 meter connectivity radius may misclassify the biggest, connected

cities in Akamai’s sample as unconnected, as explained in more detail in the notes to the table.
   36 The reason is that Akamai’s technology normally tests a user’s speed of connection to a nearby server. In general, during our data




                                                                  12
with numerous media articles and existing analyses reporting large increases in speed with the arrival of
submarine cables in Africa (see e.g. BBC, 2009; CNN, 2009; State of the Internet Report, 2012).
    In the Afrobarometer surveys, respondents are asked if they use the Internet daily or weekly. In columns
4 and 6 of Table II, we show results from again running (1), except that the outcome variable is now a dummy
for the individual reporting that she uses the Internet. We find that submarine cable arrival increases the
probability that an individual uses the Internet daily in connected relative to unconnected locations by about
eight percent on average, and the probability that she uses the Internet weekly by about 12 percent. When
we control for interactions between the Connectedi indicator and time period fixed effects in columns 5 and
7, the estimated effect on daily and weekly Internet use is respectively 12 and 14 percent.
    There are likely two reasons why use of the Internet increases with submarine cable arrival. First, the
technology becomes more useful to potential users. Second, the arrival of the submarine cables led to
“drastic falls in prices for international capacity” (Kende & Rose, 2015, p. 15); a cost decrease that ISPs
likely partly pass on to users via lower prices. Such a fall in prices could be especially important in Africa,
where many potential users are credit constrained.
    Of course, the increase in take-up by employers after the arrival of the submarine cables may differ from
that for individuals. In Section 6, where we use firm level data to explore channels through which fast
Internet may affect employment, we analyze how firms’ use of websites and email responds.
    We conclude that, while data limitations prevent us from pinning down the exact magnitude of the
increase in experienced speeds and commercial use of the Internet with the arrival of fast Internet in Africa,
both rise considerably. This highlights that an impact on employment patterns may arise both through
inframarginal users increasing and changing their use of the Internet, and through take-up by new users.


5.2    Fast Internet and employment rates
In Table III we report this paper’s first main findings: the estimated effect of the arrival of fast Internet on
employment rates in Africa. In the eight countries for which we have DHS data—Benin, D.R. Congo, Ghana,
Kenya, Namibia, Nigeria, Togo, and Tanzania—we find a 4.6 percentage point, or 6.9 percent, increase in the
probability that an individual is employed when fast Internet arrives. In the nine countries for which we
have Afrobarometer data—Benin, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal, Tanzania,
and South Africa—we find an even bigger 7.7 percentage point, or 13.2 percent, increase in the employment
rate. In South Africa—for which we use labor force survey data—we find a 2.2 percentage point or 3.1
percent increase in employment.
    Given the large magnitude of these estimates, one may wonder to what extent they reflect “real” ad-
ditional economic activity. In Panel B of Table III, we use more detailed work-related questions available
in the QLFS dataset to investigate this. In column 1, we show that access to fast Internet increases hours
worked by about 10 percent on average in South Africa. This helps rule out, for example, that fast Internet
simply allows individuals to smooth out their work hours over time (which could affect how they answer
employment questions in a survey). The increase in hours worked also helps explain why the technology re-
duces the probability that an individual “wants to work more” by 2.2 percent, as seen in column 2. Another
period, the speed recorded was that to a server in another country—typically in or via Europe—only in cases where Akamai did not
own a server that was located within the user’s ISP’s own network or directly upstream. It is, however, primarily speeds on traffic to
other continents that are affected by the submarine cables, as discussed in Sub-section 2.1. Almost all Internet traffic from Africa did
indeed travel to or via other continents during our data period, as also discussed in Sub-section 2.1. Despite significant efforts, we have
not managed to find Internet speed data covering our data period that explicitly measure speeds between specific locations in Africa
and other continents over time, and Akamai would not share a more detailed version of their data (that could allow us to separate out
the speed tests that were sent to other continents) with us.



                                                                    13
possibility is that the estimates in the top panel of Table III reflect formalization of pre-existing informal jobs
rather than additional employment. This is unlikely because all the surveys we use ask about employment
status in a way that should capture also informal employment (see Section 3). The QLFS survey explicitly
records both formal and informal employment. As seen in columns 3 and 4 of Panel B, the estimated in-
crease in formal employment is only slightly smaller than the estimated increase in any employment, while
the estimated effect on informal employment is positive but close to zero and insignificant.
    The evidence thus suggests that “real” employment in Africa increases substantially when fast Internet
becomes available. In the next sub-section we probe the identifying assumption underlying our causal
interpretation of the estimates in depth.


5.3    Robustness
We start by confirming that the estimated effect of fast Internet is not sensitive to the radius around the
backbone network used to define locations’ connection status. In Figure IV we display point estimates and
confidence intervals for a wide range of radii, each used to define connectivity in a separate regression.
For each of our three main outcome datasets, we display results for several radii beyond the connection
radius at which the point estimate becomes insignificant. In all three datasets, the point estimate falls as the
connection radius is increased, as we would expect. The decay in the estimate as we increase the assumed
connection radius is steepest in the DHS sample and least steep in the Afrobarometer sample. In all three
samples, the point estimate remains significant well beyond the 500 meter radius we use to define connec-
tivity in our baseline approach. In Appendix Table AII, we show that the results are also not sensitive to the
size of the grid-cells used to define location fixed effects.
    In Appendix Table AIV, we vary the backbone cables used to define connection status and the sample an-
alyzed in several ways. We first use the intersection of the AfTerFibre and www.africabandwidthmaps.com
maps to define connectivity.37 When we do so, the estimated effect of fast Internet is essentially unchanged
in two of our samples, as seen in Panel A. In the Afrobarometer sample, the point estimates decreases
somewhat and becomes insignificant, but remains large in magnitude when we use only backbone cables
reported by both these sources to define connectivity.
    In Panel B of Appendix Table AIV, we exclude from the sample all individuals located less than 20 km
from a landing point. The locations that were chosen as landing points are, in addition to being on the
coast, typically in or near large cities. If such locations were on a different trend in employment before the
arrival of submarine cables, we may incorrectly attribute an estimated treatment effect to the arrival of fast
Internet. However, the results are essentially unchanged—if anything the point estimates are slightly larger
in magnitude—when we exclude near-landing point locations.38
    In Panel C of Appendix Table AIV, we exclude from the sample all observations in locations that are
more than 5 km from the backbone network itself. Though there are arguments for including more remote
locations in the sample—they are presumably less likely to be indirectly affected by the arrival of fast In-
ternet than unconnected locations closer to the backbone—such locations likely differ more from connected
locations. The estimates in Panel C make clear that our findings in Table III are not driven by the inclusion
of more remote, less comparable locations in the analysis sample.
   37 The drawback of this approach is that we can only implement it with “post-treatment”—2013—backbone maps (see Section 4).

However, few backbone cables were finalized and “turned on” during our data period.
   38 This finding also implies that an increase in demand due to the building of the submarine cables themselves cannot explain the

effect on overall employment rates. Locations near the landing points are presumably places where a lot of the submarine cable- driven
increase in construction and related employment would have occurred.



                                                                 14
    In Table IV we include additional controls. In most African countries, a part of the backbone network
runs parallel to other infrastructure such as roads or electricity cables (see Appendix Figure AII). If lo-
cations near such infrastructure saw faster employment growth over time, irrespective of whether they
were also connected to the Internet backbone, there is a risk of misattributing employment growth to the
arrival of submarine cables. We thus use maps of Africa’s road and electricity network to define each lo-
cation’s “road-connectivity” and “electricity-connectivity” status, exactly as we do for Internet backbone-
connectivity. We interact these with the arrival of submarine Internet cables—analogously to the construc-
tion of SubmarineCablesit × Connectedi in (1)—to construct placebo road- and electricity treatments. When
these are included, the estimated effect of fast Internet is essentially unchanged and the estimated coeffi-
cients on the placebo treatments are small and insignificant, as seen in columns 1, 3, and 5 of Table IV.
    In column 5 of Table IV, we also include a placebo treatment that interacts SubmarineCablesit with an
indicator for the location having 3G mobile coverage at t, similarly to the approach for roads and electricity
connectivity (except that 3G coverage varies over time). This is possible when we use the QLFS sample
since 3G coverage data is available for South Africa. The coefficient on the treatment variable for access to
fast Internet remains essentially unchanged; it is thus clear that Internet affects employment rates whether
or not the area is covered by the 3G network.
    We next control for a non-linear trend in employment that is specific to the connected locations. Specif-
ically, we include interactions between the Connected indicator and the time fixed effects in columns 2
and 4 of Table IV. This is possible for the multi-country DHS and Afrobarometer samples, where the ar-
rival of fast Internet is staggered across time. Estimating the treatment effect of interest while controlling
for Connected×Time FEs is unusually demanding on the data. Remarkably, the estimated coefficient on
SubmarineCablesit × Connectedi remains large and significant in both the DHS and the Afrobarometer
sample (and in fact the point estimate increases in magnitude in both samples). In column 6, we approxi-
mate this multi-country specification in the South Africa sample by including linear grid-cell specific trends.
The estimated coefficient on the access-to-fast-Internet indicator is essentially unchanged.
    Finally, in columns 6 and 7, we include a lead and a lag of SubmarineCablesit . This is possible in
the QLFS dataset, wherein data is collected every quarter. Perhaps somewhat surprisingly, the effect of
SubmarineCablesit × Connectedi loads on the quarter-of-arrival treatment indicator when a lag is included.
More importantly, the estimated coefficient on the lead is near zero and insignificant, supporting the identi-
fying assumption of parallel trends.
    Bertrand et al. (2004) point out that serial correlation can bias standard errors in difference-in-differences
analysis. To address this concern, we follow Chetty et al. (2009) and conduct a non-parametric permutation
test of β = 0. We can do so in the QLFS dataset, where data is collected every quarter. We sample from
the set of possible submarine cable arrival times, assigning a randomly chosen “fake” arrival time to each
location while maintaining each observation’s backbone connectivity status. Figure V depicts the empirical
cdf of estimates resulting from permuting arrival times 500 times and running (1) on the fake datasets. The
vertical line represent the true estimate: where it falls in the empirical cdf of estimates from datasets with
permuted arrival times implies its p-value. As seen in the figure, the true estimate is near the top of the
empirical cdf, with an implied p-value of 0.046.
    Conley (1999) emphasizes that spatial correlation may also require corrections to standard errors, and
develops a method for implementing such corrections. In Panel A of Appendix Table AV, we present the
estimates from Table III and standard errors that are calculated using Conley’s method. In Panel B of the
same table, we cluster the standard errors by administrative unit, rather than grid-cells. In both cases, the



                                                       15
estimated effect of fast Internet on employment rates remains statistically significant.
    Finally, in Figure VI, we again take advantage of the quarterly surveying in QLFS to display the path of
the employment rate in connected and unconnected areas before and after the arrival of the first submarine
cable in South Africa. This allows us to inspect how the gap between the two areas evolves after fast Internet
arrives, and, more importantly, to check if the identifying assumption of parallel pre-trends appears to hold.
Indeed, while the employment rate in both areas declines between 2008 and 2011, in part due to the financial
crisis that hit South Africa during that period, the shape of the graph is virtually identical for connected
and unconnected areas before the submarine cable arrives in mid-2009. The gap in the employment rate
between the connected and unconnected areas starts to increase soon after submarine cable arrival and
widens further over time, illustrating the treatment effect estimated in Table III.
    We conclude that the estimated effect of access to fast Internet on employment rates in Africa is robust
and likely represents a causal response.


5.4    Fast Internet and employment rates across space
We have established that the arrival of fast Internet in Africa led to a large increase in employment rates in
connected areas relative to unconnected areas. This finding would hold even if employment in unconnected
areas was also affected. However, it is possible that the impact we estimate in Sub-section 5.2 does not
capture the total effect of fast Internet across space. We would overestimate the total effect if for example
(existing or newly created) jobs are shifted from unconnected to connected areas. We would underestimate
the total effect if for example surveyed individuals commute to work in or migrate to connected areas. We
now investigate these possibilities.
    First, note that we find no effect of access to fast Internet on migration in South Africa and Tanzania (for
which the required data is available).39
    Second, recall that we confirmed in Figure IV that the estimated effect of fast Internet is not sensitive to
the radius around the backbone network used to define connection status. This finding implies that our re-
sults are unlikely to be driven by a simultaneous decrease (or increase) in employment in areas neighboring
connected locations.
    Finally, we investigate more directly in Figure VII. Recall that we consider individuals and areas located
within 500 meters of the backbone network connected. We now divide those located outside of this con-
nection radius into a maintained control group (those located more than 3500 meters from the backbone
network) and three additional treatment groups that are equally spaced geographically: those 500–1500 me-
ters, 1500–2500 meters, and 2500-3500 meters from the backbone respectively. We compare the four groups
closest to the backbone to those furthest away, before and after the arrival of submarine cables on the coast.
As seen in the figure, the estimated coefficients on SubmarineCablesc(i)t interacted with indicators for the
three additional treatment groups are statistically insignificant and generally near zero. Consequently, the
estimated coefficient for those nearest to the backbone network remains essentially unchanged in compar-
ison to the estimates in sub-section 5.2 (except in the Afrobarometer sample, where the estimate increases
in magnitude when individuals intermediate distance from the backbone are excluded from the control
group40 ). We conclude that the estimated increase in employment in connected areas is not due to shifting
  39 None of the surveys we use elicited respondents’ migration status or place of birth in both “pre” and “post” survey rounds

conducted during our data period. (QLFS contains a question about migration, but the variable is missing for the majority of the
sample). But in South Africa and Tanzania, it is possible to run (1) with migration status on the left-hand side by using another data
source (South Africa) or adding a later survey round conducted by DHS (Tanzania). Results available from the authors upon request.
  40 In the Afrobarometer sample, the point estimate for areas that are intermediate distance from the backbone network suggests that




                                                                 16
of employment across space.
    We now explore how fast Internet affects structural change as measured by occupational employment
shares in Africa.


5.5    Fast Internet and employment in skilled and unskilled jobs
The overall response of employment to the arrival of fast Internet in Africa is made up of underlying changes
in job creation and destruction across specific occupations and the sectors associated with those occupations.
How technological change affects occupational and sectoral employment shares is especially important in
poor countries (Herrendorf et al. , 2014). To explore this question, we distinguish between jobs and workers.
“The employment rate in occupation X” will here mean the probability of holding a job in occupation X (not
the overall employment rate of workers who (“permanently”) belong to occupation X). We believe that the
changes in occupational employment rates we document mostly reflect changes in the size of different sec-
tors.41 However, readers can alternatively interpret the results in this sub-section as reflecting a combination
of within- and across-sector changes in employment in skilled and unskilled occupations.
    In Table V we use the DHS and QLFS datasets, where occupations are recorded and can thus be catego-
rized. In the first two columns of Panel A, we define skilled and unskilled employment categories following
the ILO’s ISCO categorization of occupations’ skill level (ILO, 2012).42 In the DHS countries and South
Africa, the arrival of fast Internet increases the probability that an individual holds a skilled job by respec-
tively 4.4 and 1.4 percent. The probability of unskilled employment is unaffected in both the first group of
countries and South Africa. Our findings thus imply a positional skill bias of fast Internet in Africa that is
directionally similar to what has been found for computerization and fast Internet in the U.S. and Europe.
However, it is noteworthy that the large estimated increase in overall employment in Africa is entirely made
up of increased employment in skilled occupations.
    In columns 3-6 of Table V, we break the skilled category (ISCO levels 2-4) into its sub-categories as
defined by the ILO.43 We lack power to estimate the impact on each of these separately with precision, but
the point estimates are nevertheless worth noting. In both the DHS countries and South Africa, a relatively
large increase in the probability of “moderately” skilled (ISCO level 2) employment appears to contribute
most to the overall increase in skilled employment. The point estimates also point towards a sizable increase
in “highly” skilled (ISCO level 4) employment in the DHS countries, when fast Internet becomes available.
    McMillan & Rodrik (2014) and McMillan & Harttgen (2014) show that the overall trends in structural
change in Africa improved after 2000. The estimates in Table V suggest that greater and cheaper access
these may also experience employment gains, but the estimates are far from significant.
   41 In addition to our expectation that low rates of tertiary education make African workers comparatively likely to switch sectors, this

is because we in Section 6 find that when fast Internet arrives, there are noteworthy changes in firm entry across sectors in South Africa
and an expansion of the manufacturing sector in Ethiopia. Note that we cannot estimate how the impact of fast Internet differs for
individuals who “permanently” belong to different occupations because none of our individual level datasets include (non-missing)
information on the occupations workers’ past jobs belong to.
   42 Unskilled jobs (ISCO level 1) “typically involve performance of simple and routine physical or manual tasks” (ILO, 2012, p. 12).

ILO defines the following DHS occupational categories as skilled work: professional, sales, services, and skilled manual; and the
following DHS occupational categories as unskilled work: self-employed agriculture, domestic, and unskilled manual. ILO defines
the following QLFS occupational categories as skilled work: legislative, professional, services, skilled manufacturing, and technical;
and the following QLFS occupational categories as unskilled work: elementary, and domestic.
   43 Moderately skilled jobs (ISCO level 2) “typically involve performance of tasks such as operating machinery and electronic equip-

ment; driving vehicles; maintenance and repair of electrical and mechanical equipment; and manipulation, ordering and storage of
information”. Somewhat skilled jobs (ISCO level 3) “typically involve performance of complex technical and practical tasks that re-
quire an extensive body of factual, technical and procedural knowledge in a specialized field”. Highly skilled jobs (ISCO level 4)
“typically involve performance of tasks that require complex problem-solving, decision-making and creativity based on an extensive
body of theoretical and factual knowledge in a specialized field” (ILO, 2012, pp. 12-13). There are no observations in the ISCO level 3
categories in the DHS sample.


                                                                    17
to information and communication may be among the changes in the economic environment that helped
shift workers towards occupations that usually display higher productivity. We return to this question
in sections 6 and 7, where we investigate whether firms whose productivity increased, or which started
exporting more, also hired more workers when fast Internet became available, and how the technology
affects incomes in Africa. In the next sub-section we explore how job inequality in Africa responds to the
arrival of fast Internet.


5.6        Fast Internet and job inequality
Given the lack of direct evidence on the factor bias of ICT in poor countries, it is a priori unclear if fast
Internet affects job inequality across the educational attainment range in Africa in the same way that “com-
puterization” has been shown to do in rich countries (Katz & Autor, 1999; Bond & Van Reenen, 2007; Goldin
& Katz, 2007; Akerman et al. , 2015). We investigate this question in Table VI, where we report results from
interacting SubmarineCablesit × Connectedi with educational attainment.
    Remarkably, the estimated increase in the employment rate is of comparable magnitude for those with
primary school, those with secondary school, and those with tertiary education in all three samples.44 Those
with primary school in fact see a moderately bigger estimated employment gain than those with secondary
school in all three samples, though not statistically significantly differentially so. In the Afrobarometer
countries—but not in the DHS countries and South Africa—fast Internet also increases the employment rate
for those who did not complete primary school significantly.
    In the DHS countries, those with tertiary education see by far the biggest increase in skilled employment.
The smaller, but nevertheless noteworthy, estimated increase in skilled employment is of identical magni-
tude for those with primary and those with secondary education, but more precisely estimated for the latter
group.45 Employment in unskilled occupations increases significantly for those with primary school in both
the DHS countries and South Africa.
    The results in Table VI in combination with those in Table V illuminate important similarities and differ-
ences in the way modern ICT technologies affect job inequality in Africa versus rich countries. We saw in Ta-
ble V that the skill complementarity of fast Internet as defined by its relative impact on net creation (and/or
saving) of high and low skill jobs in Africa resembles the skill-bias documented in the West. However, the
results in Table VI show that, in the eight DHS countries in our sample, those with almost no education
are the only group of individuals whose employment outcomes do not benefit from fast Internet. In these
countries, while the technology increases skilled employment among more educated workers the most, fast
Internet thus reduces (un)employment inequality across the majority of the adult population. In the Afro-
barometer countries, even those who did not complete primary school see significant employment gains
with the arrival of fast Internet. These results partially contrast both with existing findings on computers
and fast Internet as SBTC in rich countries, and with the adverse estimated effect of another important form
of globalization—trade liberalization—on (income and wage) inequality in developing countries (Goldberg
& Pavcnik, 2007; Harrison et al. , 2011; Goldberg, 2015).
    The magnitude of the estimated increase in “any” and skilled employment with the arrival of fast Inter-
net in Africa is surprising, but the overall pattern that emerges across the educational attainment range—
  44 The initial employment rates that the estimates shown can be compared to are in Appendix Table AIII.
  45 For the South African sample, the increase in skilled employment is imprecisely estimated for all educational attainment groups.
(The point estimate for the increase in skilled employment is of roughly comparable magnitude across the educational attainment
range, but it is noteworthy that the estimate for those without primary school in South Africa is comparatively large (but statistically
insignificant). Recall, however, ILO’s fairly broad definition of skilled occupations, e.g. including jobs in services).



                                                                  18
particularly in the DHS sample—is arguably less surprising. The especially large increase in skilled employ-
ment for workers with tertiary education suggests that fast Internet is in one sense a high education-biased
technology in these countries. The productivity of workers with less education may also benefit from fast
Internet, however, if for example employers choose to provide targeted on-the-job training to such workers
(Green et al. , 2001; Frías et al. , 2009). This may help explain why we observe a considerable increase in
skilled employment also for less educated workers in the DHS countries. The increase in employment for
workers with primary school in all three samples (and those without primary school in the Afrobarometer
countries) may be due, for example, to the emergence of new types of positions that are complementary to
jobs wherein more educated workers make more direct use of Internet technology.
    In the next section we investigate how fast Internet affects employment in Africa.


6       Understanding how Fast Internet Affects Employment in Africa
6.1     Firm entry
The changes in average speeds and use of the Internet after the arrival of the submarine cables we docu-
mented in Sub-section 5.1 suggest that new, and new forms of, employment may arise both through ex-
tensive margin (new Internet users) and intensive margin (different use of the Internet by existing users)
responses. In this sub-section, we analyze how fast Internet affects firm entry and exit; in the next two
sub-sections we explore possible changes in the productivity and exports of existing firms.
    We first use a dataset from South Africa’s CIPC that records the names and addresses (including zip-
codes) of firms that register or de-register, and the date of registration/de-registration. We run (1) at the
zip-code×quarter level. As seen in Table VII, we find a significant increase in net firm entry per quarter
of around 23 percent when fast Internet arrives in South Africa. This overall impact is due both to a large
increase in firm entry, and to a decrease in firm exit of similar magnitude. Greater net firm entry likely helps
explain the estimated increase in employment when fast Internet arrives in South Africa.
    As also seen in Table VII, we find a significant increase in net firm entry in many sectors, but the biggest
point estimates are is seen in sectors that use ICT extensively (World Bank, 2006), such as finance and ser-
vices.
    These results reinforce the view that fast Internet’s impact on structural change was at least partly fa-
vorable insofar as productivity in the sectors that saw the biggest increase in net firm entry is likely high
relative to other sectors in South Africa.


6.2     Firm and labor productivity in existing firms
6.2.1    OLS results

We have seen that access to fast Internet increases firm entry, which appears to contribute to its impact
on employment rates. Does the new technology also affect employment within existing firms, and, if so,
why? To investigate these questions, we first use Ethiopia’s LMMIS dataset of large and medium- sized
manufacturing firms, which is to our knowledge the only African dataset with detailed enough information
and the geographical and time coverage needed to estimate changes in firms’ production function with the
arrival of fast Internet. We restrict the sample to firms that are observed both before and after the submarine
cable that gets connected to Ethiopia’s backbone network arrives on the coast.



                                                      19
    In columns 1-6 of Table VIII, we continue to use a similar specification and definition of right hand-side
variables as in (1), but i now represents a firm and observations are at the firm×year level. The estimated
increase in total employment per firm when fast Internet arrives is about 16 percent in column 1, where
we control for firm and year fixed effects46 , and about 22 percent in column 2, where we control instead
for grid-cell×connected and industry×year fixed effects. The estimated increase in skilled and unskilled
positions per firm (as discussed in Section 3, these are proxied using salary bins) is respectively 3.4 and 11.5
percent (but not statistically significant) when we control for firm and year fixed effects, and 20 and 12.4
percent when we control instead for grid-cell×connected and industry×year fixed effects (in which case the
estimated increase in skilled employment is statistically significant). The firm level estimates of changes
in employment when fast Internet arrives in Ethiopia are thus broadly comparable to the individual level
employment results for the broader samples of African countries and South Africa in Section 5. The relative
increase in unskilled positions may be larger in Ethiopian manufacturing firms.
    In the last three columns of Table VIII, we explore whether the increase in employment in Ethiopian
manufacturing firms may be explained by an increase in the output elasticity of labor and/or firm level
productivity with the arrival of fast Internet. We start with the following OLS regression:

          vaij(i)jt = x0ijt α + SubmarineCablesConnectedijt x0ijt β + δj(i) × Connectedi + ψjt + ij(i)jt                          (2)

where vaijt is the value added of firm i, in grid-cell j(i), industry j, and year t; x0ijt is a set of inputs (labor,
capital) used by the firm and a constant term; ψjt is an industry×year fixed effect, and the other variables
are as defined previously.47 Results from this specification are in column 7 in Table VIII. The coefficients on
capital and labor are of similar magnitude to what other studies have found for comparable contexts. The
estimated output elasticity of labor in skilled positions increases (insignificantly) from 0.497 to 0.523 with
the arrival of fast Internet, but that of labor in unskilled positions falls significantly.


6.2.2   Structural estimation

OLS estimates of the share of variation in output attributable to different input factors may partly reflect
the fact that some input factors—such as labor—are chosen after a firm’s productivity (unobserved to the
researcher) is fully or partially known to the firm. Olley & Pakes (1996) (OP) and Levinsohn & Petrin
(2003) (LP) developed practical methods that help overcome such simultaneity bias. The commonly used LP
method involves using intermediate inputs to proxy for a firm’s unobserved productivity in the production
function (see LP for details). We posit the following “structural” model:

                       vaijt = lijt θ + SubmarineCablesConnectedijt lijt φ + κkijt + ωijt + ijt                                   (3)

where lijt are labor inputs and the productivity term ωijt subsumes the constant term and the fixed effects.
ijt represents a standard i.i.d. error term capturing unanticipated shocks to productivity and measurement
error. We present LP estimates in column 8 of Table VIII. As expected, both θ̂ and φ̂ are now much smaller
in magnitude than the OLS estimates, and the φ̂ from the interaction of SubmarineCablesConnectedijt and
workers in unskilled positions is no longer significant.
  46 We match firms across years using all available information in LMMIS, and cross-check our matches against those of Abebe et al.

(2017) (the most in-depth and authoritative existing work on such matching in LMMIS). Our matches are nearly identical to theirs. We
are grateful to the authors for allowing this cross-check.
  47 To ease comparison with the structural results in columns 8 and 9 of Table VIII, we interact only labor and the constant term with

SubmarineCablesConnectedij(i)jt .



                                                                  20
    De Loecker (2011) points out an important methodological tension when using the OP/LP methods to
investigate how a change in the operating environment affects output elasticities. Suppose that a firm’s
productivity itself is influenced by the change in the operating environment. If the productivity response
in turn influences hiring, investment, and value added—as conventional models of firm behavior predict—
then changes in the coefficients on labor and capital estimated using methods that do not account for the
firm level productivity response will be incorrect.
    Inspired by De Loecker (2011), we assume the following law-of-motion for firm productivity:

             ωij ,t+1 = αωijt + τ SubmarineCablesConnectedijt+1 + δj(i) × Connectedi + ψjt + ξij ,t+1                                   (4)

where grid-cell×connected and industry×year fixed effects control for differences across space in, and
industry-wide shocks to, productivity. We continue to use the LP estimation procedure, but adjust the
method to allow both the output elasticity of labor and firm level productivity itself to change. We first esti-
mate φ while controlling for a possible response in firm level productivity to fast Internet. As in the conven-
tional LP method, we use a flexible polynomial in the other input factors—including intermediate inputs—
to proxy for ωijt . The adjustment we make in this first step is that we include SubmarineCablesConnectedijt
among the factors included in the polynomial. We run:

              vaijt = lijt θ + SubmarineCablesConnectedijt lijt φ
                       + Ψ mijt , kijt , SubmarineCablesConnectedijt , δj(i) × Connectedi , ψjt + ijt
                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                        (5)

where Ψ mijt , kijt , SubmarineCablesConnectedijt , δj(i) × Connectedi , ψjt is a polynomial of inputs used
                                                                               

(mijt ), capital (kijt ), access to fast Internet, and grid-cell×connected and industry×year fixed effects.
    The estimated effect of fast Internet on the output elasticity of labor estimated through this procedure
is reported in column 9 of Table VIII. The estimated decrease in the output elasticity of labor in unskilled
positions increases in absolute magnitude to -0.063 and becomes significant. The estimated increase in
the output elasticity of labor in skilled positions is very similar to the estimate from the conventional LP
method—0.016.
    In the second step of the procedure, we estimate the coefficient on capital by GMM using the moment
condition E ξijt (κ) kijt = 0, which is motivated by the assumption that capital cannot be adjusted in
                            

response to unobserved shocks to productivity.48 ξˆij ,t+1 is obtained by taking the OLS residual from (4),
where ωijt and ωijt−1 come from applying (3), that is, by subtracting the labor coefficients estimated in (5)
and the coefficient for capital from the predicted value added obtained from (5).
    For our purposes the coefficient on capital is needed only as an input into the procedure for estimating
how fast Internet affects firm level productivity. With estimates of the coefficients on labor, capital, and the
interaction between labor and SubmarineCablesConnectedijt in hand, we can construct ω̂ijt using (3) and
then estimate the law-of-motion for productivity in the third step. The results are reported in column 9 of
the bottom panel of Table VIII. The estimated increase in firm level productivity when fast Internet becomes
available is around 13 percent and statistically significant.49
    We conclude that an increase in firm level productivity likely contributes to increased hiring in existing
  48 We use the OLS estimates as starting values, and bootstrap the standard errors.
  49 There are many potential channels through which fast Internet can boost firm productivity above and beyond the output elasticity
of labor. The technology may e.g. allow firms to sell more per unit of marketing cost, give access to information about more efficient
production processes, or allow firms to increase the quality of their products. Note that the estimated impact on firm productivity
remains statistically significant if we bootstrap also the standard error corresponding to this last step of the procedure, as seen in Panel
C of Appendix Table AV.


                                                                    21
Ethiopian manufacturing firms after the arrival of fast Internet, and that changes in the relative output
elasticity of workers in skilled and unskilled positions may also help explain the hiring response.


6.3    Firms’ exports, on-the-job training, and Internet communication
In Table IX, we use data from the World Bank Enterprise Surveys (WBES) to explore how the arrival of the
submarine Internet cables changed the behavior and performance of firms in Ghana, Kenya, Mauritania,
Nigeria, Senegal, and Tanzania. We include country×year, location, and industry fixed effects in the regres-
sions and thereby approximate (1) as closely as we can with the WBES dataset, where firms are relatively
clustered in space and their location is reported only at city/town level.50
    As seen in column 1, access to fast Internet leads African firms in the WBES sample to employ about
17 percent more workers per firm. We find a significant increase in the number of employees in skilled
positions (as proxied by non-production positions) per firm of around 23 percent, while the corresponding
estimate for workers in unskilled positions (as proxied by production positions) is of slightly smaller mag-
nitude and insignificant. The firm level estimates of changes in employment when fast Internet arrives in
the WBES countries are thus broadly comparable to the individual level employment results in Section 5.
    In column 4, we show that firms are more than twice as likely to provide on-the-job training to their
employees when fast Internet becomes available. This finding may help explain why the technology in
general boosts employment not only for highly educated workers, but also less educated workers, in Africa.
We also find a large (but imprecisely estimated) increase in WBES firms’ sales per unit of labor costs—
a measure of productivity (World Bank Group, 2017)—when fast Internet becomes available, as seen in
column 5.
    In columns 6 to 8, we explore how the composition of firms’ sales responds to the arrival of fast Internet.
We find a decrease in in-country sales, and large increases in both indirect and direct exports. In light of the
existing literature documenting the benefits to firms and employment consequences of exporting (see e.g.
Verhoogen, 2008; Frías et al. , 2009; Goldberg et al. , 2010b; Atkin et al. , 2015), this finding suggests that one
way in which fast Internet increases employment in Africa is by making it easier for firms to sell to customers
abroad. The increase in exports is also evidence of an interaction between technological change and trade
that differs from the trade-induced SBTC analyzed by an existing literature (Wood, 1995; Acemoglu, 2003;
Attanasio et al. , 2004; Burstein et al. , 2013; Koren & Csillag, 2016; Raveh & Reshef, 2016). Here, causality
runs from technological change to trade, rather than the other way around.
    Unlike our other datasets, WBES contains information on firms’ use of the Internet. As seen in columns 9
and 10, we find a significant increase in firms’ probability of communicating with clients through email and
through a website, each of about 13 percent. Easier communication with clients may be part of the reason
why African firms’ ability to export increased when submarine Internet cables reached the continent.
    In sum, we have seen evidence in this section indicating that the increase in employment when fast
Internet arrived in Africa was driven in part by greater firm entry in South Africa; by higher firm level
productivity in existing Ethiopian manufacturing firms; and by an increase in exports, on-the-job training,
and use of online communication among firms in the six WBES countries in our sample. While the large
magnitudes of these economic responses is important in their own right, data limitations prevent us from
  50 Almost all firms in WBES are located in relatively large cities and towns, and sub-city/town information on location is not reported.

We classify a city/town as connected if the backbone network passes through its perimeter. (This yields the same classification of
connected/unconnected cities/towns as “extending” the perimeter by 500 meters when categorizing locations). This issue is not
relevant to our other datasets, where we have much more fine-grained information on individuals’ and firms’ location. Note also that
the results in Table IX are nearly identical if industry×year fixed effects are included in place of the industry fixed effects.



                                                                   22
investigating what share of the changes in employment patterns they account for. Additional mechanisms
likely also played a role.


7    Fast Internet, Employment, and Incomes
Some would consider employment a means to an end more than an end in itself. In Table X, we explore
how the arrival of fast Internet ultimately affects incomes in Africa. Increasing access to, and lowering the
cost of, information and communication may affect incomes also through other channels than employment
outcomes. But to the extent that fast Internet affects overall and skilled net job creation, we would a priori
also expect such an employment response to ultimately translate into higher incomes.
    We follow a growing literature and proxy for average incomes at location level with light density at
night as measured by satellites (see e.g. Henderson et al. , 2012; Bleakley & Lin, 2012; Michalopoulos & Pa-
paioannou, 2013, 2018; Lowe, 2014). In addition to capturing the aggregate economic benefits of fast Internet,
an advantage of this income proxy is that it is available for all 12 countries in our sample. The National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) provides pixel-level measures of average night light
density from satellite images. We thus construct a grid of such pixels that are 0.1 degree (∼10 km) apart, in
the spirit of Michalopoulos & Papaioannou (2013). The estimating equation we use is (1) as throughout the
paper; the i subscript now indexes the pixels. In column 1, we see that night light density rises by about
2.4 percent when fast Internet becomes available. Controlling for a non-linear trend in average incomes
that is specific to the connected locations—interactions between the Connected indicator and the time fixed
effects—in column 2 increases the estimated impact of fast Internet on night light density to 3.3 percent.
    The balanced panel, “high(er)-T” format of the night lights data allows us to trace out how fast Internet
affects economic activity over time better than the household surveys we use allow. We do so in Appendix
Figure AIII by interacting a location’s connectivity status with years-to/since-cable-arrival-dummies, as in
an event study. First, we see that year-to-year changes in average incomes in connected locations relative to
unconnected locations hover around zero prior to the arrival of submarine cables. Second, relative average
incomes in connected locations start to rise the year fast Internet arrives. Third, the rise continues in each of
the two following years, before relative average incomes in connected locations level off in the third “post”
year. It thus appears that the impact of fast Internet on incomes in Africa persist over time, but that the
growth effect may be especially large in the first few years after the submarine cables arrive.


8    Conclusion
This paper provides evidence on how fast Internet affects employment in Africa. We exploit the gradual
arrival of 10 submarine Internet cables from Europe in cities on Africa’s coast in the late 2000s and early
2010s and interact landing points and -times with an indicator for whether a given location is on the terres-
trial cable network that connects users with the coast. We first show that both average speeds and use of
the technology increase when the submarine cables arrive. We then compare the changes in employment
patterns in cities and towns with a bigger versus a smaller increase in access to fast Internet, controlling for
location and time effects. In each of three different datasets that together cover 12 African countries with
a combined population of roughly half a billion people, we find a significant and large relative increase in
the employment rate in connected areas when fast Internet becomes available. Extensive prodding of the
identifying assumptions that underlie our “dynamic” difference-in-differences approach suggests that these


                                                       23
estimates reflect a causal effect of access to fast Internet on employment rates. Employment responses of
the magnitude we document indicate that building fast Internet infrastructure may be among the currently
feasible policy options with the greatest employment-creating potential in Africa. We also show that the
technology’s impact is due to an increase in employment in higher-skill occupations. Finally, fast Internet if
anything lowers (un)employment inequality across the educational attainment range in Africa.
    The observed changes in average speeds and use of the Internet after the arrival of the submarine cables
suggest that new and new types of jobs may have been (net) created both via “extensive margin” (new In-
ternet users) and “intensive margin” (different use of the Internet by existing users) responses. We explore
these possibilities with more detailed firm level data available for some countries. In South Africa, firm
entry increases—notably in sectors that tend to benefit from ICT—as does the productivity of existing man-
ufacturing firms in Ethiopia, when fast Internet becomes available. We also show that fast Internet enables
firms in Ghana, Kenya, Mauritania, Nigeria, Senegal, and Tanzania to export (much) more, perhaps in part
because online communication with clients became easier.
    The impact on job inequality we document indicates that the skill bias of fast Internet in Africa is much
more nuanced than what has been found for “computerization” and fast Internet in rich countries. This in
turn suggests that the primary explanation for the slow economic progress of poor workers in Africa and
other similar contexts during the last few decades is unlikely to be the factor bias of recent technological
change. The sectors that ex ante appear to have been most constrained by lack of access to ICT, and that
create more “good” jobs when fast Internet becomes available, are broadly speaking sectors associated with
high relative productivity in Africa. In at least some of these sectors in some parts of the continent, fast
Internet further increases productivity, and enables exporting. This suggests that the technology contributed
positively to structural change in Africa during our data period.




                                                     24
References
A BEBE , G IRUM , M C M ILLAN , M ARGARET, & S ERAFINELLI , M ICHEL. 2017. Foreign Direct Investment and
  Knowledge Diffusion in Poor Locations: Evidence from Ethiopia. EDRI mimeo.

A CEMOGLU , D ARON. 2003. Patterns of skill premia. Review of Economic Studies, 70, 231–251.

A CEMOGLU , D ARON , & A UTOR , D AVID H. 2011. Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for Employ-
  ment and Earnings. Pages 1043–1171 of: A SHENFELTER , O RLEY, & C ARD , D AVID E. (eds), Handbook of
  Labor Economics Volume 4, vol. 4. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

A DEPETUN , A DEYEMI. 2014. Nigeria’s ICT Sector Finds Strength in E-Commerce Growth. "http://allafrica.
  com/stories/201410151110.html".

A F T ER F IBRE. 2014. African Terrestrial Fibre. "http://afterfibre.net/". Accessed November 2014.

A GHION , P HILIPPE , B URGESS , R OBIN , R EDDING , S TEPHEN , & Z ILIBOTTI , FABRIZIO. 2005. Entry Liberal-
  ization and Inequality in Industrial Performance. Journal of European Economic Association, 3, 291–302.

A KER , J ENNY. 2010. Information from Markets Near and Far: Mobile Phones and Agricultural Markets in
  Niger. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2, 46–59.

A KERMAN , A NDERS , G AARDER , I NGVIL , & M OGSTAD , M AGNE. 2015. The Skill Complementarity of Broad-
  band Internet. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130, 1781–1824.

A LLEN , T REB. 2014. Information Frictions in Trade. Econometrica, 82, 2041–2083.

A MITI , M ARY, & C AMERON , L ISA. 2012. Trade Liberalization and the Wage Skill Premium: Evidence from
  Indonesia. Journal of International Economics, 87, 277–287.

A MITI , M ARY, & D AVIS , D ONALD R. 2012. Trade, Firms, and Wages: Theory and Evidence. Review of
  Economic Studies, 79, 1–36.

A NTRÁS , P OL , R OSSI -H ANSBERG , E STEBAN , & G ARICANO , L UIS. 2008. Organizing Offshoring: Middle
  Managers and Communication Costs. Chap. 10, pages 311–340 of: H ELPMAN , E LHANAN , M ARIN , D ALIA ,
  & V ERDIER , T HIERRY (eds), The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy. Harvard University Press.

ATASOY, H ILAL. 2013. The Effects of Broadband Internet Expansion on Labor Market Outcomes. Industrial
 and Labor Relations Review, 66(2), 315–345.

ATKIN , D AVID , K HANDELWAL , A MIT, & O SMAN , A DAM. 2015. Exporting and Firm Performance: Evidence
 from a Randomized Trial. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132, 551–615.

ATKIN , D AVID , C HAUDHRY, A ZAM , C HAUDRY, S HAMYLA , K HANDELWAL , A MIT, & V ERHOOGEN , E RIC.
 2017. Organizational Barriers to Technology Adoption: Evidence from Soccer-Ball Producers in Pakistan.
 Quarterly Journal of Economics.

ATTANASIO , O RAZIO , G OLDBERG , P INELOPI K., & PAVCNIK , N INA. 2004. Trade Reforms and Wage In-
 equality in Colombia. Journal of Development Economics, 74, 331–366.

ATUANYA , PATRICK , & A UGIE , B ALA. 2013. Online sales boom as Konga, Jumia lure shoppers. "http:
 //businessdayonline.com/2013/12/online-sales-boom-as-konga-jumia-lure-shoppers/".

                                                     25
A UTOR , D AVID H., K ATZ , L AWRENCE F., & K RUEGER , A LAN B. 1998. Computing Inequality: Have Com-
  puters Changed the Labor Market? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 1169–1213.

A UTOR , D AVID H., L EVY, F RANK , & M URNANE , R ICHARD J. 2003. The Skill Content of Recent Technolog-
  ical Change: An Empirical Exploration. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 1279–1333.

A UTOR , D AVID H., K ATZ , L AWRENCE F., & K EARNEY, M ELISSA S. 2008. Trends in US Wage Inequality:
  Revising the Revisionists. Review of Economics and Statistics, 90, 300–323.

B ANERJEE , A BHIJIT V., & N EWMAN , A NDREW F. 1993. Occupational Choice and the Process of Develop-
  ment. Journal of Political Economy, 101, 274–298.

B ANERJI , S OURANGSU , & C HOWDHURY, R AHUL S INGHA. 2013. Wi-Fi and WiMAX: A Comparative Study.
  Indian Journal of Engineering, 2, 51–54.

B ARTEL , A NN P., & S ICHERMAN , N ACHUM. 1999. Technological Change and Wages: An Inter-Industry
  Analysis. Journal of Political Economy, 107, 285–325.

B ASANT, R AKESH , C OMMANDER , S IMON , H ARRISON , R UPERT, & M ENEZES -F ILHO , N AERCIO. 2011. ICT
  Adoption and Productivity in Developing Countries: New Firm Level Evidence from Brazil and India.
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 93, 528–541.

B AUMOL , W ILLIAM J. 2012. The Cost Disease. New Haven: Yale University Press.

BBC. 2009. East Africa gets high-speed web. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/8165077.stm.

B EAMAN , L ORI , & M AGRUDER , J EREMY. 2012. Who gets the Job Referral? Evidence from a Social Networks
   Experiment. American Economic Review, 102, 3574–3593.

B EAUDRY, PAUL , & G REEN , D AVID A. 2003. The Changing Structure of Wages in the US and Germany:
   What Explains the Differences? American Economic Review, 93, 573–602.

B EAUDRY, PAUL , & G REEN , D AVID A. 2005. Changes in U.S. Wages, 1976-2000: Ongoing Skill Bias or Major
   Technological Change? Journal of Labor Economics, 23, 609–648.

B EAUDRY, PAUL , D OMS , M ARK , & L EWIS , E THAN. 2010. Should the Personal Computer Be Considered
   a Technological Revolution? Evidence from U.S. Metropolitan Areas. Journal of Political Economy, 118,
   988–1036.

B ERMAN , E LI , B OUND , J OHN , & G RILICHES , Z VI. 1994. Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor within
   US Manufacturing: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufactures. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
   109, 367–397.

B ERTRAND , M ARIANNE , D UFLO , E STHER , & M ULLAINATHAN , S ENDHIL. 2004. How Much Should We
   Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 249–275.

B LEAKLEY, H OYT, & L IN , J EFFREY. 2012. Portage and Path Dependence. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127,
   587–644.

B LOOM , N ICHOLAS , , & VAN R EENEN , J OHN. 2007. Measuring and Explaining Management Practices
   Across Firms and Countries. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 1351–1408.


                                                    26
B LOOM , N ICHOLAS , S ADUN , R AFFAELLA , & VAN R EENEN , J OHN. 2012. Americans do I.T. Better: US
   Multinationals and the Productivity Miracle. American Economic Review, 102, 167–201.

B LOOM , N ICHOLAS , E IFERT, B ENN , M C K ENZIE , D AVID , M AHAJAN , A PRAJIT, & R OBERTS , J OHN. 2013.
   Does management matter: evidence from India. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 1–51.

B OND , S TEPHEN , & VAN R EENEN , J OHN. 2007. Microeconometric Models of Investment and Employment.
  Pages 4417–4498 of: H ECKMAN , J. J., & L EAMER , E. E. (eds), Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 6. North-
  Holland.

B RAMBILLA , I RENE , L EDERMAN , D ANIEL , & P ORTO , G UIDO. 2012. Exports, Export Destinations, and Skills.
   American Economic Review, 102, 3406–3438.

B RESNAHAN , T IMOTHY F., B RYNJOLFSSON , E RIK , & H ITT, L ORIN M. 2002. Information Technology, Work-
   place Organization, and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-Level Evidence. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
   nomics, 117, 339–376.

B URSTEIN , A RIEL , C RAVINO , J AVIER , & V OGEL , J ONATHAN. 2013. Importing Skill-Biased Technology.
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5, 32–71.

B USINESS D AILY. 2009. The Edge names top Kenyan software developers. "http://www.businessdailyafrica.
  com/blob/view/-/667912/data/105719/-/na5mfh/-/Edge-02102009.pdf".

B USTOS , PAULA , C APRETTINI , B RUNO , & P ONTICELLI , J ACOPO. 2016. Agricultural Productivity and Struc-
  tural Transformation. Evidence from Brazil. American Economic Review, 106, 1320–1365.

C ARD , D AVID , & D ELLAV IGNA , S TEFANO. 2017. What do Editors Maximize? Evidence from Four Leading
  Economics Journals. NBER Working Paper No.23282.

C ARD , D AVID , H EINING , J ÖRG , & K LINE , PATRICK. 2013. Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of West
  German Wage Inequality. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 967–1015.

C ARD , D AVID , C ARDOSO , A NA R UTE , & K LINE , PATRICK. 2016. Bargaining, Sorting, and the Gender Wage
  Gap: Quantifying the Impact of Firms on the Relative Pay of Women. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131,
  633–686.

C AROLI , E VE , & VAN R EENEN , J OHN. 2001. Skill-Biased Organizational Change? Evidence from a Panel of
  British and French Establishments. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 1449–1492.

C ASABURI , L ORENZO , K REMER , M ICHAEL , M ULLAINATHAN , S ENDHIL , & R AMRATTAN , R AVINDRAN.
  2013. Harnessing ICT to Increase Agricultural Production: Evidence From Kenya. mimeo, Harvard Univer-
  sity.

C HAMPION , S ARA , K OSEC , K ATRINA , & S TANTON , C HRISTOPHER. 2012. The Effects of Internet Access on
  Labor-Supply Decisions. Working Paper.

C HAVULA , J OSIAH , F EAMSTER , N ICK , B AGULA , A NTOINE , & S ULEMAN , H USSEIN. 2014. Quantifying the
  Effects of Circuitous Routes on the Latency of Intra-Africa Internet Traffic: A Study of Research and Education
  Networks. Proceedings of the AFRICOM conference.




                                                       27
C HETTY, R AJ , L OONEY, A DAM , & K ROFT, K ORY. 2009. Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence. Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 99, 1145–1177.

C HONG , A LBERTO , D URYEA , S UZANNE , & L A F ERRARA , E LIANA. 2012. Soap Operas and Fertility: Evi-
  dence from Brazil. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4, 1–31.

C LARK , C OLIN. 1940. The Conditions of Economic Progress. London: MacMillan.

C LARKE , G EORGE , & WALLSTEN , S COTT. 2006. Has the Internet Increased Trade? Evidence from Industrial
  and Developing Countries. Economic Inquiry, 44(3), 465–484.

CNN. 2009. Going Optic. http://ireport.cnn.com/docs/DOC-350004.

C OMMONWEALTH T ELECOMMUNICATIONS O RGANISATION. 2012. The Socio-Economic Impact of Broad-
  band in sub-Saharan Africa: The Satellite Advantage. http://www.cto.int/media/research/projects/
  Socio-Economic_Impact_of_Broadband_The_Satellite_Advantage.pdf.

C ONLEY, T IMOTHY. 1999. GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence. Journal of Econometrics, 92,
  1–45.

C RESPI , G USTAVO , C RISCUOLO , C HIARA , & H ASKEL , J ONATHAN. 2007. Information Technology, Organisa-
  tional Change and Productivity. Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper 6105.

C URRIE , J ANET, & H ARRISON , A NN E. 1997. Sharing the Costs: The Impact of Trade Reform on Capital
  and Labor in Morocco. Journal of Labor Economics, 15, 44–71.

C ZERNICH ., N INA , FALCK , O LIVER , K RETSCHMER , T OBIAS , & W OESSMANN , L UDGER. 2011. Broadband
  infrastructure and economic growth. The Economic Journal, 121(552), 505–532.

D ABLA -N ORRIS , E RA , K OCHHAR , K ALPANA , S UPHAPHIPHAT, N UJIN , R ICKA , F RANTISEK , & T SOUNTA ,
  E VRIDIKI. 2015. Causes and Consequences of Income Inequality: A Global Perspective. IMF mimeo.

D AVIS , D ONALD , & H ARRIGAN , J AMES. 2011. Good Jobs, Bad Jobs, and Trade Liberalization. Journal of
  International Economics, 84, 26–36.

D E L OECKER , J AN. 2011. Product Differentiation, Multi-Product Firms and Estimating the Impact of Trade
  Liberalization on Productivity. Econometrica, 79, 1407–1451.

DE M. C ORDEIRO , C ARLOS , G OSSAIN , H RISHIKESH , A SHOK , R OY L., & A GRAWAL , D HARMA P. 2003. The
  Last Mile: Wireless Technologies for Broadband and Home Networks. "http://eecs.ceas.uc.edu/~cordeicm/
  course/wirelessbroadband-text.pdf".

D E S TEFANO , T IMOTHY, K NELLER , R ICHARD , & T IMMIS , J ONATHAN. 2014. The (Fuzzy) Digital Divide: The
  Effect of Broadband Internet Use on UK Firm Performance. mimeo, University of Nottingham.

D I N ARDO , J OHN E., & P ISCHKE , J ÖRN -S TEFFEN. 1997. The Returns to Computer Use Revisited: Have
   Pencils Changed the Wage Structure Too? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 291–303.

D RACA , M IRKO , S ADUN , R AFFELLA , & VAN R EENEN , J OHN. 2007. Productivity and ICTs: A Review of
  the Evidence. Chap. 5, pages 100–147 of: AVGEROU , C HRISANTHI R OBIN M ANSELL D ANNY Q UAH , &
  S ILVERSTONE , R OGER (eds), Handbook of Information and Communication Technologies. Oxford University
  Press.

                                                    28
E ATON , J ONATHAN , E SLAVA , M ARCELA , K RIZAN , C.J., K UGLER , M AURICE , & T YBOUT, J AMES. 2015. A
   Search and Learning Model of Export Dynamics. mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.

FAJGELBAUM , PABLO , & K HANDELWAL , A MIT. 2015. Measuring the Unequal Gains from Trade. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 131, 1113–1180.

F EENSTRA , R OBERT C., & H ANSON , G ORDON H. 1996. Foreign Investment, outsourcing and relative
   wages. Chap. 6, pages 89–128 of: G ROSSMAN , G ENE M., & I RWIN , D OUGLAS A. (eds), The Political economy
   of trade policy: essays in honor of Jagdish Bhagwati. MIT Press.

F EENSTRA , R OBERT C., & H ANSON , G ORDON H. 1999. The Impact of Outsourcing and High-Technology
   Capital on Wages: Estimates for the United States, 1979-1990. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 907–940.

F EENSTRA , R OBERT C., & H ANSON , G ORDON H. 2003. Global Production Sharing and Rising Inequality:
   A Survey of Trade and Wages. Chap. 6, pages 146–185 of: C HOI , E. K WAN , & H ARRIGAN , J AMES (eds),
   Handbook of International Trade, vol. 1. Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

F ERRAZ , C LAUDIO , F INAN , F REDERICO , & S ZERMAN , D IMITRI. 2015. Procuring Firm Growth: The Effects
   of Government Purchases on Firm Dynamics. NBER Working Paper No. 21219.

F ORMAN , C HRIS , G OLDFARB , AVI , & G REENSTEIN , S HANE. 2012. The Internet and Local Wages: A Puzzle.
   The American Economic Review, 102(1), 556–575.

F OSTER , A NDREW D., & R OSENZWEIG , M ARK R. 2008. Economic Development and the Decline of Agri-
   cultural Employment. Chap. 4, pages 3051–3083 of: C HENERY, H OLLIS B URNLEY, S CHULTZ , T. PAUL , &
   S RINIVASAN , T. N. (eds), Handbook of Development Economics, vol. 4. Elsevier.

F RAZER , G ARTH. 2013. Imports, Import Sources and Skill Utilization. Univ. of Toronto mimeo.

F RÍAS , J UDITH A., K APLAN , D AVID S., & V ERHOOGEN , E RIC. 2009. Exports and Wage Premia: Evidence from
   Mexican Employer-Employee Data. mimeo Columbia University.

G ALLAUGHER , J OHN. 2012. Getting the Most Out of Information Systems: A Manager’s Guide. Creative Com-
  mons.

G IORGIS , TAMRAT G. 2010. Global Firms Vie over Ethiopia’s Link to the World. "http://www.addisfortune.
   com".

GIZ. 2014. Connect the BoP. "https://www.giz.de/Wirtschaft/de/downloads/GIZ_Connect_the_BoP_
 Webversion.pdf".

G OLDBERG , P INELOPI K. 2015. Trade and Inequality. Edward Elgar Research Collections.

G OLDBERG , P INELOPI K, & PAVCNIK , N INA. 2007. Distributional Effects of Globalization in Developing
  Countries. Journal of Economic Literature, 45, 39–82.

G OLDBERG , P INELOPI K., K HANDELWAL , A MIT, PAVCNIK , N INA , & T OPALOVA , P ETIA. 2010a. Imported
  Intermediate Inputs and Domestic Product Growth: Evidence from India. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  125, 1727–1767.




                                                     29
G OLDBERG , P INELOPI K, K HANDELWAL , A MIT, PAVCNIK , N INA , & T OPALOVA , P ETIA. 2010b. Multi-
  product Firms and Product Turnover in the Developing World: Evidence from India. Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 92, 1042–1049.

G OLDIN , C LAUDIA , & K ATZ , L AWRENCE F. 2007. Long-Run Changes in the Wage Structure: Narrowing,
  Widening, Polarizing. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 38, 135–168.

G OLLIN , D OUGLAS , PARENTE , S TEPHEN , & R OGERSON , R ICHARD. 2002. The Role of Agriculture in Devel-
  opment. American Economic Review, 92, 160–164.

G OLLIN , D OUGLAS , L AGAKOS , D AVID , & WAUGH , M ICHAEL E. 2014. The Agricultural Productivity Gap.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 939–993.

G OOS , M AARTEN , M ANNING , A LAN , & S ALOMONS , A NNA. 2014. Explaining Job Polarization: Routine-
  Biased Technological Change and Offshoring. American Economic Review, 104, 2509–2526.

G REEN , F RANCIS , D ICKERSON , A NDY, & A RBACHE , J ORGE S ABA. 2001. A picture of wage inequality and
  the allocation of labor through a period of trade liberalization: The case of Brazil. World Development, 29,
  1923–1939.

H ANSMAN , C HRISTOPHER , H JORT, J ONAS , L EÓN , G IANMARCO , & T EACHOUT, M ATTHIEU. 2017. Vertical
  Integration, Supplier Behavior, and Quality Upgrading among Exporters. NBER Working Paper No. 23949.

H ARDY, M ORGAN , & M C C ASLAND , J AMIE. 2015. Are Small Firms Labor Constrained? Experimental Evidence
  from Ghana" with Morgan Hardy. mimeo, University of British Columbia.

H ARRIS , L ANCE. 2012. Is South Africa the best place to start your start-up? "http://www.zdnet.com/article/
  is-south-africa-the-best-place-to-start-your-start-up/".

H ARRISON , A NN , M C L AREN , J OHN , & M C M ILLAN , M ARGARET. 2011. Recent Perspectives on Trade and
  Inequality. Annual Review of Economics, 3, 261–289.

H ARRISON , A NN E., & H ANSON , G ORDON H. 1999. Who gains from trade reform? Some remaining
  puzzles. Journal of Development Economics, 59, 125–154.

H ARRISON , A NN E., & R EVENGA , A NA L. 1998. Labor Markets, Foreign Investment and Trade Policy
  Reform. Pages 247–276 of: N ASH , J OHN , & TAKACS , W ENDY (eds), Trade Policy Reform: Lessons and Impli-
  cations. World Bank Regional and Sectoral Studies.

H ENDERSON , J. V ERNON , S TOREYGARD , A DAM , & W EIL , D AVID N. 2012. Measuring Economic Growth
  from Outer Space. American Economic Review, 102, 994–1028.

H ERRENDORF, B ERTHOLD , R OGERSON , R ICHARD , & Á KOS VALENTINYI. 2014. Growth and Structural
  Transformation. Pages 855–941 of: A GHION , P HILIPPE , & D URLAUF, S TEVEN N. (eds), Handbook of Eco-
  nomic Growth, vol. 2. Elsevier.

ILO. 2012. International Standard Classification of Occupations: ISCO-08. Report.

I NTERNET S OCIETY. 2013. Regional Interconnection Strategy for Africa. "http://pages.au.int/sites/
   default/files/2-Regional-Interconnection-Strategy-For-Africa.pdf".



                                                      30
ITU. 2000. Improving IP Connectivity in the Least Developed Countries. www.itu.int.

ITU. 2013. ITU Study on International Internet Connectivity in Sub-Saharan Africa. https://www.itu.int/en/
  ITU-D/Regulatory-Market/Documents/IIC_Africa_Final-en.pdf.

J ACK , W ILLIAM , & S URI , TAVNEET. 2014. Risk Sharing and Transaction Costs: Evidence from Kenya’s
   Mobile Money Revolution. American Economic Review, 104, 1.

J ENSEN , R OBERT. 2007. The Digital Provide: Information (Technology), Market Performance and Welfare in
   the South Indian Fisheries Sector. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 879–924.

J ENSEN , R OBERT, & O STER , E MILY. 2009. The Power of TV: Cable Television and Women’s Status in India.
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 1057–1094.

J ORGENSON , D ALE W., H O , M UN S., & S TIROH , K EVIN J. 2008. A Retrospective Look at the U.S. Produc-
   tivity Growth Resurgence. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22, 3–24.

K ATZ , L AWRENCE , & M ARGO , R OBERT A. 2014. Technical Change and the Relative Demand for Skilled
  Labor: The United States in Historical Perspective. Pages 15–57 of: B OUSTAN , L EAH , F RYDMAN , C AROLA ,
  & M ARGO , R OBERT A. (eds), Human Capital in History. University of Chicago Press and NBER.

K ATZ , L AWRENCE F., & A UTOR , D AVID H. 1999. Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings Inequality.
  Pages 1463–1555 of: A SHENFELTER , O RLEY C., & C ARD , D AVID (eds), Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3.
  Elsevier.

K ENDE , M ICHAEL , & R OSE , K AREN. 2015. Promoting Local Content Hosting to Develop the Internet Ecosystem.
  http://www.internetsociety.org.

K OREN , M IKLOS , & C SILLAG , M ARTON. 2016. Machines and machinists: Importing skill-biased technology.
  mimeo, Central European University.

K RUEGER , A LAN B. 1993. How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure: Evidence from Micro Data.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 33–60.

L AGAKOS , D AVID , & WAUGH , M ICHAEL E. 2013. Selection, Agriculture, and Cross-Country Productivity
  Differences. American Economic Review, 103, 948–980.

L EVINSOHN , J AMES. 1999. Employment Responses to International Liberalization in Chile. Journal of Inter-
   national Economics, 47, 321–344.

L EVINSOHN , J AMES , & P ETRIN , A MIL. 2003. Estimating production functions using inputs to control for
   unobservables. Review of Economic Studies, 70, 317–341.

L EWIS , W. A RTHUR. 1955. The Theory of Economic Growth. London: Allen and Unwin.

L OWE , M ATT. 2014. Rail Revival in Africa? The Impact of Privatization. Working Paper.

M ACCHIAVELLO , R OCCO , & M IQUEL -F LORENSA , P EPITA. 2015. Supply Assurance, Relational Contracts
  and Vertical Integration: Evidence from Costa Rica’s Coffee Chain. mimeo Warwick University.

M ACHIN , S TEPHEN , & VAN R EENEN , J OHN. 1998. Technology and Changes in Skill Structure: Evidence
  from Seven OECD Countries. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 1215–1244.

                                                     31
M AGRUDER , J EREMY. 2010. Intergenerational Networks, Unemployment, and Persistent Inequality in South
  Africa. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2, 62–85.

M AGRUDER , J EREMY. 2012. High Unemployment Yet Few Small Firms: The Role of Centralized Bargaining
  in South Africa. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4, 138–166.

M AHLKNECHT, G REG. 2014. Map of Undersea Cables. "http://www.cablemap.info/". Accessed November
  2014.

M ARQUEZ , G USTAVO , & PAGES -S ERRA , C ARMEN. 1998. Trade and Employment: Evidence from Latin
  America and the Caribbean. WP-366, Inter- American Devel. Bank.

M C K ENZIE , D AVID , DE M EL , S URESH , & W OODRUFF , C HRISTOPHER. 2008. Returns to Capital: Results
  from a Randomized Experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 1329–1372.

M C K INSEY G LOBAL I NSTITUTE. 2013.      Lions go digital: The Internet’s transformative po-
  tential  in   Africa.         "http://www.mckinsey.com/industries/high-tech/our-insights/
  lions-go-digital-the-internets-transformative-potential-in-africa".

M C M ILLAN , M ARGARET, & H ARTTGEN , K ENNETH. 2014. Africa’s Quiet Revolution. In: L IN , J USTIN , &
  M ONGA , C ELESTIN (eds), The Oxford Handbook of Africa and Economics. Oxford University Press.

M C M ILLAN , M ARGARET, & R ODRIK , D ANI. 2014. Globalization, Structural Change, and Productivity
  Growth, with an Update on Africa. World Development, 63, 11–32.

M ICHAELS , G UY, N ATRAJ , A SHWINI , & VAN R EENEN , J OHN. 2014. Has ICT Polarized Skill Demand?
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 96, 60–77.

M ICHALOPOULOS , S TELIOS , & PAPAIOANNOU , E LIAS. 2013. Pre-Colonial Ethnic Institutions and Contem-
  porary African Development. Econometrica, 81, 113–152.

M ICHALOPOULOS , S TELIOS , & PAPAIOANNOU , E LIAS. 2018. Spatial Patterns of Development: A Meso
  Approach. Annual Review of Economics.

M ITRA , S ANDIP, M OOKHERJEE , D ILIP, T ORERO , M AXIMO , & V ISARIA , S UJATA. 2016. Middleman Margins
  and Asymmetric Information: An Experiment with Potato Farmers in West Bengal. mimeo, Boston University.

M OREIRA , M AURÌCIO M., & N AJBERG , S HEILA. 2000. Trade Liberalization in Brazil: Creating or Exporting
  Jobs? Journal of Development Studies, 36, 78–99.

OECD. 2013. Measuring the Internet Economy: A Contribution to the Research Agenda. OECD Digital
 Economy Papers.

OECD. 2014. OECD Insights: International Cables, Gateways, Backhaul and International Exchange. http:
 //oecdinsights.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/International-cables-gateways-IXPs.pdf.

O LINER , S TEPHEN D., S ICHEL , D ANIEL E., & S TIROH , K EVIN J. 2007. Explaining a Productive Decade.
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 38, 81–152.

O LLEY, G. S TEVEN , & PAKES , A RIEL. 1996. The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications equip-
  ment industry. Econometrica, 64, 1263–1297.


                                                   32
O XFORD B USINESS G ROUP. 2015.           Djibouti to utilise geostrategic location to de-
  velop   ICT    connectivity hub.            "http://www.oxfordbusinessgroup.com/overview/
  emerging-gateway-country-seeks-leverage-its-geostrategic-location-develop-connectivity-hub".

PAUNOV, C AROLINE , & R OLLO , VALENTINA. 2015. Overcoming Obstacles: The Internet’s Contribution to
  Firm Development. World Bank Economic Review, 29, 1.

Q IANG , C HRISTINE Z HEN -W EI , & R OSSOTTO , C ARLO M. 2009. Economic impacts of broadband. In:
   W ORLD B ANK (ed), Information and communication for development: Expanding reach and increasing impact.
  World Bank.

R AVEH , O HAD , & R ESHEF, A RIELL. 2016. Capital imports composition, complementarities, and the skill
  premium in developing countries. Journal of Development Economics, 118, 183–206.

R EVENGA , A NA. 1997. Employment and Wage Effects of Trade Liberalization: The Case of Mexican Manu-
  facturing. Journal of Labor Economics, 15, 20–43.

R ICE , X AN. 2013.      Internet sales flourish in Nigeria.                     "http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/
   3f455b7e-b1bb-11e2-9315-00144feabdc0.html#axzz41yKTXOh0".

R ODRIK , D ANI. 2015. Premature Deindustrialization. Journal of Economic Growth, 21, 1–33.

S CRUGGS , G REG. 2015. How Nairobi built a thriving tech community. "http://citiscope.org/story/2015/
   how-nairobi-built-thriving-tech-community".

S TATE OF THE I NTERNET R EPORT. 2012. The State of the Internet Report, 4th quarter, 2012, Akamai.
   https://www.slideshare.net/AkamaiTechnologies/q4-2012-sotiweb.

S YRQUIN , M OSHE. 1988. Patterns of Structural Change. Chap. 7, pages 203–273 of: C HENERY, H OLLIS , &
   S RINIVASAN , T. N. (eds), Handbook of Development Economics, vol. 1. Elsevier.

S YVERSON , C HAD. 2011. What Determines Productivity? Journal of Economic Literature, 49, 326–65.

T HE E CONOMIST. 2012. What’s the greatest invention of all time? The Economist Magasize.

T OPALOVA , P ETIA. 2010. Factor immobility and regional impacts of trade liberalization: Evidence on
  poverty from India. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2, 1–41.

V ERHOOGEN , E RIC. 2008. Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Manufacturing
  Sector. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 489–530.

W EI , S HANG -J IN , & W U , Y I. 2002. Globalization and Inequality Without Differences in Data Definitions, Legal
 System, and Other Institutions. IMF mimeo.

W INTERS , A LAN L., M C C ULLOCH , N EIL , & M C K AY, A NDREW. 2004. Trade Liberalization and Poverty:
 The Evidence so Far. Journal of Economic Literature, 42, 72–115.

W OOD , A DRIAN. 1995. How Trade Hurt Unskilled Workers. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9, 57–80.

W OOD , A DRIAN. 1999. Openness and Wage Inequality in Developing Countries: The Latin American Chal-
 lenge to East Asian Conventional Wisdom. Chap. 6, pages 153–184 of: B ALDWIN , R ICHARD , C OHEN ,
 D ANIEL , S APIR , A NDRE , & V ENABLES , A NTHONY (eds), Market integration, regionalism and the global econ-
 omy. Cambridge University Press.

                                                        33
W ORLD B ANK. 2006. Information and Communications for Development 2006: Global Trends and Policies. Report.

W ORLD B ANK. 2016. Digital Dividends. World Development Report 2016.

W ORLD B ANK G ROUP. 2017. Firm Level Productivity Estimates. www.enterprisesurveys.org/.

Y OUNG , A LWYN. 2014. Structural Transformation, the Mismeasurement of Productivity Growth, and the
  Cost Disease of Services. American Economic Review, 104, 3635–3667.




                                                    34
Figures

F IGURE I: T HE TERRESTRIAL BACKBONE NETWORK , ENUMERATION AREAS USED FOR LOCATION FIXED
EFFECTS , AND SAMPLING CLUSTERS (S OUTHWESTERN S OUTH A FRICA AND SA-QLFS DATASET AS EX -
AMPLE )




This figure shows submarine Internet cables arriving to Yzerfontein, just north of Cape Town in South Africa, the country’s terrestrial
backbone network, and centroids of the SA-QLFS enumeration areas. Enumeration areas are used for location fixed effects.




                                                                  35
                          F IGURE II: S UBMARINE I NTERNET CABLE ARRIVAL IN A FRICA




                         2009/Q3                                                                  2009/Q4




                         2010/Q3                                                                  2011/Q2




                         2012/Q2                                                                  2012/Q4
This figure shows the arrival of submarine Internet cables in Africa over time. The first two cables during our analysis period arrived
in 2009/Q3 and the last in 2012/Q4. The submarine cables are Seacom and Teams (2009/Q3), Lion (2009/Q4), Eassy and MainOne
(2010/Q3), Glo1 (2011/Q2), WACS (2012/Q2), and ACE (2012/Q4).




                                                                  36
F IGURE III: T HE TERRESTRIAL BACKBONE NETWORK , GRID - CELLS USED FOR LOCATION FIXED EFFECTS ,
AND SAMPLING CLUSTERS (S OUTHERN G HANA AND A FROBAROMETER DATASET AS EXAMPLE )




This figure shows submarine Internet cables arriving to the Accra region in Ghana, the country’s terrestrial backbone network, and
locations from the Afrobarometer. Grid-cells are 0.1×0.1 decimal degrees, which is roughly 10×10 km, and are used for location fixed
effects.




                                                                37
F IGURE IV: T HE E STIMATED E FFECT           OF   FAST I NTERNET        ON   E MPLOYMENT, VARYING              THE       A SSUMED
C ONNECTION R ADIUS




         This figure plots the coefficients from running (1) using varying connection radii. The coefficients thus come
         from separate regressions. We display a longer x axis for Afrobarometer since the estimated effect becomes
         insignificant "further out" in that sample.




                                                              38
F IGURE V: D ISTRIBUTION      OF PLACEBO ESTIMATES :              FAST I NTERNET         AND EMPLOYMENT IN        S OUTH
A FRICA




             This figure shows a non-parametric permutation test of β = 0. We sample from all possible
             submarine cable arrival times, assigning a randomly chosen “fake” arrival time to each loca-
             tion while maintaining each observation’s backbone connectivity status. There are as many
             possible arrival times as there are quarters in the SA-QLFS sample. The figure depicts the em-
             pirical cdf of estimates resulting from permuting arrival times 500 times and running (1) on
             each fake dataset. The vertical line represents the true estimate; where it falls in the empirical
             cdf of estimates from the dataset with permuted arrival times implies its p-value, which is
             0.046.




                                                            39
F IGURE VI: E MPLOYMENT RATE IN CONNECTED                AND UNCONNECTED LOCATIONS IN                   S OUTH A FRICA
BEFORE AND AFTER FAST I NTERNET ARRIVAL




        This figure plots the employment rate in connected and unconnected locations in South Africa before and
        after the first submarine cable during our data period arrived in the country (2009/Q3).




                                                          40
  F IGURE VII: T HE EFFECT OF FAST I NTERNET ON EMPLOYMENT ACROSS SPACE




This figure plots the coefficients from running (1) using several connection radii. The coefficients thus come
from the same regression for each sample. The first radius is the baseline specification in the paper, i.e. 0-500
meters. We then include three "bands" further away from the backbone to display effects across space. These
additional treatment groups are each 1 km wide since there are fewer and fewer observations the further
out from the backbone.




                                                       41
Tables

         TABLE I: I NTERNET                         SPEED AND USE , AND EMPLOYMENT OUTCOMES , BEFORE SUBMARINE
         CABLE ARRIVAL

                                                                                                                                                                         Un-
                                                                                                                                               Connected              connected                All
           INTERNET OUTCOMES – LOCATION, INDIVIDUAL, AND FIRM LEVEL
                                      Internet speed, kbps (location, from Akamai)                                                                 453.6                  423.5              429.6
                                                                                                                                                  [319.9]                [443.9]            [419.3]
                                      Daily Internet use (individual, from Afrobarometer)                                                           0.08                   0.11               0.10
                                                                                                                                                   [0.27]                 [0.32]             [0.30]
                                      Weekly Internet use (individual, from Afrobarometer)                                                          0.16                   0.21               0.20
                                                                                                                                                   [0.37]                 [0.41]             [0.40]
                                      Email communication (firm, from WBES)                                                                         0.40                   0.24               0.38
                                                                                                                                                   [0.49]                 [0.43]             [0.49]
                                      Website use (firm, from WBES)                                                                                 0.13                   0.10               0.12
                                                                                                                                                   [0.33]                 [0.30]             [0.33]
           EMPLOYMENT OUTCOMES – INDIVIDUAL LEVEL
                         Benin, D.R. Congo, Ghana, Kenya, Namibia,
                         Nigeria, Togo, Tanzania (DHS)
                                      Employment                                                                                                    0.67                   0.69               0.68
                                                                                                                                                   [0.47]                 [0.47]             [0.47]
                                      Skilled                                                                                                       0.57                   0.58               0.58
                                                                                                                                                   [0.49]                 [0.49]             [0.49]
                        Benin, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar, Mozambique,
                        Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania (Afrobarometer)
                                      Employment                                                                                                    0.56                   0.59               0.58
                                                                                                                                                   [0.50]                 [0.49]             [0.49]
                         South Africa (QLFS)
                                      Employment                                                                                                    0.77                   0.71               0.72
                                                                                                                                                   [0.42]                 [0.45]             [0.45]
                                      Skilled                                                                                                       0.55                   0.49               0.50
                                                                                                                                                   [0.50]                 [0.50]             [0.50]
                                      Hours worked                                                                                                 45.26                  45.38              45.36
                                                                                                                                                  [14.20]                [15.03]            [14.92]
                                      Wants to work more                                                                                            0.62                   0.66               0.66
                                                                                                                                                   [0.48]                 [0.47]             [0.47]
                                      Formal employment                                                                                             0.54                   0.47               0.48
                                                                                                                                                   [0.50]                 [0.50]             [0.50]
                                      Informal employment                                                                                           0.12                   0.12               0.12
                                                                                                                                                   [0.33]                 [0.33]             [0.33]
           EMPLOYMENT OUTCOMES – FIRM LEVEL
                                      # employees (from WBES)                                                                                       33.2                   14.3               30.9
                                                                                                                                                  [123.7]                 [32.5]             [95.0]
                                      # skilled positions (from WBES)                                                                               11.1                    3.0               10.2
                                                                                                                                                   [44.5]                  [6.5]             [42.1]
                                      # employees (from Ethiopia LMMIS)                                                                             73.9                   80.8               75.5
                                                                                                                                                  [146.4]                [300.1]            [192.3]
                                      # skilled positions (from Ethiopia LMMIS)                                                                     24.3                   23.9               24.2
                                                                                                                                                   [73.2]                [132.8]             [90.2]
          All measures displayed are from the period before submarine cable arrival. Internet speed data come from Akamai. They provided us with quarterly data on average connection speeds for
         ∼900 African locations during the 2007-2013 period. These locations are shown in Appendix Figure AI. Akamai averages the speeds recorded for residential users, educational institutions,
         government offices, and firms in a given location×quarter, excluding those who connect via mobile networks. We restrict to location×quarters for which the speed measure is based on more
         than 10 unique IP addresses. (We also exclude the four biggest cities in each country from the speed data sample in this table; see Table II). Internet use rates come from Afrobarometer (survey
         countries and years are listed in Table AI). We restrict the (individual level) Afrobarometer sample to observations near (<20 km) Akamai locations for comparability (in Table II). Employment
         rates are from Demographic Health Surveys (DHS), Afrobarometer, and South African Quarterly Labor Force Surveys (QLFS). Occupational skill levels in DHS and QLFS are defined according
         to ILO ISCO standards. Firm data are from the Ethiopia Large and Medium Scale Manufacturing Industries Survey (LMMIS), and the World Bank Enterprise Survey (WBES). In WBES, skilled
         positions are proxied by the number of non-production employees. In LMMIS, skilled positions are defined as those where earnings are more than 800 Birr per year (roughly the sample salary
         median). In WBES information is also provided on whether firms communicate with clients via website and/or email. Individuals (locations) are considered connected if they are closer than 0.5
         km to the backbone network. Standard deviations are shown in square brackets.




                                                                                                      42
         TABLE II: S UBMARINE CABLE ARRIVAL AND I NTERNET SPEED AND U SE

                                                                                      Internet use
 Outcome:                                 Internet speed (asinh)            Daily (0/1)         Weekly (0/1)
 Unit of analysis:                               Location                              Individual
 Sample:                                         Akamai                              Afrobarometer
                                         (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)
 SubmarineCables × Connected           0.354**    0.362**      0.380**   0.082***   0.124**   0.123***    0.142***
                                       (0.137)    (0.176)      (0.191)   (0.028)    (0.050)   (0.032)     (0.053)
 Observations                           2533       1670         1670       4160      4160       4160        4160
 Mean of Outcome                                                           0.10       0.10      0.20        0.20
 Country×Time FE                         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes
 Location FE                             Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes
 # unique IP’s > 10                      Yes        Yes         Yes        No        No         No          No
 Connected×Time FE                       No         No          Yes        No        Yes        No          Yes
 Including biggest cities                Yes        No          No         No        No         No          No
 Internet speed (kbps) and use (0/1) data come from Akamai and Afrobarometer respectively (more details in
Table I). Akamai data is for 2007-2014 and the locations shown in Appendix Figure AI. Afrobarometer survey
countries and years are listed in Table AI. Akamai recommends focusing on location×quarters for which the
speed measure is based on more than 1000 unique IP addresses, but this dramatically reduces the sample size.
We thus restrict to #unique IP>10. Individuals (locations) are considered connected if they are closer than 0.5
km to the backbone network. This indicator may incorrectly classify large, connected cities as unconnected
when the city is considered as one geographical unit. Since the Akamai data is at location/city×quarter level
(e.g., Cape Town×2009/Q1), we exclude each country’s four largest cities (as defined by UNData) from the
Akamai sample (if they are present in the sample to begin with). As seen in column 1, the estimated effect of
fast Internet is of similar magnitude and significant also in the full sample. (Note that this issue is not relevant
to our other datasets, where we have much more fine-grained information on individuals and firms’ location).
We restrict the (individual level) Afrobarometer sample to observations near (<20 km) Akamai locations for
comparability. Time FEs are years. Location FEs are the reported location (a village/neighborhood or city) in
both samples. Robust standard errors clustered at the level of location FEs in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, **
p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                          43
                             TABLE III: FAST I NTERNET AND E MPLOYMENT

 Panel A:
 Employment
 Outcome:                                                    Employment (0/1)
 Unit of analysis:                                              Individual
                                                                 Afro-
                                              DHS              barometer             SA-QLFS
                                               (1)                 (2)                    (3)
 SubmarineCables × Connected                 0.046***            0.077**              0.022***
                                              (0.014)            (0.037)               (0.008)
 Observations                                  59914              7918                280641
 Mean of Outcome                                0.68               0.58                  0.72
 Country×Time FE                               Yes                Yes                     No
 Grid-cell×Connected FE                        Yes                Yes                     No
 Time FE                                       No                 No                      Yes
 Location FE                                   No                 No                      Yes
 Panel B:
 Work-related outcomes from SA-QLFS
                                            Hours               Wants to             Formal            Informal
 Outcome:                                worked (asinh)      work more (0/1)     employment (0/1)   employment (0/1)
 Unit of analysis:                                                           Individual
                                               (1)                 (2)                    (3)             (4)
 SubmarineCables × Connected                 0.101***           -0.022***             0.017*             0.004
                                              (0.035)            (0.008)              (0.009)           (0.005)
 Observations                                279482              457192               280641            280641
 Mean of Outcome                                                   0.66                 0.48              0.12
 Time FE                                       Yes                Yes                     Yes             Yes
 Location FE                                   Yes                Yes                     Yes             Yes
The DHS sample includes Benin, D.R. Congo, Ghana, Kenya, Namibia, Nigeria, Tanzania, and Togo. The Afrobarometer
sample includes Benin, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, and Tanzania. The QLFS
survey is from South Africa. Survey years for each DHS and Afrobarometer country are reported in Table AI. QLFS data
are 2008/Q1-2010/Q2. Grid-cells are 0.1×0.1 decimal degrees, which is roughly 10×10 km. Location FEs are enumeration
areas in South Africa QLFS. Time FEs are quarters in QLFS and years in DHS and Afrobarometer. Individuals (locations)
are considered connected if they are closer than 0.5 km to the backbone network. Hours worked is defined as zero for
unemployed individuals. Robust standard errors clustered at the level of location FEs in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, **
p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                        44
     TABLE IV: FAST I NTERNET             AND     E MPLOYMENT, I NCLUDING P LACEBO “T REATMENTS ”,                             AND   C ONTROL -
     LING FOR T RENDS

      Outcome:                                                                                 Employment (0/1)
      Unit of analysis:                                                                           Individual
      Sample:                                                          DHS            Afrobarometer                     SA-QLFS
                                                                 (1)          (2)      (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)
      SubmarineCables × Connected                             0.049***    0.108***   0.084**    0.142**   0.021**    0.017*     0.022**   0.018*
                                                               (0.014)     (0.040)   (0.037)    (0.071)   (0.008)    (0.010)    (0.009)   (0.010)
      SubmarineCables × Connected to road network              -0.014                 -0.016               0.000
                                                               (0.009)               (0.024)              (0.006)
      SubmarineCables × Connected to electricity grid           0.006                 0.004                -0.012
                                                               (0.009)               (0.032)              (0.017)
      SubmarineCables × Connected to 3G                                                                    0.007
                                                                                                          (0.006)
      SubmarineCables × Connected, t-1                                                                                           0.000
                                                                                                                                (0.008)
      SubmarineCables × Connected, t+1                                                                                                     0.005
45




                                                                                                                                          (0.007)
      Observations                                             59914         59914    7900       7900     280641     280641     280641    280641
      Mean of Outcome                                           0.68          0.68    0.58       0.58      0.72       0.72       0.72      0.72
      Country×Time FE                                           Yes           Yes      Yes       Yes        No        No         No         No
      Grid-cell×Connected FE                                    Yes           Yes      Yes       Yes        No        No         No         No
      Time FE                                                   No            No       No        No         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
      Location FE                                               No            No       No        No         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
      Linear grid-cell trend                                    No            No       No        No         No        Yes        No         No
      Connected×Time FE                                         No            Yes      No        Yes        No        No         No         No
      The DHS sample includes Benin, D.R. Congo, Ghana, Kenya, Namibia, Nigeria, Tanzania, and Togo. The Afrobarometer sample includes
     Benin, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, and Tanzania. The QLFS survey is from South Africa.
     Survey years for each DHS and Afrobarometer country are reported in Table AI. QLFS data are 2008/Q1-2010/Q2. Grid-cells are 0.1×0.1
     decimal degrees, which is roughly 10×10 km. Location FEs are enumeration areas in South Africa QLFS. Time FEs are quarters in QLFS
     and years in DHS and Afrobarometer. Individuals (locations) are considered connected to the backbone, roads, and electricity if they are
     closer than 0.5 km to the backbone network, the road network, and the electricity grid respectively; and to 3G if the individual (location) is
     within 3G coverage. The GIS shapefile for African electricity grids comes from The Africa Infrastructure Country Diagnostic (AICD), that
     for African road networks from the Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC) at the Center for International Earth Science
     Information Network at Columbia University, and that for 3G data from Collins Bartholomew. Robust standard errors clustered at the level
     of location FEs in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.
             TABLE V: FAST I NTERNET AND E MPLOYMENT IN S KILLED AND U NSKILLED POSITIONS

                                                               Un-           Highly          Somewhat       Moderately          Un-
      Outcome:                             Skilled (0/1)   skilled (0/1)   skilled (0/1)    skilled (0/1)   skilled (0/1)   skilled (0/1)
      Unit of analysis:                                                               Individual
                                                (1)             (2)             (3)                (4)           (5)             (6)
      Panel A:
      DHS
      SubmarineCables × Connected             0.044**          0.003           0.017                           0.027           0.003
                                              (0.018)         (0.015)         (0.011)                         (0.020)         (0.015)
      Observations                             59966           59923           59923                           59957           59923
      Mean of Outcome                           0.58            0.11            0.09                            0.49            0.11
      Country×Time FE                           Yes             Yes             Yes                             Yes             Yes
      Grid-cell×Connected FE                    Yes             Yes             Yes                             Yes             Yes
      Panel B:
      SA-QLFS
46




      SubmarineCables × Connected             0.014**          -0.001          0.001            0.003          0.010           -0.001
                                              (0.006)         (0.005)         (0.004)          (0.004)        (0.006)         (0.005)
      Observations                            280641          280641          280641           280641         280641          280641
      Mean of Outcome                           0.50            0.22            0.08             0.08           0.34            0.22
      Time FE                                   Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes          Yes             Yes
      Location FE                               Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes          Yes             Yes
      The DHS sample includes Benin, D.R. Congo, Ghana, Kenya, Namibia, Nigeria, Tanzania, and Togo. The QLFS survey is from
     South Africa. Survey years for each DHS country are reported in Table AI. QLFS data are 2008/Q1-2010/Q2. Grid-cells are
     0.1×0.1 decimal degrees, which is roughly 10×10 km. Location FEs are enumeration areas in South Africa QLFS. Time FEs are
     quarters in QLFS and years in DHS. Individuals (locations) are considered connected if they are closer than 0.5 km to the backbone
     network. We categorize occupations’ skill level following the ILO’s ISCO categorization (ILO, 2012). For DHS, the Highly skilled
     occupation group includes professional; the Moderately skilled group clerical, skilled manufacturing, retail and sales, services, and
     employed agriculture; and the Unskilled group unskilled manufacturing, self-employed agriculture, and domestic work. There
     are no observations in the Somewhat skilled occupation group in the DHS sample. For QLFS, the Highly skilled occupation group
     includes legislative work and professional; the Somewhat skilled group technical work; the Moderately skilled group clerical,
     skilled agriculture, crafts workers, services, and plant workers; and the Unskilled group elementary work and domestic work. The
     Skilled category corresponds to the Highly, Somewhat, and Moderate skilled occupation groups. Robust standard errors clustered
     at the level of location FEs in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.
TABLE VI: FAST I NTERNET, E MPLOYMENT,                     AND EMPLOY-
MENT IN SKILLED AND UNSKILLED POSITIONS , BY                       E DUCA -
TIONAL     ATTAINMENT

                                       Empl-                       Unskil-
 Outcome:                             oyed (0/1)   Skilled (0/1)   led (0/1)
 Unit of analysis:                                 Individual
                                          (1)           (2)           (3)
 DHS:
 SubmarineCables × Connected
       × Not primary                    -0.013         -0.001       -0.024
                                        (0.032)       (0.036)       (0.023)
         × Primary                     0.061***         0.033       0.035*
                                        (0.023)       (0.028)       (0.019)
         × Secondary                   0.047***        0.033*         0.012
                                        (0.015)       (0.018)       (0.015)
         × Higher                      0.067**        0.119***       -0.041
                                        (0.028)       (0.036)       (0.027)
 Observations                            59914         59966         59923
 Country×Time FE                          Yes            Yes           Yes
 Grid-cell×Connected FE                   Yes            Yes           Yes
 Afrobarometer:
 SubmarineCables × Connected
       × Not primary                   0.109**
                                       (0.055)
         × Primary                     0.077*
                                       (0.042)
         × Secondary                    0.060
                                       (0.050)
         × Higher                      0.097*
                                       (0.053)
 Observations                           7902
 Country×Time FE                         Yes
 Grid-cell×Connected FE                  Yes
 SA-QLFS:
 SubmarineCables × Connected
       × Not primary                    0.012          0.021         -0.009
                                       (0.017)        (0.018)       (0.018)
         × Primary                     0.028**         0.007        0.021**
                                       (0.011)        (0.011)       (0.010)
         × Secondary                   0.022*          0.015          0.007
                                       (0.012)        (0.013)       (0.009)
         × Higher                      0.019*          0.012          0.007
                                       (0.011)        (0.012)       (0.008)
 Observations                          277737         277737        277737
 Time FE                                 Yes            Yes            Yes
 Location FE                             Yes            Yes            Yes
 The DHS sample includes Benin, D.R. Congo, Ghana, Kenya, Namibia, Nige-
ria, Tanzania, and Togo. The Afrobarometer sample includes Benin, Ghana,
Kenya, Madagascar, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, and Tan-
zania. The QLFS survey is from South Africa. Survey years for each Afro-
barometer and DHS country are reported in Table AI. QLFS data are 2008/Q1-
2010/Q2. Grid-cells are 0.1×0.1 decimal degrees, which is roughly 10×10 km.
Location FEs are enumeration areas in South Africa QLFS. Time FEs are quar-
ters in QLFS and years in Afrobarometer and DHS. Individuals (locations) are
considered connected if they are closer than 0.5 km to the backbone network.
We categorize occupations’ skill level following the ILO’s ISCO categorization
(more details in Table V). Afrobarometer does not record respondents’ occu-
pation. Controls for educational attainment (primary school not completed,
primary school completed, secondary school completed, and higher educa-
tion) are included. Robust standard errors clustered at the level of location
FEs in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                     47
                                                          TABLE VII: FAST I NTERNET AND F IRM E NTRY IN S OUTH A FRICA

                                              All             Agri-           Retail/          Tech-              Manu-                                 Finan-         White-            Blue-
      Outcome:                           firms (asinh)   culture (asinh)   sales (asinh)   nology (asinh)    facturing (asinh)   Services (asinh)    cial (asinh)   collar (asinh)   collar (asinh)
      Unit of analysis:                                                                                          Location
                                              (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)                (5)                 (6)              (7)             (8)              (9)
      Panel A:
      Net firm entry
      SubmarineCables × Connected           0.227***          0.026*          0.086**           0.022              0.020              0.120**          0.158**         0.060*           0.076**
                                             (0.079)          (0.014)         (0.043)          (0.028)            (0.013)             (0.052)          (0.063)         (0.033)          (0.034)
      Observations                            38108            38108           38108            38108              38108               38108            38108           38108            38108
      Panel B:
      Firm entry
      SubmarineCables × Connected           0.089**            0.007           0.033            0.015              0.012               0.046           0.103**          0.029           0.043*
                                            (0.038)           (0.012)         (0.030)          (0.020)            (0.009)             (0.034)          (0.046)         (0.023)          (0.025)
      Observations                           38108             38108           38108            38108              38108               38108            38108           38108            38108
      Panel C:
      Firm exit
      SubmarineCables × Connected           -0.088**         -0.021*          -0.053**          -0.007             -0.008             -0.059**          -0.043         -0.031*          -0.032*
48




                                             (0.038)         (0.012)           (0.023)         (0.015)            (0.009)              (0.029)         (0.029)         (0.017)          (0.018)
      Observations                            38108           38108             38108           38108              38108                38108           38108           38108            38108
      Time FE                                 Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
      Location×Connected FE                   Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
     Data at location×quarter level, 2007-2014. Location FEs are zip-codes. Time FEs are quarters. See Table AVI for information on how firms are categorized into sectors. Sectors not shown are
     mining and tourism. The point estimate is positive and insignificant for these sectors. Firms are considered connected if they are closer than 0.5 km to the backbone network. Robust standard
     errors clustered at the level of location FEs in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.
                TABLE VIII: FAST I NTERNET, E MPLOYMENT, O UTPUT E LASTICITY OF L ABOR , AND P RODUCTIVITY IN E THIOPIAN F IRMS

                                                                                                   Skilled             Unskilled
                                                                             Emplo-                emplo-               emplo-              Value           Value            Value
      Outcome:                                                             yees (asinh)          yees (asinh)         yees (asinh)       added (asinh)   added (asinh)    added (asinh)
      Unit of analysis:                                                                                                           Firm
      Method:                                                                     OLS                  OLS                  OLS              OLS            Reg LP            Adj LP
                                                                          (1)           (2)      (3)         (4)      (5)         (6)         (7)             (8)               (9)
      Submarine Cables × Connected                                      0.156*      0.224***    0.034    0.201*      0.115     0.124
                                                                        (0.091)      (0.081)   (0.080)   (0.106)    (0.078)   (0.095)

      Capital                                                                                                                              0.276***         0.263***          0.249***
                                                                                                                                            (0.018)          (0.023)           (0.020)

      Unskilled                                                                                                                            0.337***         0.127***          0.135***
                                                                                                                                            (0.064)          (0.043)           (0.045)

      Skilled                                                                                                                              0.497***         0.198***          0.198***
                                                                                                                                            (0.043)          (0.025)           (0.026)

      Submarine Cables × Connected ×
49




           Unskilled                                                                                                                       -0.176***        -0.048            -0.063*
                                                                                                                                            (0.058)         (0.031)           (0.034)

           Skilled                                                                                                                           0.026           0.017             0.016
                                                                                                                                            (0.033)         (0.027)           (0.027)
      Control for Productivity                                                                                                                No              Yes               Yes
      Control for Submarine Cables × Connected × Productivity                                                                                 No              No                Yes
      Outcome                                                                                                                                                                Produc-
                                                                                                                                                                              tivity

      Submarine Cables × Connected                                                                                                                                            0.127**
                                                                                                                                                                              (0.058)
      Time FE                                                             Yes            No      Yes          No      Yes          No         No              No                No
      Grid-cell×Connected FE                                              No             Yes     No           Yes     No           Yes        Yes             Yes               Yes
      Industry×Time FE                                                    No             Yes     No           Yes     No           Yes        Yes             Yes               Yes
      Firm FE                                                             Yes            No      Yes          No      Yes          No         No              No                No
      Observations                                                       5360           5360    5360         5360    5360         5360       4321            4321              4321
      Data from the Ethiopian LMMIS manufacturing firm census. 2006-2013. Grid-cells (for location FEs) are 0.1×0.1 decimal degrees, which is roughly 10×10 km. Time FEs are years.
     Firms are considered connected if they are closer than 0.5 km to the backbone network. The sample is restricted to firms observed both before and after submarine cable arrival and
     includes 1,103 firms. Skilled (unskilled) positions are defined as those earning more (less) than 800 Birr per year, approximately the sample salary median. Capital is the average of
     start-of-year and end-of-year book value. The production function specifications allow fast Internet to directly affect value added via a change in the intercept (not shown). Robust
     standard errors clustered at grid-cell level in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.
                          TABLE IX: FAST I NTERNET,           EMPLOYMENT, EXPORTING , ON - THE - JOB TRAINING , SALES AND FIRM COMMUNICATION

                                                                  Employment                                 Sales                              Trade                               Internet use
                                                                                               On-the        Sales                                                               Email
                                                              Prod-           Non-prod-         -job          per                                                              commu-
                                             Emplo-        uction emp-       uction emp-       train-        labor          National         Indirect            Direct          nica-      Website
      Outcome:                             yees (asinh)   loyees (asinh)    loyees (asinh)    ing (0/1)   cost (asinh)    sales (asinh)   exports (asinh)    exports (asinh)   tion (0/1)   use (0/1)
      Unit of analysis:                                                                                                Firm
                                               (1)              (2)               (3)            (4)           (5)              (6)             (7)                (8)             (9)         (10)
      SubmarineCables × Connected            0.172**           0.205            0.227***      0.145***        0.248           -0.502*         1.318*             1.539**         0.131**     0.130*
                                             (0.073)          (0.161)           (0.069)       (0.046)        (0.546)          (0.684)         (0.053)            (0.074)
      Observations                            4897             3155               3144          5164          3667             4033            4035               4037            5132        5128
      Mean of Outcome                                                                           0.09                                                                              0.38        0.12
      Country×Time FE                          Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes          Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes            Yes          Yes
      Location FE                              Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes          Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes            Yes          Yes
      Industry FE                              Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes          Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes            Yes          Yes
     Data from World Bank Enterprise Surveys. World Bank Group (2017) have produced a dataset accompanying the full WBES dataset that includes cleaned versions of sales variables and the
     number of employees. The authors account for outliers and deflate sales to 2009 USD. We use of the accompanying dataset for these variables. The WBES includes firms from Ghana, Kenya,
     Mauritania, Nigeria, Senegal, and Tanzania. 2006-2014. Time FEs are years. Location FEs are cities. We use the number of production employees as a proxy for unskilled labor, and the number of
     non-production employees as a proxy for skilled labor. The trade outcomes are defined (by WBES) as shares of annual sales, and we interact that variable with annual sales to get, e.g., the value
     of exports in 2009 USD. Indirect exports are defined as going through a third party. The Internet use variables are equal to one if the firm states that it uses email or a website to communicate
     with clients. Because almost all firms in WBES are located in large cities and sub-city information on their location is not reported, a within-500-meters-of-the-backbone indicator incorrectly
     classifies many connected WBES firms/cities as unconnected (for example those in Abuja, Accra, Dar es Salaam, and Kano. That these cities are in fact connected to the backbone is clear: the
     maps show backbone cables whose route was clearly chosen to connect them). In WBES we thus classify firms/cities as connected if the backbone passes through the city limits, as classified in
50




     Schneider, A., M. A. Friedl and D. Potere (2009). (This issue is not relevant to our other datasets, where we have much more fine-grained information on individuals and firms’ location). Robust
     standard errors clustered at city level in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.
        TABLE X: FAST I NTERNET AND I NCOMES

 Outcome:                               Light density at night (asinh)
 Unit of analysis:                                  Point
 Sample:                                            NOAA
                                          (1)               (2)
 SubmarineCables × Connected            0.024***          0.033*
                                         (0.009)          (0.018)
 Observations                             80360            80360
 Country×Time FE                           Yes              Yes
 Grid-cell×Connected FE                    Yes              Yes
 Connected×Time FE                         No               Yes
 The data is yearly and for 2007-2013. Grid-cells are 0.1×0.1 decimal
degrees, which is roughly 10×10 km. Locations are considered con-
nected if they are closer than 0.5 km to the backbone network. Light
density at night proxies for average income at location level. Robust
standard errors clustered at grid-cell level in parentheses. *** p < 0.01,
** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                   51
Appendix
The South Africa Companies and Intellectual Property Commission’s administrative dataset of firm regis-
trations categorizes firms only as public, private or NGO. To estimate the effect of fast Internet on sector
specific firm creation, we thus need to categorize the firms based on their names. We choose a set of sec-
tors that, as far as possible, correspond to the categories of occupations reported in the DHS and QLFS
datasets: services, white collar firms, blue collar firms, retail and sales, technology, manufacturing, finance,
agriculture, mining, and tourism and foods.
    We start by splitting all firm names on the space between the words. For example, “The South African
Mining Company” would render five new variables. The first one would be called “name1” and would
have the value “The”, the second one would be called “name2” and would have the value “South”, and so
on.
    name2, as specified above, usually contains the important key word that makes it possible to categorize
a firm, such as “accounting”, “trading”, “properties”, or “catering”. We therefore use name2 to manually
match key words to the sectors listed above. For example, we categorize firm X as belonging to the tech-
nological sector if name2 contains the words “computer”, “tech”, “telecommunications”, and so on. The
mapping of words to sectors is provided in Appendix Table AVI. Of course, the key words could have
ended up in any of the other name variables. We thus run the exact same iteration for all of those, up to
name10. With this method, we are able to categorize 67 percent of the firms in the CIPC sample.




                                                      52
                   F IGURE AI: L OCATIONS INCLUDED IN DATASET ON I NTERNET SPEEDS




This graph plots the locations for which Akamai has information on Internet speed between 2007 and 2014. There are around 920
locations in this sample. We use data for the countries listed in Table AI.




                                                             53
F IGURE AII: R OAD NETWORKS AND ELECTRICITY GRID (S OUTHWESTERN S OUTH A FRICA AS EXAMPLE )




This graph plots the road networks and electricity grid used in the placebo “treatment” estimations. Road data comes from SEDAC
and electricity data from AICD.




                                                              54
                              F IGURE AIII: FAST I NTERNET AND I NCOMES OVER T IME




This graph plots the coefficients from the interaction terms between the connected status and event-time indicators. The event time is
calculated as the year of light measurement net the year of first cable connection. A dummy variable is created for each event time and
is subsequently interacted with the connected indicator. Country×year FE’s are included in the regression, but the results are virtually
unchanged using year FE’s solely.




                                                                  55
TABLE AI: I NCLUDED C OUNTRIES , S URVEY R OUNDS ,                      AND    C ABLE C ON -
NECTION

                                                                                   First
     Country         Survey                                                        connected

     Benin           Afrobarometer (2008, 2011); DHS (2001, 2012)                  2010/Q3
     D.R. Congo      DHS (2007, 2013)                                              2012/Q2
     Ghana           Afrobarometer (2008, 2012); DHS (2008, 2014)                  2010/Q3
     Kenya           Afrobarometer (2008, 2011); DHS (2008, 2014)                  2009/Q3
     Madagascar      Afrobarometer (2008, 2013)                                    2010/Q3
     Mozambique      Afrobarometer (2008, 2012)                                    2009/Q3
     Namibia         DHS (2006, 2013)                                              2012/Q2
     Nigeria         Afrobarometer (2008, 2012); DHS (2008, 2013)                  2010/Q3
     Senegal         Afrobarometer (2008, 2013)                                    2010/Q3
     South Africa    Afrobarometer (2008, 2011); SA-QLFS (2008/Q1 - 2010/Q2)       2009/Q3
     Tanzania        Afrobarometer (2008, 2012); DHS (1999, 2010)                  2009/Q3
     Togo            DHS (1998, 2013)                                              2010/Q3
 This table shows the survey rounds and connection quarters for countries included in our main
analysis. Included countries (1) have surveys conducted both before and after cable arrival; (2)
have detailed geographical markers; (3) have employment status for individuals; and (4) are not
landlocked. We only make use of Standard DHS surveys.




                                              56
             TABLE AII: FAST INTERNET AND EMPLOYMENT, VARYING G RID -C ELL S IZE

      Outcome:                                                            Employment (0/1)
      Unit of analysis:                                                      Individual
      Grid-cell size:                       10 km      15 km      20 km        25 km      30 km      35 km      40 km
                                             (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)         (5)       (6)        (7)
      DHS:
      SubmarineCables × Connected          0.046***   0.047***   0.051***      0.044**    0.052***   0.049***   0.060***
                                            (0.014)    (0.016)    (0.018)      (0.019)     (0.014)    (0.016)    (0.018)
      Observations                           59914      59914      59914        59914       59914      59914      59914
      Mean of Outcome                         0.68       0.68       0.68         0.68        0.68       0.68       0.68
      Afrobarometer:
      SubmarineCables × Connected          0.077**     0.076**    0.080**      0.076**    0.069**    0.071**    0.073**
                                           (0.037)     (0.038)    (0.036)      (0.037)    (0.034)    (0.035)    (0.034)
      Observations                          7918        7918       7918         7918       7918       7918       7918
      Mean of Outcome                        0.58        0.58       0.58         0.58       0.58       0.58       0.58
57




      Country×Time FE                        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
      Grid-cell×Connected FE                 Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
      The DHS sample includes Benin, D.R. Congo, Ghana, Kenya, Namibia, Nigeria, Tanzania, and Togo. The Afro-
     barometer sample includes Benin, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, and
     Tanzania. Survey years for each DHS and Afrobarometer country are reported in Table AI. Grid-cells range from
     10×10 km to 40×40 km. Time is years in both datasets. Individuals (locations) are considered connected if they
     are closer than 0.5 km to the backbone network. Robust standard errors clustered at grid-cell level in parentheses,
     using the same grid-cell size as stated in the column headers. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10
TABLE AIII: E MPLOYMENT AND S KILLED E MPLOYMENT                            BY    E DUCATIONAL AT-
TAINMENT, B EFORE S UBMARINE C ABLE A RRIVAL

 Outcome:                                    Employed (0/1)                       Skilled (0/1)
                                                    Un-                                 Un-
                                 Connected       connected     All     Connected     connected     All
          DHS
                 Not primary         0.78            0.80      0.80       0.66           0.61      0.62
                                    [0.41]          [0.40]    [0.40]     [0.47]         [0.49]    [0.48]
                 Primary             0.69            0.72      0.72       0.53           0.56      0.55
                                    [0.46]          [0.45]    [0.45]     [0.50]         [0.50]    [0.50]
                 Secondary           0.60            0.61      0.61       0.55           0.56      0.56
                                    [0.49]          [0.49]    [0.49]     [0.50]         [0.50]    [0.50]
                 Higher              0.69            0.70      0.70       0.66           0.69      0.68
                                    [0.46]          [0.46]    [0.46]     [0.48]         [0.46]    [0.47]
         Afrobarometer
                 Not primary         0.42            0.44      0.43
                                    [0.49]          [0.50]    [0.50]
                 Primary             0.52            0.54      0.53
                                    [0.50]          [0.50]    [0.50]
                 Secondary           0.60            0.68      0.66
                                    [0.49]          [0.47]    [0.47]
                 Higher              0.79            0.79      0.79
                                    [0.41]          [0.41]    [0.41]
          SA-QLFS
                 Not primary         0.74            0.73      0.73       0.28           0.28      0.28
                                    [0.44]          [0.44]    [0.44]     [0.45]         [0.45]    [0.45]
                 Primary             0.73            0.65      0.66       0.44           0.38      0.39
                                    [0.45]          [0.48]    [0.47]     [0.50]         [0.49]    [0.49]
                 Secondary           0.76            0.71      0.72       0.65           0.60      0.60
                                    [0.43]          [0.45]    [0.45]     [0.48]         [0.49]    [0.49]
                 Higher              0.91            0.90      0.90       0.88           0.88      0.88
                                    [0.29]          [0.30]    [0.29]     [0.32]         [0.33]    [0.33]
 All measures displayed are from the period before submarine cable arrival. Employment rates are from
Demographic Health Surveys (DHS), Afrobarometer, and South African Quarterly Labor Force Surveys
(QLFS). Occupational skill levels in DHS and QLFS are defined according to ILO ISCO standards. Individ-
uals (locations) are considered connected if they are closer than 0.5 km to the backbone network. Standard
deviations are shown in square brackets.




                                                     58
TABLE AIV: FAST I NTERNET AND E MPLOYMENT, VARYING THE S AM -
PLE ANDT ERRESTRIAL C ABLES C ONSIDERED

 Outcome:                                                       Employment (0/1)
 Unit of analysis:                                                 Individual
                                                                    Afro-
 Sample:                                              DHS         barometer     SA-QLFS
                                                        (1)           (2)          (3)

 Panel A:
 Backbone cables reported in 2 maps
 SubmarineCables × Connected                         0.048***        0.045      0.024***
                                                      (0.015)       (0.040)      (0.009)
 Observations                                          59914         7900       280641
 Mean of Outcome                                        0.67          0.58         0.71
 Panel B:
 Excluding obs. close to landing station
 SubmarineCables × Connected                         0.054***       0.086**     0.025***
                                                      (0.016)       (0.042)      (0.008)
 Observations                                          51129         5871       259177
 Mean of Outcome                                        0.67          0.58         0.71
 Panel C:
 Excluding obs. with distance to backbone >5 km
 SubmarineCables × Connected                         0.040***       0.079**     0.022***
                                                      (0.015)       (0.038)      (0.008)
 Observations                                          49982         7062       231242
 Mean of Outcome                                        0.67          0.58         0.72
 Country×Time FE                                       Yes           Yes           No
 Grid-cell×Connected FE                                Yes           Yes           No
 Time FE                                               No            No            Yes
 Location FE                                           No            No            Yes
 The DHS sample includes Benin, D.R. Congo, Ghana, Kenya, Namibia, Nigeria, Tanzania,
and Togo. The Afrobarometer sample includes Benin, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar, Mozam-
bique, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, and Tanzania. The QLFS survey is from South Africa.
Survey years for each DHS and Afrobarometer country are reported in Table AI. QLFS data
are 2008/Q1-2010/Q2. Grid-cells are 0.1×0.1 decimal degrees, which is roughly 10×10 km.
Location FEs are enumeration areas in South Africa QLFS. Time FEs are quarters in QLFS
and years in DHS and Afrobarometer. Individuals (locations) are considered connected if
they are closer than 0.5 km to the backbone network. Panel A defines the backbone net-
work as the intersection of AfTerFibre (2014)’s map and www.africabandwidthmaps.com
map from 2013/Q2. Panel B excludes observations that are closer than 20 km to a landing
station. Robust standard errors clustered at the level of location FEs in parentheses. ***
p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                           59
                     TABLE AV: A LTERNATIVE S TANDARD E RRORS

 Outcome:                                                             Employment (0/1)
 Unit of analysis:                                                       Individual
                                                                               Afro-
 Sample:                                                     DHS             barometer    SA-QLFS
                                                              (1)                (2)          (3)
 Panel A: Fast Internet and Employment
 Standard errors accounting for spatial correlation
 SubmarineCables × Connected                               0.046***            0.077**     0.022***
                                                            [0.014]            [0.029]      [0.005]
 Observations                                                59914              7918       280641
 Mean of Outcome                                              0.68               0.58         0.72
 Country×Time FE                                              Yes                Yes          No
 Grid-cell×Connected FE                                       Yes                Yes          No
 Time FE                                                      No                 No           Yes
 Location FE                                                  No                 No           Yes
 Panel B: Fast Internet and Employment
 Standard errors clustered on administrative area
 SubmarineCables × Connected                                0.032*             0.077*      0.022***
                                                            [0.017]            [0.045]      [0.008]
 Observations                                                40798              7918       280641
 Mean of Outcome                                              0.63               0.58         0.72
 Country×Time FE                                              Yes                Yes          No
 Grid-cell×Connected FE                                       Yes                Yes          No
 Time FE                                                      No                 No           Yes
 Location FE                                                  No                 No           Yes
 Outcome:                                                Productivity
 Unit of analysis:                                           Firm
 Sample:                                              Ethiopian LMMIS
                                                              (1)
 Panel C: Fast Internet and Firm Productivity
 Bootstrapped Standard Errors
 SubmarineCables × Connected                                0.127*
                                                            [0.068]
 Observations                                                4321
 Grid-cell×Connected FE                                       Yes
 Industry×Time FE                                             Yes
 The DHS sample includes Benin, D.R. Congo, Ghana, Kenya, Namibia, Nigeria, Tanzania, and Togo.
The Afrobarometer sample includes Benin, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar, Mozambique, Nigeria, Sene-
gal, South Africa, and Tanzania. The QLFS survey is from South Africa. Survey years for each DHS
and Afrobarometer country are reported in Table AI. QLFS data are 2008/Q1-2010/Q2. Ethiopian LM-
MIS manufacturing firm census for 2006-2013. Grid-cells are 0.1×0.1 decimal degrees, which is roughly
10×10 km. Location FEs are enumeration areas in South Africa QLFS. Time is quarters in QLFS and
years in DHS, Afrobarometer, and Ethiopian LMMIS. Individuals (locations) are considered connected
if they are closer than 0.5 km to the backbone network. This table presents the precision of our main
results using Conley standard errors that accounts for spatial auto-correlation in Panel A (Conley,
1999).The cut-off window is 100 km, but the results are virtually unchanged for 50 km, 500 km, and
1,000 km. Panel B clusters the standard errors on a region (DHS and Afrobarometer) and municipality
(SA-QLFS, since South Africa does not formally have regions, and there are only nine provinces) level.
The estimates and number of observations differ somewhat due to missing information on regions in
the DHS data. There are 95 distinct regions in the DHS sample, 154 distinct regions in the Afrobarom-
eter sample, and 341 distinct municipalities in the SA-QLFS sample. Panel C bootstraps the standard
error in the last procedure described in Section 6.2.2. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10




                                                 60
                                              TABLE AVI: C ATEGORIZATION OF S OUTH A FRICAN FIRMS ’ SECTOR BASED ON KEYWORDS FROM FIRM NAMES

                                                                                                                                                          Services:
           abbatoir                     accommodation                          acquisitions                       advertising                  air-conditioning              aircon      airconditioning        airlines         airport        answers
         apartments                               art                                arts                          assessing                      assessment             assessments           assist         assistance        aviation            baby
            bakery                               bar                                 bars                              bay                            bistro                  block          booking             boxing           burial            cafe
              care                            carriers                            carwash                           caterers                        catering               caterings        chauffeur             child         children       childrens
          christian                            church                               clinic                           clinical                        clinics                   club          coaches           coaching           coffee         coffees
            college                        commercial                        communication                     communications                     compliance                concerts      conditioning       conference       conferences    consultation
           cooking                           cosmetics                            cottages                           council                      counsellors                courier         couriers           couture           creche         cuisine
              cure                              dance                             daycare                          deliveries                        design                 designs        destination      destinations         dienste          driver
            driving                        drycleaners                              eatery                             eats                         educare               education      empowerment       entertainment          estate         estates
             event                             events                           exhibitions                          export                        exporters              exporting          exports         facilitators        fashion             fast
              feed                          fellowship                            fencing                            fitness                           flats                   food          football        franchising         funeral        funerals
             games                            gaming                            gardening                              god                          gourmet                   guest        guesthouse              gym           habitat            hair
         hairdresser                            haven                             healing                             health                       healthcare                  hire            hiring         homecare       homecleaners         homes
         homestead                            hospital                          hospitality                            host                          hosting                  hotel            hotels             house         housing      immobiliare
       implementation                          import                            importers                          imports                      information             innovations       inspections      installations     intelligence         islam
             kafee                             karate                         kontrakteurs                          laundry                       leadership               learning           leasing            leisure          living           lodge
            logistic                          logistics                           logistix                             mail                        makelaars               mansions            meals         memorials         migration       ministries
           ministry                           mission                             missions                        monitoring                          motel              networking         nominees            nursery         nursing         orchards
          outsource                          paintball                               park                           parking                         payment               payments              pet           planning             pools       pre-school
        procurement                        promotions                           properties                         property                        protection                 realty          recruit         recruiting      recruitment        recruits
          recycling                              rent                               rental                           rentals                       residence              residential      residentials      resourcing        restaurant     restaurants
          resturant                         resturants                          retirement                           retreat                          rugby                   safety           salon          sanctuary           school        security
          seminars                             service                            services                         servicing                        shaving                shipping           shuttle           shuttles            spa            sport
             sports                          sportsbar                            staffing                           storage                       strategies               strategy       supervision          surgical       swimming           tavern
               tax                               taxi                              theatre                          theatres                        tourism                   tours          training          tranport     transformation   transformers
          transport                      transportation                        transporters                      transporting                         travel               traveling        travelling           travels          treats        trucking
           tutoring                       undertakers                               venue                              villa                         village                villages           villas             wash            waste         wedding
          weddings                          wellbeing                             wellness
                                                                                                                                                        White collar:
           academy                            admin                            administrasie                     administration                 administrators            advisors          advisory         akademie         analytics       architechts
           architects                      architectura                        architectural                      architecture                    assurance               attorneys        biometrics        branding         chemical        chemicals
            consult                       consultancies                         consultancy                        consultant                    consultants             consulting           data             decor            dental         designers
           directors                          editing                         entrepreneurs                         fashions                       forensic               forensics      geoconsultants        ideas           institute      insurance
            interior                         interiors                          konsultante                       landscaping                        legal              management         managers          managing         marketing         media
          optometrist                     optometrists                        petrochemicals                       publication                    publishers             publishing       publishings        radiology         research          risk
          translation
                                                                                                                                                         Blue collar:
           autobody                         automobile                            baking                              blocks                             brick             brickforce         bricks           build           builders         building
            butchery                             car                             carpenter                          carpentry                            clean              cleaners        cleaning          coaters           coating         coatings
            concrete                       construction                        constructions                       constructors                      contracting          contractors          deco         distribution     distributions     distributor
          distributors                        drilling                          equipment                             fabrics                         filtration             fishing        flooring          forestry         foundry           freight
              fuel                              gas                               hunters                            hunting                         installation        installations     irrigation         knitting       konstruksie      laminations
             lawns                         maintenance                          mechanics                              metal                            metals              movers         packaging          packing            paint          painters
            painting                          paints                              pavers                             paving                           plastering           plumbers        plumbing          recyclers       refrigiration    refurbishing
          renovations                          repair                             repairs                            roofing                         scaffolding             textiles        towing            truck          woodwork
                                                                                                                                                       Retail and sales:
          accessories                     aesthetics                                affairs                           alarms                       apparel         appliances                auction        auctioneers        auctions           auto
              bags                        bathrooms                                 beads                          beautique                        beauty           bedding               beverages            books        booksellers       bookshop
           boutique                          brand                                 brands                              bread                      canopies            cement                ceramics            cheese         clothing       commerce
         commodities                     components                               condoms                        confectionary                  confectionery     consumables                cooling          cosmetic        cosmetics          covers
              crafts                       creations                             cupboards                           curtain                      curtains             dealer                dealers             deals         delights        detailing
              diary                      discounters                              elegance                         enterprise                    enterprises        fertilisers               films            flowers           foods         footwear
              fuels                       furnishers                              furniture                        furnitures                      garden           garments                   gift             gifting           gifts           glass
            goodies                          goods                                groceries                          grocery                     handelaars         hardware                 heating             herbs         hygiene          images
          ingredients                    instruments                              jewellers                         jewellery                        juice             kiosk                 kitchen          kitchens       kitchenware        leather
            lifestyle                       lighting                                lights                             linen                        liquor            liquors              lubricants       machinery         machines            mall
             market                         markets                                  mart                           materials                        meat              meats                medical          medicine        merchandise     merchandising
           merchant                    mini-supermarket                             motor                         motorcycles                      motors             movies                  music         newspaper          noodles         nutrition
                oil                            oils                                optical                           opticals                     outdoor            outfitter              outfitters           parts        patisserie         pawn
             pearls                        perfumes                              petroleum                       pharmaceutica                 pharmaceutical    pharmaceuticals           pharmacy        photography          photos          pictures
              plant                          plants                                 plates                             print                      printers           printing               printings           prints         produce          pumps
         refrigeration                     remedies                                 resale                             retail                     retailers          retailing                sales            sewing            shoes            shop
          shopfitters                      shopping                                  signs                            snacks                        spices         sportswear              stationary        stationers       stationery          store
              style                            suit                               superette                       supermarket                    superstore       supplements               supplier         suppliers         supplies         supply
             sweets                         telesales                               things                            timber                       timbers          toiletries                tools             towels            toys          trailers
               tyre                           tyres                             upholsterers                       upholstery                      vehicle           vehicles               vending              wear        wholesailers     wholesale
          wholesaler                     wholesalers                            windscreen                        windscreens                        wine              wines
                                                                                                                                                     Technology:
               3d                             apps                                 audio                                cable                           cables          cabling             cellular          computer        computers        computing
             digital                        electrical                          electricals                         electrician                      electricians     electronics            energy         engeneering      engineering        engineers
              fibre                        hydraulics                         infrastructure                          internet                            it          mechanical             mobile         multimedia          online          software
              solar                            tech                              technical                         technicians                         technics         technik            technique         techniques     technological     technologies
           technology                 telecommunication                   telecommunications                         telecoms                            web            website
                                                                                                                                                       Manufacturing:
            brewery                          brewing                             fabrication                          factory                       manufacturer        manufacturers    manufactures      manufacturing        plastic         plastics
           production                      productions                            products                           refineries                       refiners            refinery         refining
                                                                                                                                                         Financial:
           accountant                      accountants                           accounting                            asset                            audit              auditors        beleggings         bonds         bookkeeping         brokers
              capital                          cash                                clearing                            credit                          credits                debt          equities          equity          finance           finances
             financial                        finans                              finansiele                           fund                           funding               futures         holding          holdings          invest        investements
            investing                      investment                           investments                          investors                        lending                 loan            loans           money          mortgage          mortgages
            portfolio                       portfolios                             savings                           securities                         trade               traders         trading          tradings           trust            wealth
                                                                                                                                                         Agriculture:
                agri                      agri-business                         agribusiness                      agricultural                      agriculture           boerdery         boerderye           farm            farmers          farming
               farms                        fisheries                             growers                         horticultural                     horticulture          livestock         poultry
                                                                                                                                                          Mining:
              alu                           aluminium                            aluminum                               coal                          copper           diamond             diamonds            gold              iron            mine
             mineral                         minerals                              mines                               mining                        platinum            steel             steelworks        uranium
                                                                                                                                                    Tourism and foods:
               bagel                           burgers                               cakes                            chicken                         chickens             cookies           fish              fruit            fruits           pizza
               resort                          resorts                               safari                           safari’s                         safaris              tour           vacations
This table displays the key words used when assigning firms observed in the CIPC data to a sector. See the Appendix for details on the procedure.




                                                                                                                                                       61
