                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            CREDIBILITY, REAL INTEREST
                           RATES, AND THE OPTIMAL SPEED
                              OF TRADE LIBERALIZATION




                                 Kenneth A. Froot




                              Working Paper No. 2358




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 1987




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                             NBER Working Paper #2358
                                                             August 1987




                      Credibility, Real Interest Rates,
                and the Optimal Speed of Trade Liberalization




                                         ABSTRACT




 This   paper investigates the effcct.s of imperfectly cre(lil)k trade liberalization programs on
welfare and the allocation of real resources. We present a ratiotmi expectations model in
which   a government, with limited access to niternatioiial financial iiiarkets may be forced
to abort a liberalization program if hard-currency reserves are depleted too quickly. The
liberalization's lack of perfect credibility arts as a (listortiohl which becomes   (rationally)

intensified under the typical first-best policy of a (brect move to free trade. A gradual
lowering of trade barriers turns out to he welfare-superior to au inuniediate liberalization,
and to improve the chance that. the program will ultimately succeed. We then derive
the   optimal speed of liberalization, the interteuiiporal allocation of resources, and the
liberalization program's credibility.



                                                     Kenneth A. Eroot
                                                    Sloan School of Management,
                                                    Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                                    Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139

                                                     (617) 253—6623
                             Credibility, Real Interest Rates,
                      and the Optimal Speed of Trade Liberalization


                                            Kenneth A. Froot
                                     Sloan School of Management,
                                Massachusetts Institute of Techiiology
                                   Cambridge, Massachusetts fl2 139



     Given the unpopularity of tariffs among economiists, it should come as no surprise that so
many countries have been counselled to eml)ark upon allll)itiolls tra(lc lil)erali7,ation programs over
the past decade. In return for large reductions in trade barriers, conveiitional neo-classical models
and newer niodels using an intertemporal approach to commimercjal policy offer the prospect of
improvements in welfare and efficiency. To the extent that these imiodels are realistic, they make a
strong case for the vial)ility and profital)ility of immediate ami cc)lllplete tra(le liberalization.
     In an uncertain world, however, there is less cause for 01)tilnisllI than many such models would
suggest. Recent attempts at trade liberalizatioii iii the southern coiie )f Latin America, like many
earlier programs in these and other countries, have been ('ollapletely or (as in the case of Chile)
partially abandoned. Argentina and Uruguay, for example, had plaiis to establish a lower, more
uniform tariff structure with a maximum rate of 35 percent (down from several hundred percent)
and a niinimuin rate of about 10 percent. The Argentiniaii package, aiinoiinced iii December 1078,
was abandoned in 1981 and the progress that had been made was soon reversed. The Urugiiayan
plan never succeeded in i'educing trade barriers. Chile was by far the most successful in bringing
down tariffs, which reached a uniforimi level of 10 percent (excluding autos) by the end of 1079.
Since then, however, tariffs have been raise(l substantially.
     With this kind of experience as the nile, it seems our models should address the possibility that
agents will take the government's stated intention of permaiiently libcraliziiig trade with a (rational)
grain of salt. Several authors have in fact argued that recent trade lil)erahization programs in the
southern cone were not fully credible. Edwards (1084, 1085). Pastore (1082), Sjaasted (1083), and
Dornbusch (1984), for example, all point toward blataiit domestic policy inconsistencies as being
                                                    1
 J)art.ly res1)onsihlc for the programs' failures.1 Notwithstanding this colisensus, however, there has
 been    little attempt to investigate the inechaiiisms by which a lack of credibility actually makes
 failure more likely.
       This paper represents a iitore formal attempt to inject the issue of im)erfcctly credible gov—
 ernnient policy into the discussion of tariff reduction. We iiivestigate the intertemporal incentives
 in consumption and the distortions in output which are gellerate(l by fears that the liberalization
program will be short lived. In addition, we try to rank ex)licitly coitiinercial policy alternatives
by their effects on welfare, the allocation of real resources, and the level of cre(hil)ility. The anal-
ysis intentionally focuses on countries (such as iiiany LDCs today) which have limited access to
 international financial markets, in the sense that unanticipated current. account deficits iiiust be
financed by reserve depletion instead of by borrowing. The cre(lil)ility of trade reform is perhaps
most important in these countries because of their dual histories of policy reversals and severe trade
restrictions.
       Our interest lies not just in how (Ioubt.s about the p('r1I11e11ce of trade reforms contribute
to the eventual reinstatement of trade l)aI'riers. We also consider the effects of alternative, slower
speeds of liberalization on the equilibrium level of credibility. Even though such slower rates of
reform are second—best in that they represent clear deviations from the neoclassical optimum, they
arc desirable here because they turn out to lessen the dist.ortioii gciierated l)y the lack of perfect
credibility. Indeed, it turns out that in the niodel below, governuients with credibility problems
should not pursue policies that eliminate tariffs right, away. Such a findiiig is particularly surprising
in the context of our optimizing two-period fraiiiework, which tends to l)ias the results toward
complete and instantaneous liberalization even as compared with more stali(lard macro-economic
treatnieiits.2 In the modern intertemporal approach, for example, a 1)'1J1ia1i('I1t tariff reduction is
painless in the sense that it does miot result in a tra(le deficit. Once tariffs are zero, there is no
mtertemporal incentive to deviate from the neoclassical optiiinimii of balance(l tra(le.3
       The simple two—period model below treats a country winch has i'ecently removed its trade

    Dornhnsch (1984), in particular alludes to the int.ertomporal efforts geuieratel lv oxlu.rtat.jouls of higher future tariffs.
   2 Examples of the approach iaso-l in this paper include Dixit aunt Norniaui (lost)). Sveiiscoui and 11 aziui (1983), Il azili aud
Svensson (1983), Edwards and van Wijnhergen (1983), and van Wijuhergen (1084).
   3As van Wijnhergen (1983) points out, tariff reductions in LDC's may 1mph                 aIsolut.e decline in the return to capital,
sluice umports in those countries are often relatively capital iuit.eusivo. In the iiiterteuruiorat ai,i>roacli. removing tariffs once and
for all crniltl then reduce investment, leading to an m.provernent in the current arcoiuuit.

                                                                    2
    restrictions, so that tariffs are zero in the first period. If agents l)elieve that the government
   may be forced to abandon the liberalization in period two, consluners are iiicliiiecl to substitute
   consumption toward the first period and producers will on average divert more resources toward
   the inefficient import sector. These two sources of additional spending lead to a current account
   deficit, which in turn will make the government more susceptible to external shocks that deplete
   reserves. A higher percentage of the time, the authorities will lw forced to levy tariffs in an effort to
   cut imports, thereby generating badly needed hard-currency reserves. In this way, agents' disbelief
  that the policy will endure becomes self-fulfilling.
      After describing the model in section 1, section 2 goes on to derive a rational expectations
  equilibrium in which the current accoimt deficit, level of welfare, and the probability of collapse
  are endogenous. Next, we consider a more gradual liberalization program which employs I)oSitive
  first-period tariffs. It is possible to show that gradualism
                                                                   improves welfare, lowers the current
  account deficit, and raises the probability that free trade will ultimately prevail. There is a unique,
  positive first-period tariff which is welfare optimal.
      For iiiany developing countries today, particiilaiIy those with large external (lebts, l)iflding
 restrictions on international borrowing and the scarcity of hard-currency reserves fix current ac-
 counts more or less exogenously. In section 4, the effects of imperfect credibility arc investigated
 when consumers cannot substitute toward
                                              current consluliptiomi by running a larger current ac-
 count deficit.4 In these circumstances, the shadow value of saving miiust increase to equilibrate the
 expected marginal utility of real consumptioli in both periods. High real interest rates have in fact
 been a common feature of many recent liberalization attenij,ts. Here we find that more gradual
speeds of liberalization will help bring down interest rates and shift production toward the export
sector. Finally, section 5 concludes.

1. The Model
       We employ a two-period model of a small country simitilar to that of Svensson and Razin (1983),
Razin and Svensson (1982), and Edwards and van Wijnbergen (1983). There are two goods, exports
(x) and imports (rn), both of which are consumed and I)roduce(I. The small
                                                                                                    country is represented
   41n a similar two period modcl, Edwards and
                                                   van SS'ijnbergen (1983) investigate the optimal speed of liberalization for
the case in which a binding external financing constraint,
                                                           falls entirel on investment, anti secontl.perjoil tariffs are zero with
certainty.

                                                               3
by a single consumer, who maximizes eX1)CCtC(I welfare. TV = TV('y, F), where 'y = y(Cm, c) denotes
subutility in period one of the consiunptioii of imports. rfl,, an(l eXpOrts, ca.. Period two suhutility
is expressed as I' = r(G,, C).5 ' and F are assmuned to have the expected utility property and are
homothetic. Without loss of generality, ami I' can be chosen to be linearly homogeneous. Each
period's expected suhutility has an associated imit CXI)eil(litllre function, ir afl(l H, which yields the
minimum expenditure required to reach the unit level of expected slml)litility in that period, given
current prices of imports and exports:

                              lr(pm ,    , 1)   = mm {pm Cm + pc,r : I < 'i( Cm, e) } ,                                     (i)



                           ll(P70, P, 1) = miii {PIUCW + PC., : I < r(c01, C1)).

     We can think of w an(1 H as the price of obtaining a single unit. of expected subutility in
that period or as the price of a unit of real spending. 'y. F. Expressions for nominal spending are
therefore iry and [IF, the price index times the measure of real consuinptioii in that. period.
     The analogous intertemporal expenditure function, E(w, DH. TV), gives the minimum present
discounted expenditure required to achieve a fixed level of expected welfare, for given levels of the
price indexes, w and H:

                    E(x, DH, TV) = miii {2r(p.m, pr)' + DH(Pm, 1)F : W < W(, r)},                                          (ii)

where D =           is the discount factor and z is the doniestic nominal interest rate. Overall welfare,
W, is the expected utility of real consumption over 1)0th 1)eriOds.
     We will use the well-known properties of the expenditure function that its first derivative with
rcsI)cct to prices yields the Hicksian compensate(I (lelllan(I fuiiction for each gooi (here given for
period one goods and imports, respectively):

                                            Ej(7r,DH,T'V) = 'y(7r.DH.W)                                                   (iii)


                                                        = c,, (p,0     i'.i )
                                                                   1
    Thioughout the paper we use lower case letters for period one vsrial,les ,itl upper cise letters for period two variables,

                                                               4
   From the Slutsky equation, the marginal propensity to spend tinies the change in expenditure with
  respect to welfare is equal to the second derivative of the exj)en(litlIr,' function with respect to price
  and welfare:
                                               E1 9y
                                                   — = civ.
  where
                                               E1 a                                                       (iv)
          c is the marginal proJ)ensity to spend in J)rriod one nut of a ('ilange in expenditure.
       On the production side we define first- and secoild-1)erio(l (niliposite revenue functions (over
  exports and imports), q and Q, which are homogeneous of (legr(' one in each period's prices:

                        q(pTh P.T   K, L) = max {Pmi + p.Tq2 : q1. q2 are feasible },
                                                                                                          (v)
 where the own derivatives with reSI)ect to prices, q =
                                                          ?i (pm Pr:K, L) aiid q2 = q2(p11,, p; K, L)
 are the first-period supply fimctions for imports and exports, respectively (and similarly for period
 two).

 2. Expected Collapse of a Liberalization Program when Reserves are not Rationed
      With this model in mind we consider a country which has just lil)rralize(l its trade account
 by elilllinating tariffs on imports. In order to focus on the prnl)lenls LDC's may face during such
 liberalizations, we assume that the cniuiti'y is credit constraint'cI iii that the I)rivate sector does
not have direct access to to suppliers of foreign exchange. Instva(I, all l)orrowing in international
capital markets is conducte(I by the government at the beginning of period one. The initial level of
hard-currency reserves hieki by the goverilnient, 1?, inclu(les any external financing the government
has been able to arrange, and is treated here as exogenously determjne(I (though in reality it is the
outcome of a quasi—iiiai'ket bargaining
                                       process bctw('eli the goveriinjeitt and its creditors).
     In these circumstances, the government must flulance any clitrent ac coinit deficit from its stock
of reserves. (In the next section, we consider the case in which the goveriinuiif refuses or is unable to
finance the entire current account deficit, and
                                                   rations foreign exchange instead.) The government's
reserves are also used to shliel(l the private sector frnmii
                                                             lllIantici1)at(scl shocks to export revenues or
import expenditures which occur during period oiie. Thus the ex post current account deficit, or
the total reduction in governmneiit reserves, is the sum of the current accoiuit deficit the private
sector chooses plus a random shock component:


                                                                                                       (1)
                                                     5
where      is distributed normally with mean 0 and Variaiic('              At the end of the first period,
reserves are R —
     To focus on the possibility that the liberalization program will 1w abandoned, we assume the

government follows a rule—of-thumb policy in deciding whether to impose second—period tariffs. The
rule is that tariffs will be reimposed at their original pre-liberalizatioii level in period two if reserves
at the end of the first period fall below sonic critical floor, Rmj,,:


                                                 R — < I?,,.                                            (2)

Tariffs remain at zero if equation (2) is not satisfied. The prol)al)ility that the liberalization I)i'ogram
will 1)e reversed is just the probability that, equation (2) holds:

                          = P(I?,,,j,,    , z)   = proballllity{/l. > R — R,,,, — z) .                  (3)

To keel) matters simple all(I to avoid aml)iguitics, we assume that. II,,, ,, is set equal to the difference
between the initial level of reserves and the itiaximinu currciit account deficit. i.e., the deficit the
private sector would choose if tariffs were to be rcinstate(l with probability one:

                                                        z(..\ = 1).                                     (4)


Notice that even with a balanced! current account, there is still a nonzero plol)al)ility of reversal
since:

                             P( Rmiu, o, z) = prol)ahulity {p. > I? —          }   > 0.                 (5)

     The goverment's decision rule imnl)hes that the price of iniports in period two is olistributed

Linomially:
                                —

                               Pm   =    (p,           ifjt < I?— I?,,,,, —
                                                                                                        (6)
                                         p + Ti,, if p > 1? — R,,1,1 —
where    r1, is the tariff which will be ilnl)osc(l if the liberalization program fails. In the following
analysis. we take r, to be given exogenoiisly.
     Before we proceed, two other aspects of the model require elalmration. First, in this type
of welfare—based general eqiiilibriuimi model, it is often useful to limit. the absolute niagnitucle of
distortions (in our case, ii,). Large distortions result. ni large reductions in real income, and these
income effects eventually swamp the subtler substitution effects we wish to study. So, for example,

                                                        6
      a small tariff in tile iiitia period
                                         encourages agents to shift. real expencIjftl'( towards the second
    period, when the tariff will be reiiioved. As we might expect, the
                                                                            current account in period one
    shows a surplus. In an attempt to offset the negative first-pei'jo(J
                                                                            welfare effccts of a somewhat
    larger temporary tariff, however, agents begin to shift real income back
                                                                                 toward the period of the
    distortion. Utimately, when the tariff grows big enough, the
                                                                   a(Iditional borrowing in the first
   period is sufficient to swing the current account jut0 (1cfict.
                                                                   Although one could question the
   importance of such perverse marshalljan
                                             effects on the basis of their doubtful realism, we rule
   theni out here simply because tariffs are imposed by
                                                           goveruiulieuits with the intention of
                                                                                                 improving
   (and not worsening) the cujrreuit accouuiit We do not wish to considei'
                                                                                po1icic that have effects
  systematically Opposite those expected by the authorities. Therefore, in the
                                                                                  Spirit of the small (but
  fiuiite) tariff assumption we frequently
                                           express sufficient conditioums for the paper's results ill terms
  of upper bounds on the size of the tariff.
        A second aspect of the uiiodel that
                                           requires additional explanat.joui is the treatment of uncer-
  tainty. Random prices are not usually ad(lcd to interteuull)oral general
                                                                           equiilibriujuij models l)Ccause
  of the additional complexity
                               they bring. The stan(lar(I results from duality theory (Jo not generally
  hold when prices are random. For examj)le, there is no guarantee that the
                                                                               uiiatrix of Hicksian sub-
 stitution terms is negative semflj(Iefillite
                                         In the present paper, however We are able to invoke a kind
 of weak-form certainty equivalence by exploiting the l)illonhial
                                                                          distrihutioj of import prices and the
 limitations imposed on time mulagnitucle of the tariff by the suuiall tariff
                                                                              assuini1)tioI. The intuition
 for this strategy is actually a simple one. Notice that the itli
                                                                  moment of the second-period tariff,
    can be written as       () = (1     —
                                          t1)• For small tariffs and any given Prol)ahility that the
 liberalization will collapse, the higher-ordt.
                                                milommients of are insignificantly smuiall relative to the
 expectatiomi,       More precisely:

                             urn
                            r—.O                (1   —
                                                         ")r''   =   0,    Vn > 2.
                                                                                                           (7)
The  effects of a change in the prolm.bzlzty that tariffs will be levied
                                                                         in period two can be made
arbitrarily close to the effects of a known change ill the future tariff.
                                                                            For snialt enough values
of r, the signs of the sul)stituitjofl and income effects
                                                          reuulajui the same as in the certainty case,
even though the optimal choice varial)les
                                        become vastly more coiiiplex functions of the underlying
utility and production functions. Since we make no atteuiipt
                                                             in the PPer to specify the various
                                                         7
                                                       their repsec tive signs, all of the results remain
elasticities of consumption am1 produc finn heyOli(I
general enough to apply to a variety of utility an(l production fiuictions. hideed, such a treatment
of uncertainty seems particularly iiatiiral in this case, since, as we have alrea(ly noted, it is desirable

to restrict our attention to small values of r, even without introducing uncert.aiiit.y. In the first
appendix, we discuss this strategy for dealing with random future tariffs in more detail. We also
demonstrate how a restriction on the size of r is sufficient to guaraittee that. the         substitution

effects (i.e. second derivatives of the expenditure fmiction with respect to eX1)ectCd prices) have
the usual signs.
    We are now ready to apply the model of the previous section, and t.o derive the rationally
expected level of credibility, the correspon(Iilig current accoiuit, and the level of welfare under
complete liberalization. The mt,ertemporal budget constraint of the country is:

                    E( ir(pm , ps), DH( Pm, P ) W)
                                                     = q(pm ' Pr) + DQ (Pm, I) + T.                     (8)


Equation (8) requires that total expenditure is ((1ual to the 1)res(m1t (hiscounteci value of income plus
tax revenues. Revenues generated by a future tariff will 1w rrhlrmle(l to the 1)rivate sector in the
form of a lump sum transfer, T, where

                                 T D(E2fl1 — CJ) = D(C, — CJ)                                           (9)


 Cm — Q 1 represeiits net imports, or cohisllml)tion minus (lomnestic 1)roduction of the imported gooi,
                                                                           debt to the rest
 awl r = 1\r, the expected future tariff. We assume that the country has no prior
 of the world (this could easily be added). Consequently. the cnrreiit a,ccoumt (leficit is eciual to
 consumption expenditure minus total revenues from production:

                                               z=E1ir—q.                                               (10)


      To see that an imperfectly credible conimnit,iiicnt to free trade leads to a sumboptimal allocation
 of resources, we t.ake the derivative of equation (8) with respect to ,\ aud use equatioii (0) to get:

                                                      = o(i,\,                                         (11)


 where
                                (:10=
                                        rD(E2Hjj + 111E22111D —     ()
                                                1—   Dfl1C
                                                      8
      Equation (11) gives the loss in welfare attributable
                                                                               to a Ilolizero 1)rol)al)ility that future tariffs will
      be levied. Welfare declines
                                     proportionally in the i)roi)ability of a policy
                                                                                        reversal; indeed, integratjoi1
     of equation (11) gives the familiar Harberget• result that the loss in welfare is
                                                                                                 J)rOpOrtional to the
     qtiare of the distortion (i.e., the lack of 1)CI'fCCt


    proportional to the discoumfecj s1li)stitulfioli
                                                             credibility).
          The welfare effects of the Iluisaijocat ion of resources are slullIljlaIjze(l in

                                                       effect in co11s111111)fjoIj and
                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                   The ulumerator is

                                                                                       production, holding welfare
    constant. The first terni in the mimerator, E2fl11 =               is the change in the coml)ensatecl
                                                                                                             demand
    for period two imports from a change in price holding real period two
                                                                                       expeiidituii'e constant. This
    captures the Zfltratemporal substitution in consum1)tioli of exj)nrts for imports. The second
                                                                                                               term,
    IIi E H1 D              is the change in period two real si)en(Iing from a change in the
                                                                                                    J)rice of
   imports, weighted by the share of imports in spending. This terni represents the
                                                                                            transfer of real
   income across periods in response to price changes. The third terni, —Q
                                                                                  is the negative valuation
   effect on imports realized as a result of the (histortioii. Taken
                                                                     togetliei these three terms      coml)rise
   flue colnl)dnsated siibstjtutjoui effects of the expected future tariff: all
                                                                                represent welfare losses.0
        It is worth mentioning the effects on productioii as well. On the margin,
                                                                                      olItJ)ut of the imported
  good is expected to rise by P Q11                    while output of exports is ('xperte(l to fall by
                                                                                                        au equivalent
  amount,7 PQ21. The standard iiicchanjsm linking the oultJ)llt of
                                                                                               illIJ)OI't5 aul(l exports is the wage-
   rental ratio, w, winch decreases with higher import
                                                         prires. The effect of cxec ted price changes
  on the composition of output can be seen in Figure 1, the fanuiliar Saiwielson
                                                                                     diagram. With zero
  expected future tariffs, the terms of trade stand at m
                                                           (01r('sponding to an output mix at point B
  (where A represents complete specialization in exports and D
                                                                   lepreseults coiiiplete specialization in
 imports), given the capitahlal)oI' ratio of the economy, k. An increase in tariffs lowers the
                                                                                                 expected
 terms of trade to p'. lowers w and moves the outJ)lit iruix to point C, where
                                                                                more imports and fewer
 exports are produced than before.

    6 The overall eWect of
                            the expecte,l future tariff on welfare will he
is satisfied. An llIlIlecessarjh.                                          i gative provirliiig the staj,jlity coii,litin I —  i (]w > 0
                                  strong hut, sufficjej, conhitioij for this is if flip
positive, that is, if DflC1 < 1. To see this note that                                itiargijial Jropeitsjfv to i'nd in hioth peods is


                                         TDflICIF
                                                        nrjlDflC < nr        IC,,,    P,,,C,,,
                                                                                     <—_<1
                                                                                        nr'

    These two term.s canc exactly only for
                                                       infinitesimal chialiges in relative prices. For discrete
olitl)flt, is zero only for first, orilrr aI)proxiinatioris                                                     changes, the change in total

                                                                    9
                              Figure 1

    The Effects of Expected Future Tariffs on
        the Expected Period Two Output Mix




L

    k




                                         I'

                 \
                     NN
                      N
                          N




                                                Pr
                                                     J
          To see the effects of a change iii tile
                                                           probability of a policy reversal on the current account we
    differentiate equation (10) and use equation (11) to get:

                                                            dz
                                                                 = a1 — a2\,
                                                                                                                                    (12)
    where

                                                       a1        wE12H1D     >0



                                                       a2 = —7rCwao > 0.

        The first term in equation (12), a1, is tile sum of the
                                                                colnpellsate(j ifltertempoi.al substitution
  effects in cOnsurnptioii; it tends to increase unambiguously the
                                                                     current account deficit. The intuition
  is that higher expected tariffs raise the aggregate level of
                                                                   I)rices in the second period and lower
  the real conslimptioli rate of interest, I + r =
                                                      . The incentive to save is therefore reduced
 and consumption is transferred toward the first period. Also, the
                                                                              lower the credibility of the
 liberalization program, tile greater the Inisaliocatioji of real
                                                                  resources toward the inefficient import
 sector.

     The second terni in equation (12), —a2,\, which is
                                                         negative, reflects tile decrease in total
 income from the distortion weighted by the marginal
                                                     I)ropensity to spend in period one and the
 expected tariff. A decrease in total income reduces real spending iii
                                                                          every period,8 which improves
the current account. Notice that if tile tariff becomes too large, the
                                                                         second term will dominate, and
the expected future tariff will improve the first-period current
                                                                     account. As we mentioned at the
beginning of this section, tile negative income effects of large tariffs
                                                                         swamp the substitution effects,
and ultimately result in current account balances that
                                                            are lint sensible. We therefore                          use as an

by tue income effects: 0 <
effects, a1, induce a marginal
                                ,<        .
uPper bound on the size of tile tariff the point, at which tile slIi)stitlltioil effects

                                               Note that
                                                                                                      are just cancelled out
                                                             at the margin = 0, the ilitertenhl)ol.al substitution
                                 current account deficit regardless of the size of ii,.
      To find the approximate deviation in the level of the curreiit
                                                                       account fi•1 the zero expected
tariff equilibrium, we integrate equatioii (12) to get
                                                       an expression which is once again
                                                                                         approximately
   Nominal spiiding will the less than
                                         proportionately in the period with the tariff. anil fall al,solijtply in the other peo4.

                                                              10
a qua(IratiC:9
                                                  z) — a1A —                                                                (13)

                                                                                  account deficit is an
Equation (13) is graphed in Figure 2. Given our restrietioll on r1,, the current
                                                                             fail.'0
increasing ftmction of the probability that the liberalization program will
     We can now solve for the rational expectations equilibrium of the model by coIlll)iniflg equations

(3) and (13). A linear approximation    to A in equatioli (3), is USe(I for the algebraic solution since

the cmnulative normal (listribution is not tractal)le analytically:"

                                              A V(X,c,z) a + a4z,                                                            (14)


where
                                    a3 = a3kJ4nin, Os,)
                                                          2.     _______     < U.          >
                                                                 ( -Join             (7,


                                                2
                                    a4 = a4(R,0i0,     : — > 0.
                                                   ,i)8Rmin                                > 0.

                                                            levels of credibility, A*. and the current accrnmt deficit,
 Equations (3) and (13) now give equilibrium

                                        —1 a4(a2a3 — ai) + ((a,a4 — 1)2 + 2a2a3a4)                                             (15)
                         A =a3+
                           +
                                                                        2a


                                                        —
                                                            ai) + ((aia4 — j)2 + 2a2a3a4)
                               z= —1 — a4(a2a3
                               *
                                                                       2
                                                                                                                               (16)


 The scaling restriction in equation (2) is sufficient to imply that a1a4 < 1, a1 > a2, and a3 < 1,
 so that A and      are both positive. Also, from e(luat.iolls (11) and (13), we have that the loss in
  welfare due to the imperfect credibility is:

                                                       LW = _.2-A*2 .                                                          (17)
                                                                  2 ET-

       The integration performed in equation (13) holds i and 02 fixed     (white in fact they may vary with ), and therefore
                                                                      siinpiificatin is in the deiioiniitator of on. which may be
   jelils an approximation to the current account. The most olwiousto the marginal ProPe1y to save times the share of tariff
  written explicitly as a function of ). The term rDfl1 C is equal
  revenues in total second-period spending, flC0 ,\       winch is small, and thus the deuiuuniitator chaiiges very little for small
                                                             accounting for this effect. lout the aublitional complication chops not
  tariffs. We could perform the integration in equation (ia)
  change       of the results, and is omitted here.                           fl.aziui attil Sveuusson (1082), auid Edwards and van
    '°These results are comparal)le to those of Svensson and Raziti (1083),
  Wijnbergen (1983) who show, for the case of no uncertainty, that future tariffs tetuul to increase the flrst-1,priod current account
  deficit by lowering the real consumption rate of interest.
      This approximation is merely a convenience to avoid more complex algeicra.

                                                                  11
         Figure 2




I




    •0
                    1
     More intuition about the eqiulibrmm caii 1)C gained from a graph than from the algebraic
solution. Figure 3 displays the current account and probability of collapse given in equations (13)
and (5). As one might expect, greater iutert.empOral sul)stitutal)ilit.y in COflsUmI)tiOfl raises the
edpulil)rium current account. and I)rol)a)iIity of collapse. From equation (17), the lack of credibility
imposes larger welfare losses when these mtert.emporal transfers are more readily itiade. An increase
in the world interest rate predictably reduces the current accouiit (leficit (since any given future
surplus finances a smaller current deficit) and lowers                   ami 1T'. Fiiially, increases in uncertainty
about. the future level of reserves (which raise the intercept an(l the slope of the P curve in equation
(14)) yield a higher probability of collapse, a greater current account deficit, and a lower level of
welfare.

2.1. A Second Best Argument for a Slower Rate of Trade Liberalization
     The model above can now be use(I to investigate the justificat.ioii for positive first-period tariffs
as a second—best tool for reducing the distortion introduced by a lack of perfect credibility. Such
temporary tariffs may be added to the foregoing analysis by rewritiiig equations (8), (9), and (10)
as follows:

                                 E(ir,DH,W) —_q(p,i,,p)+DQ(Pm,Pz)+t+T                                                         (18)



                                                     t = rj(Eirrj — q,)                                                       (19)

                                                   T = D(E2 Hi — Qi)

                                                       z=—+Eiir,                                                              (20)

where t represents the lump sum transfer of revenues front the first-period tariff. Equation (20) is
similar to (10), the hats indicate that the trade deficit is eValUate(l at interiiational prices instead
of at distorted domestic prices.'2 Differentiating equation (18) and using (19) we have the change
in welfare resulting from a change in r1:

                                                 E1dW= rDJ\ + r1c                                                             (21)
                                                    dr,          1—A—C)
  12 This complicates matters since the usual duality expressions imist. lie aitiended. For example, ott the production side first.
period production in international prices is, q pqj + q. A change in the tariff alters domestic 1,roduct.ion decisions, but
international prices remain fixed, q = p,,qi I+q21. Tue domestic marginal rate oftrancfnri,tat.ion sat.icfles (p,+ri)qi i+q = 0.
The change in the value of domestically produceil goods is therefore given by q = —r1 qi p.

                                                                12
    ITJ
    I-a.


    '1
>   ID
    where
                                           J = H1E21ri > 0                                          (22)

                                     =   E1ir11   + w1E11r1 — < 0

                                           A=DI1jCTV >0

                                            0=     rrc > 0.
    The variable J on the right-hand side of equation (21) captures the intertemporal substitution
effect. Although it arises from the introduction of a new first period tariff, it acts to rai.5e welfare.
Welfare improves because the real consumption rate of interest,         (which is "too" low due to the
anticipation of future tariffs), rises with r1. Consumption is theii shifted toward the future and
the current account improves. Though the intertemporal distortion created l)y low credibility is
mitigated by the imposition of r1, there are obvious costs: a new (histortion in the first period is
introduced. The second term in equation (21) captures the reduction iii welfare attributable to the
intratemporal distortions produced by the first-period tariff. This term is 1)1oI)O1tiOflal to r1, so
that, overall, a marginal first-period tariff teiids unambiguously to unprove welfare.
     Equation (21) also implies that there is a unique first-period tariff which maximizes welfare.
Setting (1W = 0, we have:



                                              Ti*t) =                                               (23)


where
                                                    r, D .1
                                            a8 =
                                                     —c
                                                              >•                                    (24)


Figure 4 shows a graph of r(), the welfare maximizing temporary tariff, which is strictly 1)ositive
for all non—zero ). The reason r is increasing in A is that the higher is the probability of failure,
the greater is the distortion in the consumption rate of interest, and the more it is worth the cost of
incurring a second distortion (in the form of a tariff in period one) which will reduce the distortion
in the real consumption rate of interest. For any given level of cre(hi1)ility, the government can raise

welfare by liberalizing more slowly.
                                                     13
                        Figure 4

The Optimal Tariff as a Function of the Probability of Reversal




                                          /\
     We now turn to the effects of temporary tariffs on the cnrreiit account deficit. By differentiating
equation (20) with respect to r1 and using equation (22). we have:

                                                     dz
                                                     —  = —a0 — a7r1,                                                         (25)
                                                     dr,

where
                                                     f     + — rDc11H1E12r,    \ 0
                            a6 =    —(ir
                                           —
                                                                        — -
                                               rir,)(E,,ir, 1 — TilriclV rH,(w ) >
                                                                                                                              (26)


                                                               —
                                                                    r,ir,)(E,irii + 7r1E117r1 — q,,
                         a7=—q,,+Eirii                                                 -
                                                                    1 —    r,rlc- —
      The terni a0 captures the iutert.Clfll)Oral effects of the first-period tariff on expenditure and
welfare. The tariff shifts spending toward the second period as the real consumption rate of interest
rises; a0 will be positive as long as r1 is not too large.'3 Tariffs today will therefore offset the
suboptimal reduction in the real consumption rate of interest caused by 1)OsitiVe eXI)eCted tariffs
tomorrow. The incentive to save increases and the current account. improves.'4
     If we evaluate equation (25) at the optimal tariff as defined in equation (23), it can be shown
that the current account improves for all r1 < r1. From this fact, it follows that the level of the
temporary tariff which maximises the current account, call it. j,                              is   greater thaii the level of the

optimal temporary tariff, r1. This imiakes sense intuitively because for r1                                       expenditure is

transferred on the margin toward the first period. Welfare imist alrea(Iy 1)e di'clining.
       The approximate iniprovemdnt in the current account. (leficit froni positive first period tariffs

can be obtamed by integrating eqiiatioii (25) over r1:

                                                  z(rj) = —a0rj — a7r.                                                         (27)

    51\tore explicitly, o will be positive as long as:

                                                              -e, + —
                                                         2rcT1—     nr <1.
 where 4" is the share of tariff revenue in first period spending and !'! is the expecteil share of tariff revenue in second
 period.s)ending. A sufficient condition for this equatioii to hold is for tariff revenues to be lessthan 50 I)ercetit of nominal
 spending in each period.
   14 The second parameter, c*, is less important for smaller r1. This term reflects changes iii current consurnptioii and
 production due to the temporary tariff. The sign of 4*7 is ambiguous, bt will lie positive as long as the interteinporal
 substitution effects are "large" in comparison with the first, prio4l ijitrateinporal substitiitioii effects. To make this l)rise, (*7
 will he positive if:
                                                    rEi 11r1 > (1   —    xrn')(qi i — Er1 i)



                                                                    14
         It is convenient to define a function which allows us to see how
                                                                          changes in first-period tariffs
    affect the current account as ) varies:

                                                          = z(1\) + zz(r1)
                                                                                                                         (27')


                                           =        — a2\ — a6r1 —

         Figure 5 demonstrates the effect on the
                                                 current account of first-period tariffs (equation                    (27')).
   An increase in the probability that the
                                          liberalization i)rogralll will collapse, from
   the tradeoff between current account deficits and first-period tariffis. shifting the
                                                                                                     .   to   .,   worsens

                                                                                                    z curve out and to
   the right.15 Figure 6 shows how the tradeoff between current accoinit deficits and
                                                                                                      a lack of perfect
   credibility improves with the a(Iclition of sinaI!
                                                            temporary tariffs. lii z-, -space, the z curve shifts
   down when first-period tariffs are imposed.
       We now have three equations in three unknowns: the current account deficit,
                                                                                       z, the probability
  of collapse of the liberalization program, ), and the oI)tuhlal tvnLporary tariff, r:

                                     z(ri, .) = a1\ —              —       —
                                                                                                                       (28)



                                                      rA) = a..\                                                       (20)



                                            = P(Rmin,ii,z) = a3 + 4Z.                                                 (30)
       Figure 7 characterizes the welfare maximizing solution.
                                                                           In the upper right-hand quadrant are
 the P (equation (30)) and z (equation (28)) curves. They intersect initially at the instantaneous
 liberalizatioii equilibrium, point A. In the lower—right quadrant is a 45 degree line,
                                                                                                     mapping \ into
 itself. The third quadrant contains the           r curve (equation (20)), which translates a given level
of credibility into an implied optimal first-period tariff. Finally. in the
                                                                                         upper left is the z curve
in z-, ri-space (equation (28)), which reports the curiejit account, deficit associated with different
first-period tariffs, given values of ) generated by intersections of the P and z
                                                                                  curves in the first
quadrant.
  For simplicity this curve is drawn downward sloping. At levels of r ahov(' the olt.iinal
negative and the z curve, drawn in z, r1as
                                         space, begins to slope upward.
                                                                                           tariff, however,   07 l)CCOIflCS


                                                          15
                               Figure 5

    The Change in the Current Account from a Shift in the Probability of
               Reversal as a Function of First—Period Tariffs




2
                          Figure 6

The Change in the Current Account from a Shift in First—Period Tariffs
          as a Function of the ProbabilitY of Reversal
    Figure 7




         2     p




                   Z(t0')




z
          Consider now what happens if the liberalization proceeds iiiore slowly. Positive tariffs in period
   one shift the z curve in the firt quadrant down. This defines a new intersection of the P and z
   curves at a lower current account deFicit and lower , marked l)y J)oint B. Moving in a clockwise
   direction into the third quadrant, the r curve gives the optimal temporary tariff. In the
                                                                                                                       upper left
   quadrant, the value of the optimal tariff is translated into a corresl)onding current accoirnt deficit.
   If the deficit is the same as that generated by the intersection of the z and P
                                                                                   curves, we have
   found the fixed point B. If it is not, we try a higher (or lower) r,
                                                                                        shifting the z curve further down
   (or up). The fixed-point values, r1,        z,     the optimal speed of liberalization, the optimal
                                                            give
  current accoimt deficit, and the resulting degree of credibility, given the underlying parameters R,
                     It is straightforward to show that 0 < z <                    z, 0 < ,\** < , and 0 < rr.                   A
  liberalization program which removes tariffs directly and has less than perfect credibility
                                                                                                                           can be
  improved upon by slowing the speed at which tariffs arc reduced.
       It is also possible to do some comparative statics with this model, An increase in the level
  of reserves, will raise Rmj, and lower z, .A, rr as shown in Figure 8. Here the P curve shifts
  left (its slope decreases as well) anti the z curve in z-,             r1-space   shifts down, since the improvement
 in credibility implies that at any given level of r1, the curreiit account deficit will be lower. The
 initial optimum is given by A, r1 and            z
                                              and the new optimum by           r and z*. Greater
 international liquidity, evidenced by a lower level of                       will have the same qualitative effect on
 the equilibrium: the P curve shifts to the left as the program's susceptibility to trade balance shocks
 improves. The higher the level of reserves, and the easier it is to negotiate additional international
 lending, the greater the optimal speed of liberalization. An increase in the variance of unexpected
 shocks to reserves, , shifts the P curve in a differeiit maimer, shown in Figure 9. The result is
 that z, A, r1 all increase: the optimal rate liberalization is even slower.
        It is worth stressing that on average imiore resources are devoted to exj)orts in period two
when the liberalization proceeds gradually thaii whmemi the liberalization is immediate. In terms of
Figure 1, temporary tariffs cause a smaller decrease iii the expected relative p11cc of exports and
wage/rental ratio, so that the shift in resources towardimports is less pronounced. This reallocation
of resources is important since one uiotivation for undertaking a liberalizatiomi
                                                                                                       program in the first
  t6BCcaUSe the algebraic solutions for
here,                                     ,   , and   r   are   rnml"'rsome aiiil yi'hl no athIif.ijjal insights, they are omitted


                                                            16
                  Figure 8

An Increase in Reserves Shifts the PP Curve Left



                      I                     &
                                            U?


            2                                      2
                     Figure 9
An Increase in Uncertainty in International
                                            Markets


                             I




     I




                        >'
place is to boost the allocation ci rrsonrces in export sectors.

3. Expected Collapse of a Liberalization Program when Reserves are Rationed
     The previous section explored the kind of difficulties whicli confront a less than fully credible
removal of tariffs when domestic reserves are made available to fiuiaiice the private sector's current
account deficit. Frequently, however, reserves are rationed by the government, so that additional
borrowing by the private sector is not I)OSSil)le. In this section we look at the effects of an incredible
liberalization when the current account is fixed by the authorities. The private sector's excess
demand for loans in the initial I)eriod is vitiated1 iii the lIio(Iel 1)elow by a rise in the domestic
interest rate, which compensates individuals who would otherwise want to consume more in the

first periO(I. The budget constraint now becomes

                                                                                                      (31)



                                          T = D(E2H1      —                                           (32)

where D* =         and i   is the nominal world rate of interest. In equation (31), we treat the higher
 domestic interest rate as a tax on first period borrowing. The term (D* —D)(Q — E2H) represents
 the redistribution of the revenues fromim the tax. We assume that. these taxes are calculated in terms
 of real goods, evaluated at period-two domestic p'5• The cimiTelit accoiuit constraint is given by

                                           2 = D*(Q — E211),                                          (33)

 where the hats indicate that the current account is fixed in terimis of international currency. To see
 how the domestic discount rate varies in respomise to positive expecte(1 future tariffs we differentiate

 equations (31) and (32) using (33):
                                                              —
                 (1 + (D* — D)N — Da,\ (D* — D)F                  ?(DB + V)'\ (EwdW                   ( 4)
                             N — aA                       F—               )      dD


                                   ((_(D* — D)(V + G) + DC)r
                                               ('C—G)i                 F
      where
                                             a = rfliCn' > 0                                          (35)

                                                     17
                                                            B=fl1E22H<0
                                                 C H1E22FID + E2H11 — Q11 <0

                                                            F=rIE22rI<o
                                                          C = flE22ITD <0

                                                             N=llCTT.>o

                                                         V=E2HI_QI>0
   Applying Cramer's rule to equation (34), some algebra yields the solutions:

               EwdW =                 —
                                          rfl)(D — D*)v + ?(D* 2D)(CB — FC) + V(C —
                                                                                                                                    (36)


    dD = (c(1 — (2D — D*)N) — G(1 —
                                                            Da) — (D* —                      — (a — N)(D*        —
                                                                                                                     D)V)d.        (37)
  The determinant of the matrix on the left-hand side of (34), ,
                                                                                        is
                                                                       negative as shown in Appendix 2.
  Appendix 3 gives gives explicit limits On the size of r4, to guarantee that EV
                                                                                    < 0 in equation (36).
  It is easy to be convinced on an intuitive level that welfare should fall.
                                                                             As individuals' expectations
  of future tariffs increase, the
                                expected distortion rises and so welfare is reduced. This seemingly
 obvious result is complicated in the above equation because the domestic
                                                                               interest rate is free to
 fluctuate in response to pressure on the current account, and will
                                                                     1)resumably do so in a way that
 tends to raise welfare al)ove what it would have been if it were fixed.
       Equation (37) gives the response of the interest rate to changes in
                                                                           expected future tariffs.
 The lack of perfect credibility lowers
                                    time consumption rate of interest and
                                                                          encourages consumption,
causing the current account constraint to bind
                                               more severely. Consequelitly, interest rates must rise
in order to compensate individuals for the iltimediate consumption
                                                                   they otherwise would desire.17
      Figure 10 demonstrates this mechanism using the P and z curves from the
                                                                                                               previous section.
Now, however time ex ante current account is pegged at Z. At point B time
                                                                                                   current account Constraint
     If the expected tariff becomes too large,
                                               however, thou once again the luegative welfare effects
first-period consumption falls, the current account                                                        swamp the results: desired
therefore negative and interest rates rise with \ if constraint becomes less binding. ais.l the iuuterest, rate fails. Equation (37) is

                                      I_p <
                                                            ii2ff5j
                                              0(1 — Da) + (D* — D)aG + (a —
                                                                               N)(D — D)V



                                                                 18
                                   Figure 10

                  Domestic Interest Rates and the Closed Capital Account




         2




I        2




             I       I
              I


              I      I
              I




    1'




                                     L
   is just binding, so that, V = D' and, from equation (11),
                                                                        -.  The equilibrium, ,\
                                                                                                    ( point
   C), has associated with it a domestic interest    rate which exceeds the world rate (point D). Althoigh
   it is not tractable analytically, it is in principle possible to integrate (37) from
   the domestic interest differential, D —
                                                                                             -  to   to get


                                          L(2,   )        f dD(A)d.                                       (38)



  From equation (37), aL(Z,)             9L(z,\)
                         —a-—— < 0 and ———- > 0. Figure 10 also shows the effect      on the domestic
  interest rate of a change in the borrowing constraint from 2 to 2'. Whieji the
                                                                                 current accoimt fixed
  at 2', interest rates begin to rise at point E' instead of point E. At a given level of
                                                                                           credibility, the
  equilibriuni domestic interest rate is falls wlieii the capital constraint is loosened: point D' implies
 a lower interest rate than D, Welfare improves
                                                      unambiguously.
 3.1. A Slower Rate of Liberalization when
                                           Reserves are Rationed
        Now we can proceed to analyze the optimal speed of liberihiz,atioii when
                                                                                     reserves are rationed.
 The budget constraint is similar to equation (31):

                        E(w, DH, W) = q + DQ + t + T + (D — D)(Q
                                                                             E211)                       (39)

                                          T = DI(E2H1       —
                                                                Qi                                       (40)
                                           t = r1(Eir1 — q1),
                                                                                                         (41)
with t representing first-period tariff revenues. The current account is given by equation
                                                                                                 (33):

                                          2= D*( - E2ñ),
                                                                                                     (42)
Taking the derivative of equations (39) and
                                                 (42), and using equations (40) and (41) we have:
           I1+(D*_D)N_Da —o (D—D)F_r(V+Dfl)_r1H\
                  N—(z\                                                            (E11rdW
                                  F—ill                                         )k    (ID                43




where
                                =              Jff
                                   (D,J + en — (D           —
                                                                D)H d


                                                     19
                                                         a = rHiGi > 0                                                              (44)

                                                         0 = r1nc > 0

                                                         B=fl1E2211<0
                                                = Er11 + w1E1jir1 — q11 < 0

                                            C llE2flD + E21111 — Q,i <0

                                                         F=11E22fl<0
                                                         H = 7r1E12J1 >        0

                                                          N=flC11>0
                                                         J HE2iwi > 0
                                                      V=E2111—Q1>0.

Equation (43) yields:
                             EwdW =
                                dr1
                                    --rj(c(F —              D) + H(.J — H)) + V(.Jr — H)                                            (45)



                                        =
                                            --(J     —   H + ri(c(a — N) — 0(.J —H))).                                              (46)
                                  dr1
Setting (45) equal to zero and solving for the optimal tariff iii periO(l one, WC Ol)taifl

                                                                =           > 0,                                                    (47)
                                                                    a 10

      where
                                                         = —r,V(JT — H) > 0                                                         (48)

                                            a10 = (c(F    —
                                                              B) + H(J — H)) > 0.                                                   (49)

      The optimal tariff is once agaili increasing and approxiinat.'ly liiicar iii : wheii credibility is
low, more can be gained from instituting larger first-pcriod tariffs.'8
   ln equation (48), jO appears to have an ambiguous sign. A simple coIit.intity argument serves to show that it must be
positive. The fact that 1e, is greater than zero implies that the change in welfare from a first period tariff, evaluated when rj
                                                                                i
is zero, is unambiguously positive. As long as the first, (lerivative of welfare is coxitinitoils, snisli increases in the level of r1 will
raise the level of welfare. Thus, at least for small first. period tariffs, °iO positiVi'.

                                                                    20
         Next we consider the behavior of iiiteret
                                                          rates when tariffs are imposed in the initial period.
    From equation (46) we have:
                                               dD
                                               dr,
                                                     = iI       12Ti,
                                                                                                           (50)
        where

                                        a11     --(rfl1 — ri)riE21 > 0
                                                                                                           (51)


                               a12 =            — H)(iE2111i. — C11r) > 0.
        Equation (50) implies that interest rates will fall as a result of higher
                                                                                    temporary tariffs provided
   that r1 < u. A simple intuitive argument serves to denionstrite that the domestic
                                                                                                 interest rate
  remains above the world rate at the
                                           optimal tariff, r. The only benefit to raising r1 comes from a
  decline in the interest rate ( is fixed). The cost of such a policy is the
                                                                                 temporary distortion that
   tariffs induce. At the point where r1 =
                                              ll,  the benefits of raising tariffs further are zero, but the
  costs of the added distortion are positive. It follows that welfare
                                                                         can be at a maximum only when
  the benefits are still positive, i.e. that T1 < Ji-.
      From equation (50) we can integrate over r1 to obtain:


                                 L(2, , r1)     L(, ) — a11T1 + a12r,                                    (52)

 which gives the level of the interest rate for given values of ,
                                                                  r1, and 2.
     We can now solve for the optimal first-period tariff and the
                                                                    equilibrium level of credibility and
 domestic interest rate. There are three equations and three unknowns:

                                       =                  2) = a3 + a4Z
                                                                                                        (53)


                                                      =
                                                          a10                                           (54)



                              L(Z, , r1) = DD(Z, ) — a11r1 + a12m- .
                                                                                                       (55)
    The solution is displayed in Figure 11. Note that
                                                                is detcrxiiiiiecj by 2 and equation (53), so
that the above system is
                           recursive. Given ), equation (54) yields the o1)timal tariff, rj. Equation
                                                     21
 Figure 11   F




ji!




                 L
(55) then gives the equilibrium domestic interest rate, i. When flit' current account is fixed by
government fiat and domestic interest rates are consequently driven above
                                                                                world rates, gradual
liberalization appears to be the optimal policy in the face of imperfect credibility.
     In many cases, a reduction in the speed of liberalization will ease pressure on the current
account constraint, and in some cases the constraint will no longer bind. If this occurs, we are in
the situation described in section 2, and the tendency for tciiipoiary tariffs to improve welfare and
the efficiency of resource allocation is strengthened over and above the argumeiits presented in this

section, since first-period tariffs purchase both reductions iii the doiiiestic interest rate as well as
improvements in credibility.




                                                22
4. Conclusions
    When the private sector can obtain hard currency to huiaiicc its desired current account deficit,
an imperfectly credible and immediate attempt to liberalize trade results in a positive current
account deficit and rational positive probability that the liberalization will ultimately fail. Positive
expected future tariffs tend to increase future production opportuiiitiesin the import sector relative
to the export sector. The imperfect credibility built into our imiodel thus tends to undermine one
important motivation for removing tariffs to 1)egin with: to shift 1roductive resources out of the
protected import sector and into the efficient export sector.
     A slower rate of trade liberalization can increase welfare over the equilibrium in (1), as long
as the temporary first-period tariffs are not too large. This equilibrium dominates that of the
instantaneous liberalization in that the current account deficit is smaller, z <         z, the probability
of the program's failure is lower,         < ), and welfare is greater. There is a unique (positive)
first-period tariff which maximizes intertemporal welfare. Second period 1)rOduCtiofl in the import
sector is on average lower with such temporary tariffs. Thus, a mimore gradual S1)Ced of liberalization
may actually help encourage a shift of resources from the import sector into the export sector.
     For the case in which the current account is collstraine(l by rationing of reserves, imperfect
credibility translates into domestic interest rates that are above those in the rest of the world.
We show that in such circumstances, an immediate and comI)lete tariff reduction is inferior to a
more gradual approach. When such temporary tariffs are imposed, the domestic, interest rate is
lower than it would be under instantaneous liberalization (but it remains aboVe the world rate).
Time behavior of the interest rate in this instance indicates that it. is particularly problematic for
countries with foreign exchange constraints to liberalize successfully. When high interest rates force
down the capital stock in the export sector, it becomes all time niore difficult to obtain fresh loans.
Thus, in the common case in which a current account constraint is a coiiseiuciicc of a low level of
reserves and too little international liquidity, an incre(Iible Iil)erali/,atiOli I)10gra111 iiiay usii further
into the future the day whemi voluntary lending and borrowing call be reSlUfle(1.




                                                      23
    5. Appendix 1
        In this appendix we investigate fnrther the treatment of uncertainty used in the text.
                                                                                                    Our
   basic problem is to determine the comparative statics of the model discussed in section
                                                                                             two when
   A, the probability that the liberalization
                                               program will fail, changes. Because the Consumption
   and production problems for
                                 our sinai! country are formally identical, we need to look at a single
   example only. Here we investigate the maximization of period two subutility:

                                          max {r(C.m, C,.) : P,0 C,,, + (y = y}         ,
                                                                                                                       (A1.1)
   where g is second-period real income, which is taken as fixed by the
                                                                        consumer. By substituting in
   the budget constraint, we can rewrite (A1.1) as

                                                  max (r (C,,,,      — ,, C, ) }.                                     (Al. 2)
        The first order condition is:

                                                     E[r1}        E[r21',,,] ,                                        (A1.3)
  where Fm =      E[J = p,, + Am-n. To find expected utility, we take                 Taylor series expalisions around
          F,,,:

                                      E[r1 — r22C,,,(1,,, — i) + r122(i,,, —
                                                                                            t)2c,,]                  (A1.4)



   E[,r21 E[PmP2 + (F,J22Cm +                                 —
                                                                   Fm)   + (r222c, — 2r22C111)(,,, — P2]
 where the bars indicate that utility is evaluated at the expected price level.19
                                                                                                      By taking expecta-
 tions, (A1.4) becomes

                                                  E[r1j = r1 + r122(Tc,
                                                                                                                    (A1.5)


                                E[P70r2J          p,,,r2 + P,0r222a2c, 2r22c
Substituting (A1.5) into (A1,3) gives the first order condition expressed in terms of the first
                                                                                                two
moments of Pm:

                           Fm +                    = (F2 + r222a2c.,)pm
                                                                                    (7,,,2F22 .                    (A1.6)
 'For simplicity, we limit this demo,istratjo,,
                                                   to second order expansions. Providing that the higher order de%tives of t
exist, longer expansions still satisfy proposition A.!
                                                    below.

                                                             24
To find the pure substitution effect,         we   take the total derivative of equation (Al.6) with

respect to A. The resulting expression contains derivatives of expected utility, and income and
substitution effects. To eliminate the income effects, we a1)prOXilflat.e the level of eXI)eCted utility

by a Taylor series expansion,
                                        E[F1 F + 2cr2,                                            (Al.7)

and take the derivative of (A1.7) with respect to A for a givell level of expected utility. Combining
the derivatives of equations (Al.6) and (Al.7) yields the pure SU1)StitlltiOfl effect:

                                 = (F11 — 2P F21 + m i'22) (P2 +             ,                    (AL8)

                                                                 substitution effect, and 'P is
where the first term on the right-hand side is the certainty equivalent

0(0) in r:

       =   4A(1 — A)C(F1221 — 2PFj222 + PP2222) + A(l — A)h1j(2Cm(l'122
                                                                                  —
                                                                                      '3m222)   + F22)


                    —A(1 — A)c, P222 + (1 — 2A)(C,(F122 P, F222) + c7P22)
                                                       —



             —   (I — 2A)(cr22)(r12 — PmF22 + '2c2 (F1222 — P,,,r2222) + a2CF222)
                                            "2 + l2c2 P222
 The sign and magnitude of 'P will depend upon the specific utility function chosen. Notice that,
 by continuing the Taylor series expansions in equations (Al.4) and (Al.7) out i)CyOlld the second
 order, 'P would remain 0(0) in r. We then have:
     Proposition Al. If          < 0, then a necessary and sufficient condition for the own sub-

 stitution effect to be negative is that      < —P2W. If 'P_i 0, then no restriction on r, is

 required.
     Proof. Note by inspection that if 'P 0, then the usual convexity assumptions imply that
 equation (Al.8) is negative. If, on the other hand. 'I' < 0, the restriction in Proposition Al is
 necessary and sufficient.




                                                    25
  6. Appendix 2
      Here we outline the conditions required to show that            the determinant on the right-hand
 side of (34), is negative. From equation (34) after collecting terms we have that


                                                                                                 (A2.1)

 Since this appears of indeterminate sign some manipulation is required. First we show that, for
 small values of

                                           F   —
                                                   \rB < 0 .                                     (A2.2)
 Using the definitions in (35) we substitute into (A2.2)

                                       JTE22I —
                                                                                                 (A2.3)

which then becomes:

                                       ITE22H(1 —
                                                                                                (A2.4)
which is unambiguously negative. The second terni in              is unambiguously positive, so that we
must again restrict r:
                                      O<r" < (F—— B)                                            (A2.5)
                                                   —(N     (l)V
to ensure that     is negative.




                                                   26
7. Appendix 3
    Here we give sufficient conditions that equation (36) is negative. First we demonstrate that the
second term, which appears to be ambiguous in sign, i" since FC — BG > 0. Substituting
from the definitions in (35) we have

               (11E22n)(111E22111D + E21111 — Qii) > (fl1E22H)(DflE22H1D).                      (A3.1)


Some algebra gives us an expression with only positive ternis:

                                  11E22flE21111 + 11E2211Q11 > 0,                               (A3.2)


    The last term in equation (36), V(C — C), is also ambiguous in sigh. Once again a sufficient
condition may be obtained to ensure that rV(?G — C) is positive by restrictil1g the size of the tariff:

                                                    11E2211
                               0<r <      H1E22HD + E21111 — Qi
                                                                                                (A3.3)




                                                  27
8. References

    Calvo, Guillerujo, "On the Time
                                      Cousisteiicy of Optimal Policy in a Monetary Economy,"
        Econometrjca, vol. 46 no 6., 1978.

                   CC the Costs of Teiiiporary Liberalization
         Columbia University, Sptemher 1985.                  / Stabilizatjoij Experiments,"

   Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos, ccGoodl)yc Financial Repression, Hello Financial Crash," Columbia
        University, March, 1984.

   Dornhusch, Rudiget-, "Real Interest Rates, Home Goods and Optimal External
       Journal of Political Economy, vol. 9!, no 1, pp. 141-53, February, 1983. Borrowing,"

                  , "External
                              Debt, Budget Deficits and Disequilibrium Exchange Rates," in In-
        ternatiorkil Debt and theDeielopjnq
                                            Cuntrjes, eds. G. Smith and J. Cuddington, Wash-
        ington, D.C., The World Bank, 1985.

  Edwards, Sebastian, "The Order of Liberalization of the Current and Capital Accounts
      Balance of Payments: A Survey of the Major Issues," The World Bank, 1983.        of the

                   ,   "The Order of Liberal ization of the External
       Princeton Papers in Internatzon(l Finance, 1985.                Sector in Developing Countries,"


                   "Stabilization with Liberalizatjoii: An Evaluation of Ten Years of Chile's
       Experiment with Free Market
                                     Policies, 1973-1983," Economic Development and Cultural
       C'hange, January, 1985.

 Edwards, Sebastian and Sweder van Wijnbcrgeii, "Time Welfare Effects of
      Market Liberalizatiomi: Consequences                                 Trade and Capital
                                           of Different Sequencing Scenarios," NBER Working
      Paper no. 1245, December, 1983.

 Frankel, J., K. Froot, and A. Mizala
                                      Salces,
     alization, Real Interest Rates, and the "Credibility, the Optimal Speed of Trade Liber-
     1985.                                    Latin Aiuicrjcan Debt," The World Bank, July

Krueger, Anne, Foreign Trade Regimes and
                                         Economic Development: Liberalization Attempts
    and Consequences Cambridge, MA, Balliuiger, 1978.

           ,   "Problems of Liberalization" Time World
                                                       Bank, 1983.

Krugman, Paul, "International Debt Strategies in an Uncertajum World," iii
    and the Developing Countrje,,, eds. G. Smith and J. CmIdington,        International Debt
    World Bank, 1985.                                                Washington,    D.C., The

Little, Ian, Tibor Scitovsky, and M. Scott, Industry and Trade in Some
                                                                               Developing Countries,
                                                28
    Oxford University Press, 170.

Martin, Ricardo and Marcelo Selowsky, "Energy Prices, Substitution, aiid Optimal Borrowing
     in the Short Run: An Analysis of Adjustment iii Oil Importing Developing Countries,"
     The World Bank, 1981.

McKinnon, Ronald, "The Order of Economic Liberalization: Lessons from Chile and Ar-
   gentina," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, no. 17, pp. 159-86,
     1982.

Mussa, Michael, "The Adjustment and the Timing of Trade Liberalization," The World Bank,
     1983.

Obstfeld, Maurice, "Capital Flows, the Current Account aiid the Real Exchange Rate: Con-
     sequences of Liberalization and Stabilization," presented at the World Bank Conference
     on Exchange Rates and Developing Countries, November, 1984.

Razin, Assaf and Lars Svenssou, "An Asymmetry Between Export and Import Taxes," Eco-
     nomic Letters, 1983.

Sachs, Jeffrey, "The Current Account and Macroeconomic Adjustiiieut in the 1970s," Brookings
     Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, pp. 201-68, 1981.

Svensson, Lars and Assaf Razin, "The Terms of Trade, Spending and the Current Account,
    the Harberger-Laursen-Metzler Effect," .Journal of Political Economy. vol. 91, no. 1,
      1983.

van Wijubergen, Sweder, "Tariffs, Employment and the Current Account: The role of Real
     Wage Resistance," The World Bank, 1983.

                  , "Trade
                            Reform, Aggregate Investment and Capital Flight: On Credibility
      and the Value of Information," Economic Letters. 1985.




                                           29
