                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    TOWARDS A POLITICAL THEORY OF THE FIRM

                                       Luigi Zingales

                                     Working Paper 23593
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23593


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2017




I thank Mark Gertler, Gordon Hanson, Enrico Moretti, Tim Taylor for very useful comments and
Steve Haber for educating me on the multiple ways in which Google lobbies. Financial support
from the Stigler Center and from the George Rinder Research fund at the University of Chicago
is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Towards a Political Theory of the Firm
Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 23593
July 2017
JEL No. G3

                                         ABSTRACT

Neoclassical theory assumes that firms have no power of fiat any different from ordinary market
contracting, thus a fortiori no power to influence the rules of the game. In the real world, firms
have such power. I argue that the more firms have market power, the more they have both the
ability and the need to gain political power. Thus, market concentration can easily lead to a
“Medici vicious circle,” where money is used to get political power and political power is used to
make money.


Luigi Zingales
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
luigi.zingales@ChicagoBooth.edu
        The revenues of large companies often rival those of national governments. In a list combining

both corporation and government revenues for 2015, ten companies appear in the largest 30 entities in the

world: Walmart (#9), State Grid Corporation of China (#15), China National Petroleum (#15), Sinopec

Group (#16), Royal Dutch Shell (#18), Exxon Mobil (#21), Volkswagen (#22), Toyota Motor (#23),

Apple (#25), and BP (#27) (Global Justice Now 2016). All ten of these companies had annual revenue in

higher than the governments of Switzerland, Norway, and Russia in 2015. Indeed, 69 of the largest 100

corporate and government entities ranked by revenues were corporations. In some cases, these large

corporations had private security forces that rivaled the best secret services, public relations offices that

dwarfed a US presidential campaign headquarters, more lawyers than the US Justice Department, and

enough money to capture (through campaign donations, lobbying, and even explicit bribes) a majority of

the elected representatives. The only powers these large corporations missed were the power to wage war

and the legal power of detaining people, although their political influence was sufficiently large that many

would argue that, at least in certain settings, large corporations can exercise those powers by proxy.

        Yet in contemporary economics, the commonly prevailing view of the firm ignores all these

elements of politics and power. According to this view, the firm is a simple “nexus of contracts” (Jensen

and Meckling 1976), with no objectives or life separate from those of its contracting parties, a veil or –

better-- a handy tool for individuals to achieve their personal goals. This view might be a reasonable

approximation for small or closely-held private corporations, but certainly it does not accurately describe

the giant global corporations.

        The largest modern corporations facilitated a massive concentration of economic (and political)

power in the hands of a few people, who are hardly accountable to anyone.



        The reason is not simply that many of those giants (like State Grid, China National Petroleum,

and Sinopec) are overseen by a member of the Chinese Communist party. In the United States, hostile

takeovers of large corporations have (unfortunately) all but disappeared, and corporate board members

                                                                                                                2
are accountable to none. Rarely are they not reelected, and even when they do not get a plurality of votes,

they are coopted back to the very same board (Committee on Capital Market Regulation, 2014). The

primary way for board members to lose their jobs is to criticize the incumbent CEO (see the Bob Monks

experience in Tyco described in Zingales, 2012). The only pressure on large US corporations from the

marketplace is exercised by activist investors, who operate under strong political opposition and not

always with the interest all shareholders in mind.

        In this essay, I will argue that the interaction of concentrated corporate power and politics it a

threat to the functioning of the free market economy and to economic prosperity it can generate, and a

threat to democracy as well. I begin with a discussion of how these concerns were present in Adam

Smith’s (1776) work, how they were neutralized in the neoclassical theory of the firm, and then how they

were reborn, at least to a certain extent, in the “incomplete contracts view” of the firm. However, even the

incomplete contracts view is designed for an environment in which the rules of the game are exogenously

specified and enforced. Once we recognize, however, that large firms have considerable power in

influencing the rules of the game, important questions arise: To what extent can the power firms have in

the marketplace be transformed into political power? To what extent can the political power achieved by

firms be used to protect but also enhance the market power firms have?

        The phenomenon of corporation becoming large enough to influence and in some cases to

dominate politics is not new. In their 1932 classic, The Modern Corporation and Private Property, Berle

and Means wrote: “The rise of the modern corporation has brought a concentration of economic power

which can compete on equal terms with the modern state - economic power versus political power, each

strong in its own field. The state seeks in some aspects to regulate the corporation, while the corporation,

steadily becoming more powerful, makes every effort to avoid such regulation... The future may see the

economic organism, now typified by the corporation, not only on an equal plane with the state, but

possibly even superseding it as the dominant form of social organization.” However, I will argue that US

economic patterns in the last few decades have seen a rise in the relative size of large companies.



                                                                                                               3
        Thus, I call attention to the risk of a “Medici Vicious Circle.” The “signorias” of the Middle

Ages—the city-states that were a common form of government in Italy from the 13th through the 16th

centuries--were a takeover of a democratic institution (“communes)” by rich and powerful families who

ran the city-states with their own commercial interests as main objective. The possibility and extent of

this Medici Vicious Circle depend upon several non-market factors. I identify six of them: the main

source of political power, the conditions of the media market, the independence of the prosecutorial and

judiciary power, the campaign financing laws, and the dominant ideology. I describe when and how these

factors play a role and how they should be incorporated in a broader “Political Theory” of the firm.



From Adam Smith to the Neoclassical Theory of the Firm


Adam Smith’s View of Stock Joint Companies

        Economists have not always been blind to the power of corporations. Adam Smith (1776 [1904],

Book V, Chapter 1) himself had a very negative view of corporations, then called joint stock companies,

which were granted monopoly rights by the Crown: “The directors of such companies, however, being the

managers rather of other people's money than of their own, it cannot well be expected that they should

watch over it with the same anxious vigilance with which the partners in a private

copartnery frequently watch over their own. … Negligence and profusion, therefore, must always prevail,

more or less, in the management of the affairs of such a company. It is upon this account that joint stock

companies for foreign trade have seldom been able to maintain the competition against private

adventurers. They have, accordingly, very seldom succeeded without an exclusive privilege,

and frequently have not succeeded with one.” As Anderson and Tollison (1982) argue, much of Smith’s

negativity was derived by empirical observations of the functioning of joint stock companies of his time.

        In Smith’s time, one of the oldest and largest joint stock companies was the East India Company,

which was founded in 1600 for a period of 15 years. But its desire to extend its monopoly impacted

British politics for two centuries. When the British Parliament sought to introduce competition for the


                                                                                                             4
East India Company, by giving a charter to one other competitor, some East India Company stockholders

simply bought enough shares of the one rival and forced it into a merger, thereby regaining the monopoly

position. To seal the deal and prevent future competitive challenges, the East India Company extended a

£3.2 million loan to the British Treasury, which, in exchange, again granted the monopoly of trade,

allegedly only for a few years. But repeatedly, when the monopoly expired, the East India Company

would lobby and pay bribes so that tit would be extended—until 1813 for most goods and until 1833 for

tea. That a 15-year monopoly right lasted 233 years is a harsh reminder of how dangerous the

commingling of economic and political power can be.

        Yet the typical high prices and limited output of monopolists was the least of the problems create

by the East India Company. The worst aspects were experienced by Indian and Chinese. By 1764, the

East India Company had become the de facto ruler of Bengal, where it established a monopoly in grain

trading and prohibited local traders and dealers from “hoarding” rice (which to modern economists looked

like a reasonable practice of keeping reserves as insurance against from crop fluctuations). A year after

drought struck in 1769, the East India Company raised its already heavy tax on the land. In the aftermath,

one out of three Bengalis—more than 10 million people—died of starvation. Another of the claims to

shame for the East India company involved opium. Having lost its monopoly of trade with India (except

for tea) in 1813, the East India Company aggressively promoted its export of Bengali opium to China. To

defend the right of the East India Company to sell opium to China, the British Empire would wage the

two “opium wars.”

The Gilded Age

        In the heyday of the East India Company, incorporation was a privilege granted only to a few

parties by the government. Over time incorporation became a right of citizens, subject to only a basic

registration procedure. This transformation dramatically increased entry in the corporate sector, boosting

the degree of competition.

        Yet, by the late 1800s, another phenomenon contributed to ensuring corporations’ market power:

the rise in economies of scale, during what Chandler (1977) labels the Second Industrial Revolution. It

                                                                                                            5
was the railways first, then oil refineries, steel, and chemical production later. Great technical

achievements were brought about by aggressive entrepreneurs, whom Chernov (1998) calls “titans” and

Josephson (1934) calls “robber barons.”

         In fact, they were both titans and robber barons. As in a sports competition, the more

disproportionate the reward for the winner vis-à-vis second place, the larger the incentives to dope, so it is

in business. The more an economy becomes winner-take-all, the bigger the incentives to corrupt the

political system to gain a small, but often decisive, advantage. As a result, Chernov’s industrial titans

were at the same time the greatest corruptors. In the words of Collis Huntington (California’s railway

baron): “If you have to pay money [to a politician] to have the right thing done, it is only just and fair to

do it.... If a [politician] has the power to do great evil and won't do right unless he is bribed to do it, I

think... it is a man's duty to go up and bribe” (Josephson, 1934). Not surprisingly, legal campaign

spending reached a peak (in GDP adjusted terms) at the end of the 19th century (Ansolabehere et al.

2003). In a cartoon by Joseph Keppler that appeared in Puck in 1889, the Senate was defined “of the

Monopolists by the Monopolists and for the Monopolists!”

        In a winner-take-all economy, entrepreneurs lobby and corrupt, not only to seize a crucial first

mover advantage, but also to preserve their power over time. They fear political expropriation, which can

stem from a populist revolt against the monopolist’s abuses or from the rent seeking of other politically

influential parties. This expropriation is made easier when market power does not arise from a

technological lead or a skills gap, but from a first mover advantage or the luck of being a focal point (such

as a trading venue), since the transfer implies very little deadweight losses.

          The overwhelming political power of business was first tamed during the Progressive Era and

later by the New Deal. The passage of the Tillman Act in 1907 (which prohibited corporations from

making direct contributions to federal candidates) and the Clayton Act in 1914 (which made antitrust

enforcement easier) started to limit corporate influence. The New Deal legislation went further, forcing a

break up of some of the strongholds of corporate power: investment and commercial banks with the 1933

Glass Steagall Act and corporate pyramids with the 1935 Public Utility Holding Company Act. The coup

                                                                                                                6
de grâce was provided by the aggressive antitrust enforcement in the later part of Franklin D. Roosevelt’s

administration, when Thurman Arnold was appointed head of the Antitrust Division of the Justice

Department (Waller, 2004).



The Power of Competition and Takeovers

        As a result of the political reforms of the first part of the 20th century, the United States entered

the second part of the century with a less concentrated economy. It is not surprising, thus, that then

contemporary economists started to emphasize the limits to firms’ power imposed by product market

competition and the market for corporate control. For example, Stigler (1958) argued that competitive

pressures would determine the scale of firms observed in the marketplace, neither too large or two small.

A competitive selection process in markets for inputs and outputs also eliminates much (if not all)

managerial discretion. Thus, in a perfectly competitive industry, as Alchian and Demsetz (1972) wrote:

“The firm has no power of fiat, no authority, no disciplinary action any different in the slightest degree

from ordinary market contracting between two people.”

        Even in the absence of competition in product markets, managerial discretion can be constrained

by the pressure of the corporate control market. As Manne (1965) first points out, an inefficiently-run

publicly traded firm represents an arbitrage opportunity. A raider can buy the firm, fix the inefficiency,

resell the firm or continue to operate it, and make money.

        It is in these years that neoclassical economics was very successful in moving attention away

from the “power” dimension of firms towards the more benign technological aspect. For example, in his

prominent microeconomics textbook, Varian (1992) defines firms as “combinations of inputs and outputs

that are technologically feasible,” and assumes that “a firm acts so as to maximize its profits.” When this

objective is not assumed, it is derived as a necessary implication of the threat of takeovers (Manne 1965)

and intense product market competition (Stigler 1958). Thus, neoclassical economics argued in a world

with perfect competition and no transactions costs, firms are nothing more than isoquant maps.



                                                                                                                7
        However, it turns out that even in a perfectly competitive environment, corporations are

powerless only if there is perfect contractibility. To understand this idea, we need to depart from the

standardized world of neoclassical economics.



The Incomplete Contract Paradigm

        The neoclassical framework only describes one set of transactions well, called “standardized”

transactions by Williamson (1985), which involve many producers of similar quality products and many

potential customers. Many common transactions, however, do not fit this mold.

        For instance, consider the purchase of a customized machine. The buyer must contact a

manufacturer and agree upon the specifications and the final price. More importantly, signing the

agreement does not represent the end of the relationship between the buyer and the seller. Producing the

machine requires time. During this time, events can occur that alter the cost of producing the machine as

well as the buyer's willingness to pay for it. More importantly, before the agreement was signed, the

market for manufacturers may have been competitive. Once production has begun, though, the buyer and

the seller are trapped in a bilateral monopoly. The customized machine probably has a higher value to the

buyer than to the market. On the other hand, the contracted manufacturer probably has the lowest cost to

finish the machine. The difference between what the two parties generate together and what they can

obtain in the marketplace represents a quasi-rent, which needs to be divided.

        Of course, the initial contract plays a main role in dividing this quasi-rent. But most contracts are

incomplete, in the sense that they will not fully specify the division of surplus in every possible

contingency (this might be too costly to do or even outright impossible because the contingency was

unanticipated). This creates an interesting distinction between decisions made at the time when the two

parties entered a relationship and irreversible investments were sunk, and decisions made later in the

process when the quasi-rents are divided. The incompleteness of the contract creates room for bargaining.

        The outcome of the bargaining will be affected by several factors besides the initial contract.

First, it will depend to some extent on which party has ownership of the machine while it is being

                                                                                                            8
produced. Second, it will depend on the availability of alternatives: How costly is it for the buyer to delay

receiving the new machine. How costly is it for the seller of the machine to delay the receipt of the final

payment? How much more costly is it to have the job finished by another manufacturer? Finally, the

institutional environment plays a major role in shaping the bargaining outcome: How effective and rapid

is law enforcement? What are the professional norms? How quickly and reliably does information about

the manufacturer's performance travel across potential clients? All these factors determine the allocation

of authority or power. In this setting, given that not all contingencies can be specified, what is often

specified instead is who has the right to make decisions when unspecified contingencies arise, which in

turn will influence strategic bargaining over the surplus. In this context, Grossman and Hart (1986)’s

“residual right of control” is both meaningful and valuable.



Extending the Incomplete Contract Paradigm

        The incomplete contract literature started by Grossman and Hart (1986) explains how firms’

power stems from their market power (Rajan and Zingales, 1998). While it focuses only on the market

power arising from past investments, this link holds even when the source of market power is economies

of scale, network externalities, or government-granted licenses (Rajan and Zingales, 2001).

        Furthermore, emphasizing the incomplete nature of contracts and rules, incomplete contracts

create the scope for lobbying, rent seeking, and power grabbing. The traditional contributions focus on the

under or over investments in firm-specific human capital, but the framework can easily be extended to the

political arena. If rents are not perfectly allocated ex ante by contracts and rules, there is ample space for

economic actors to exert pressure on the regulatory, judiciary, and political system to grab a larger share

of these rents.

        An aspect, which as far as I know has gone unnoticed, is the interaction between these two

dimensions. In a world where cash bribes are illegal and relatively rare, firms need other means to lobby

and pressure the political and regulatory world. One common mechanism is, for example, the (implicit)

promise of future career opportunities. The credibility (and thus the effectiveness) of such promises

                                                                                                                 9
strongly depends upon the current and future economic power of a firm. At the peak of the financial

crisis, Citigroup offers were not very credible, since there were serious doubt that Citigroup would have

survived. By contrast, JP Morgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon was seen as a reliable player, because of the

staying power of his bank. Thus, even without mobilizing its finances, the more economically powerful a

firm is, the more politically powerful can be.

        If the ability to influence the political power increases with economic power, so does the need to

do so, because the greater the market power a firm has, the greater the fear of expropriation by the

political power. Hence, the risk of a vicious circle, which I will define as the Medici vicious circle.



The Medici Vicious Circle

        A competitive advantage often starts as temporary. The video rental chain Blockbuster was

founded on the idea that videos had become a mainstream product, which no longer needed to be rented

in shady stores full of compromising material, and could instead be rented in a family-friendly setting

with bright lights and a vivid store logo. This simple (and replicable) idea was quickly transformed into a

network of stores across cities. Once the network of local stores was in place, Blockbuster had a huge

barrier to entry vis-à-vis any competitor, but a barrier that was eventually overcome by the technology of

accessing and renting movies over the internet.

        Most firms are actively engaged in protecting their source of competitive advantage: through a

mixture of innovation, lobbying, or both. As long as most of the effort is along the first dimension, there

is little to be worried about. The fear of being overtaken pushes firms to innovate (Aghion et al. 2013).

What is more problematic is when a lot of effort is put into lobbying.

        In other words, the problem here is not temporary market power. The expectation of some

temporary market power based on innovation is the driver of much innovation and progress. The fear is of

what I call a “Medici vicious circle,” in which money is used to gain political power and political power




                                                                                                            10
is then used to make more money. 1 This vicious circle needs to be broken. In the case of medieval Italy, it

turned Florence from one of the most industrialized and powerful cities in Europe to a marginal province

of a foreign empire. At least the Medici period left some examples of great artistic beauty in Florence. I

am not sure that market capitalism of the 21st century will be able to do the same.



The Increasing Market Power of U.S. Firms

In a perfectly competitive world, the economic power of firms stems only from the past specific

investments. The potential magnitude of this economic power is limited and does not benefit much from

the support of political power. Thus, in this Economics 101 world lobbying is an activity limited to firms

that are trying to escape from the jewels of regulation or interested in government contracts. In such a

world, the neoclassical description of the firm as having “no power of fiat, no authority” is a good

approximation of realty.

        One can argue whether such a world ever existed, but cannot argue that this is not the world we

live in today, even in the United States, which historically has done well in this dimension. In the last two

decades more than 75 percent of US industries experienced an increase in concentration levels, with the

Herfindahl index increasing by more than 50 percent on average. During this time, the size of the average

publicly listed company in the United States tripled in market capitalization: from $1.2 billion to $3.7

billion in 2016 dollars (Grullon et al. 2017; see also the discussion by Stulz in this symposium).

    This phenomenon is the result of two trends. On the one hand, the reduction in the rate of birth of new

firms, which went from 14 percent in the late 1980s to less than 10 percent in 2014 (Haltiwanger 2017).

On the other hand, a very high level of merger activity, which for many years in the last two decades

exceeded $2 trillion in value per year (Institute for Mergers, Acquisitions & Alliances, at https://imaa-

institute.org/mergers-and-acquisitions-statistics/ ).

1
 Several recent secondary sources claim that the Medici family motto was: “Money to get power. Power to protect
money,” although none of these sources offer a primary attribution. For example, it appears in the Santi (2003) book
of quotations, in the 2005 movie “The American Ruling Class” (as discussed in Walton 2011), and in Gross (1980).



                                                                                                                 11
Impact on Margins

Higher concentration does not mean necessarily higher market power, yet there is increasing evidence

that market power has increased. First of all, these mergers do seem to improve productivity, but only to

raise mark-ups from 15 percent to over 50 percent of the average markup (Blonigen and Pierce, 2016).

The market power enjoyed by larger firms is also reflected in the increasing difficulty that smaller firms

have in competing in the marketplace: in 1980, only 20 percent of small publicly traded firms had

negative earnings per share, in 2010, 60 percent did (Gao et al., 2013).

    Yet, the most convincing evidence is provided by Barkai (2016), who finds that the decrease in labor

share of value added is not due to an increase in the capital share (that is, the cost of capital times amount

of capital divided by value added), but by an increase in the profits share (the residuals), which goes from

2 percent of GDP in 1984 to 16 percent in 2014.

    This is not just a relabeling. By separating the return to capital and profits, we can appreciate when

profits come from (non-replicable) barriers to entry and competition, not from capital accumulation.

Distinguishing between capital and share allows Barkai (2016) also to gain some insights on the cause of

the decline in the labor share. If markups (the difference between the cost of a good and its selling price)

are fixed, any change in relative prices or in technology that causes a decline in labor share must cause an

equal increase in the capital share. If both labor and capital share dropped, then there must be a change in

markups—that is, the pricing power firms to charge more than their cost.

    In support of this “market power” hypothesis Barkai finds that sectors that have experienced a higher

increase in concentration between 1997 and 2012 also experienced a higher decline in labor share of

output and thus (presumably) a higher increase in the share of profits.

Possible Explanations

    A popular explanation for these trends is the emergence and diffusion of network externalities: that is,

situations in which an increase in usage leads to a direct increase in value for other users. These

externalities were present at least since the telephone was invented, yet, they have become much more

widespread with the diffusion of the internet and of social media.

                                                                                                             12
    A second explanation is the increased role of winner-take-all industries, driven by the proliferation of

information-intensive goods that have high fixed and low-marginal costs (Zingales 2012; Autor et al.

2017). A related explanation has to do with information complementarities. The value of the data derived

from Facebook and Instagram combined is likely to be higher than the sum of the value of the data

derived from Facebook and Instagram separately, since the data can be combined and compared. Thus,

Facebook is likely to be the higher value user of Instagram, even ignoring any potential market power

effect. If you add any effect in this direction, the effect of concentration might be irresistible

         A final explanation is reduced antitrust enforcement. Section 2 of the Sherman Act makes it

unlawful to "monopolize, or attempt to monopolize, or combine or conspire with any other person or

persons, to monopolize any part of the trade or commerce.” During the period 1970-1999 the Department

of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) together brought an average of 15.7 cases under

Section 2. Between 2000 and 2014, they brought only 2.8 cases a year (Grullon et al., 2017). All these

explanations are not mutually exclusive. In fact, they are mutually reinforcing.


Political Power of Firms

        There are many misconceptions about the nature and the importance of political power of firms.

If politics is identified along partisan lines, corporations are not very relevant nor do they want to be. Rich

individuals, like casino magnate Shelden Adelson, play a big role in funding political campaigns,

corporations do not. “Mickey Mouse is not a Republican or a Democrat… -- stated Joe Shapiro, at the

time Disney general counsel-. If you take a strong position either way, you are looking at offending

roughly half of the people” 2 This explains how in 2016 Donald Trump could be elected not having the

endorsement (and the money) of any of the top 100 U.S. corporations.

        Corporations need some friends in Congress (and in the executive) on specific issues and they

generally succeed in having them, regardless of the political affiliation. Consider Citigroup’s effort to

change the Glass-Steagall Act, which severed the economic ties between investment banking and

2
 Alan K. Ota “Disney In Washington: The Mouse That Roars” 10 August 1998,
http://edition.cnn.com/ALLPOLITICS/1998/08/10/cq/disney.html

                                                                                                            13
commercial banking. In 1998, Citigroup acquired Travelers (an insurance company), even though the law

prohibited banks from merging with insurance companies. At the time of the merger, Travelers’ CEO,

Sandy Weill, explained why the companies were moving forward in spite of an apparent conflict with the

law: “we have had enough discussions [with the Fed and the Treasury] to believe this will not be a

problem.” 3 The head of the Treasury then was Richard Rubin, who worked very hard to convince his

fellow Democrats to change the law. Rubin left the Treasury in July 1999, the day after the House passed

its version of the bill by a bipartisan vote of 343 to 86. Three months later, on October 18, 1999, Rubin

was hired at Citigroup at a salary of $15 million a year, without any operating responsibility.

        Even when it comes to lobbying, the actual amount spent by large U.S corporations is very small,

at least as a fraction of their sales. For example, in 2014 Google (now Alphabet) had $80 billion in

revenues and spent $16 million in lobbying (see Open Secrets at https://www.opensecrets.org/lobby).

        To the extent that US corporations are exercising political influence, it seems that they are

choosing less visible but perhaps more effective ways. In fact, since Gordon Tullock famous piece, it has

been a puzzle in political science of why there is so little money in politics (Ansolabehere et al. 2003).

        One possible explanation is that corporations do not need as much to prevail because the

opposition they face (public interest) is very disorganized and they can prevail with very little effort

(Zingales, 2012, Chapter 5). If money is used only in the marginal cases, one can observe very little

correlation between donations and success (Ansolabehere et al. 2003), but still a very high success rate of

big corporations in getting their wishes come true (see Pierson (2016) discussion of the health care

reform).

           Another explanation is that actual donation amounts and lobbying are so small because big

corporations are so good at achieving their goals without the need of cash transfers. Nobody would dare

to measure the influence of the Mafia with the size of the bribes they pay. In fact, the power of a boss,

like don Vito Corleone in the famous book by Mario Puzo, does not rest on his ability to pay, but on his


3
 Mitchell Martin, “Citicorp and Travelers Plan to Merge in Record $70 Billion Deal: A New No.1: Financial Giants
Unite,” New York Times, April 7,1998.

                                                                                                             14
power to make offers people cannot refuse. To be fair, the Mafia relies on not-so-vailed threats of

violence, corporate interests do not. Yet, the successful Mafia boss is the one able to minimize violence: it

is an out of equilibrium threat, rarely carried through. The threat corporate interest can use is the

ostracism from the business world at the end of a public official’s mandate. That this ostracism is rarely

observed is a proof of how effective it is.

           In other words, to detect the power of corporations we need to look at output, not inputs. Is it a

coincidence that the copyright law is extended every time Walt Disney Co’s copyright on Mickey Mouse

is close to expiration (Lessig 2001)? This case is so outrageous not because is so unique, but because

there is no ideological cover for it: extending retroactively copyright to dead authors is not going to

stimulate production!

           Similarly, we can ask why the FTC antitrust case against Google was dropped in the United

States (but not in Europe). The leaked staff report concluded that Google had unlawfully maintained its

monopoly over general search and search advertising by “scraping content from rival vertical websites”,

“by entering into exclusive and highly restrictive agreements with web publishers that prevent publishers

from displaying competing search results or search advertisements”, and “by maintaining contractual

restrictions that inhibit the cross-platform management of advertising campaigns.” 4 In spite of this

indicting report, the FTC commission unanimously decided to drop the case. One wonders what role did

the frequent visits paid by Google employees to the White House play: between Obama’s first

inauguration and the end of October 2015, employees of Google and associated entities visited the White

House 427 times, including 21 small, intimate meetings with President Obama. 5

           From Brown and Huang (2017) we know that the share price of companies whose executives

visited the White House increased an extra 1 percent in the following two months. It might not seem very

much, until you discover that during Obama’s presidency the Chairman and CEO of Honeywell

international visited the White House 30 times and the one of General Electric 22 times.


4
    https://graphics.wsj.com/google-ftc-report/img/ftc-ocr-watermark.pdf
5
    http://googletransparencyproject.org/articles/googles-white-house-meetings.

                                                                                                                15
        If companies do not succeed in preventing unfavorable legislation in Congress, they can stop it by

suing the regulators who try to implement it. The Dodd-Frank Act required that the US Securities and

Exchange Commission repeal the current rules that prevent institutional investors from nominating their

own representatives to corporate boards. In fact, the requirement was very timid, posing so many

restrictions in terms of quantity and length of ownership as to leave the bar to institutional investors

effectively in place. Still, the Business Roundtable sued the SEC to stop it. The case was argued by

Eugene Scalia, the son of then-US Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia, and was won in the US Court

of Appeals, DC Circuit, on a technicality – the failure of the Securities and Exchange Commission to

conduct a cost-benefit analysis ahead of time. This small victory turned into a major defeat for

shareholders when the Securities and Exchange Commission, rather than performing such an analysis and

re-proposing the rule, chose to withdraw. At a conference in December 2011, I asked then-SEC

Chairwoman Mary Schapiro when her agency was planning to reintroduce the rule. I even offered to do

the cost-benefit analysis for free. But she confessed that the SEC had many other items on its agenda, and

had placed the issue on the back burner, which seems to me a polite way of saying that the SEC had

surrendered under pressure.

        If all fails, large companies can succeed in avoiding regulation by lobbying the regulator directly,

so to avoid is enforcement. Lambert (2015) finds that regulators are 44.7 percent less likely to initiate

enforcement actions against lobbying banks.



        Lobbying is not the only way companies have to avoid enforcement: they can do so by hiding

crucial information. As Shapira and Zingales (2017) describe, DuPont was able to delay by more than 30

years any liability for contaminating the water supply near its West Virginia factory, by hiding

information and protecting itself behind the trade secret law.


Why the Problem Is Getting Worse




                                                                                                            16
        All the actions described above require not only money, but also power of fiat and disciplinary

action different from ordinary market contracting between two people. Thus, in a fragmented and

competitive economy firms find it difficult to exert this power. By contrast, firms that achieve some

market power can lobby (in the broader sense of the term) in a way that ordinary market participants

cannot. It is precisely their market power that gives them a comparative advantage at the influence game:

the greater their market power, the more effective they are at obtaining what they want from the political

system. But the more effective they are at obtaining what they want from the political system, the greater

their market power will be, since they can block competitors and entrench themselves. Hence, the risk of

the Medici’s vicious circle.

        In the last three decades in the United States the power of corporations to shape the rules of the

game has become stronger for three main reasons. First, the increase in the size and market share of

companies, which reduces the competition across conflicting interests in the same sector and makes

corporations more powerful vis-à-vis consumers’ interest. Second, the increase in the size and complexity

of regulation, which makes it easier for vested interest to tilt the playing field to their advantage. Finally,

the demise of the anti-business ideology among Democrats, which reduced the cost for both parties to be

perceived as too friendly to the interests of big business.

        An example of this increased power is represented by the legislative history of the 2005

Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act described in Zingales (2012, chapter 4). In

the words of one legal scholar: “Never before in our history has such a well-organized, well-orchestrated,

and well-financed campaign been run to change the balance of power between creditors and debtors.”

(Tabb, 2007).


Towards a Political Theory of the Firm


        It is not at all my intention to conclude that business should have no voice in the political process.

First of all, because there are other powerful special interests (such as unions), that play a big role.

Without some balance, the outcome would be too tilted in the opposite direction. But even more

                                                                                                              17
importantly, because without a strong constituency that defends property rights, the power of the state

over its citizens might become excessive.

        The ideal state of affairs is a “goldilocks” balance between the power of the state and the power

of firms. A state that is too weak is unable to enforce property rights, and as a result, firms will either

resort to enforcing these rights by themselves (through private violence) or collapse. If a state is too

strong, rather than enforcing property rights it will be tempted to expropriate from firms. When firms are

too weak vis-à-vis the state, they risk being expropriated, if not formally (with a transfer of property

rights to the government), then substantially (when the state demands a large portion of the returns to any

investment). But when firms are too strong vis-à-vis the state, they may up shaping the definition of

property rights and its enforcement in their own interest and not in the interest of the public at large, as in

the Mickey Mouse Copyright Act example. The feasibility of a “goldilocks” equilibrium depends upon a

mixture of institutional and economic characteristics.

        According to this metric, the United States does relatively well in international and historical

comparisons. This fortune, however, should not be taken for granted. The Second Industrial Revolution

upset this equilibrium, which was restored with great pain and effort over four decades of reforms. The

Third Industrial Revolution under way is having similar effects. To understand this phenomenon in an

historical and international context, it is useful to review the different types of equilibria present around

the world.



Institutional Characteristics

        In most autocratic regimes, the main source of power is the control of the armed forces and

police—that is, a monopoly over the legal use of force. In such countries, de facto control of the armed

forces greatly depends upon the personal loyalty of the rank-and-file soldiers to some commanders and

the future rents a leader can credible promise. By contrast, in democratic regimes the source of political

power is a broad social consensus, formalized through an election process.



                                                                                                                18
        A first key in the formation of this democratic consensus is the world of the media, itself

influenced by the political power (through censorship, ownership, subsidies, and leaks) and by the

economic power (through advertising, direct ownership, financing, and access to information).

Traditionally, media have been considered free if they were not affected by government censorship. Yet,

it is equally important that they are (mostly) not affected by corporate censorship, which can be a frequent

phenomenon especially in small countries, where the media market is often controlled by few well-

connected families (see for example, Zingales 2016).

        The second key mechanism in the formation of political consensus is the electoral process,

shaped both by the electoral law and by the rules for campaign financing. A more proportional system of

representation favors new entry and competition, but it also makes it easier for vested interest to capture

small parties and turn them into lobbying organizations for special interests. The source of campaign

financing is also crucial. When campaign financing comes from the government, the political control is

greater, when it comes from private donations, economic power can be greater. A mixture of limitations

on private donations, matched to some extent by public financing, is an attempt to find a balance between

these alternatives.

        In the formation of consensus and in legitimizing the political authority a third factor is the role of

ideology. In some countries, political legitimization is linked to a formal election process; in other

countries, government formed in different ways are nonetheless regarded as legitimate. Ideology is also

based on perceptions of the relative benefits of being dominated by economic interests.

        Finally, a crucial role is played by the prosecutorial and judiciary powers. These differ in their

degree of independence from the political and the economic powers and in their prevalent ideology. For

example, Posner et al. (2013) document the big increase in pro-business bias on the Supreme Court of the

United States between 1946 and 2011.

Economic Characteristics

        Given the legal and social restrictions on explicit bribes in most countries, a company’s ability to

obtain what it wants from the political system is highly dependent upon: 1) its ability to make credible

                                                                                                             19
long-term promises (for example, future employment opportunities for politicians and regulators), which

is highly dependent upon a company’s long-term survival probability; 2) the grip a company has on the

market for specific human capital (for example, how many potential employers of nuclear engineers there

are); 3) a company’s ability to wrap its self-interest in a bigger, noble, idea (for example, Fannie Mae and

the goal that every American should be able to borrow to purchase a house); 4) the control that a company

has though its image in society through employment, data ownership, media ownership, advertising,

research funding, and other methods.

        In economic terms, a firm’s size and the level of concentration within a market affect positively

all the crucial factors that determine a firm’s ability to influence the political system. What matters here it

is not just product market concentration, but in general all concentration of economic power. The main

employer in a town is very politically influential, even if the firm sells in a competitive market outside

that town.

A Taxonomy

        If we focus on the balance between economic and political power, we can identify some

prototypical regimes. At the one extreme there are traditional communist dictatorships, like the old Soviet

Union, as well as North Korea and Cuba. In a communist dictatorship, political power has captured all

important sources of economic power. At the other extreme, there is the most extreme form of plutocratic

regimes, like the East India Company protectorate of India or the King Leopold II ownership of Congo. In

this case the economic power has captured the functions of the political power. The “banana republics” of

the early 20th century, a term used to describe how large US firms like United Fruit Company created a

near-monopoly supply of bananas from countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, were a modified

version of these pure plutocracies. At least formally, the banana republic countries had an alternative

source of political power, while the East India Company system in India before 1858 and the Congo Free

State before 1908 did not.

        Moving towards the center we find two types of regimes that, while very different in their nature,

tend to be similar in their outcomes. On the one hand, we find the political patronage regimes of Suharto

                                                                                                             20
in Indonesia, Goodluck Johnathan in Nigeria, and many heads of government in Africa today. In these

regimes, political power grants economic power through methods like concessions of either mineral right

extraction rights or monopoly (or quasi-monopoly) rights to operate certain businesses. A special mention

is due to Egypt, where the army has transformed itself into a conglomerate, running all sort of commercial

enterprises on the side.

        On the other hand, we have the “vertical politically integrated” regimes (Haber et al. 2003),

where rich businessmen control the political system, sometimes directly (as was the case in Thailand

under Thaksin Shinawatra and Italy under Silvio Berlusconi) or sometimes indirectly (as the Russian

oligarchs under Vladimir Putin). These regimes differ in the degree of concentration in the main source

of power. Suharto in Indonesia or Robert Mugabe in Zimbabwe had a close to monopoly-grip on the

political power, while Goodluck Johnathan in Nigeria did not. In the same way, British Petroleum before

its Middle Eastern operations were nationalized had a close-to-monopoly on the sources of economic

power in Iran, while oligarchs in Russia and Berlusconi in Italy did not. While the original source of

power is very different, political patronages and vertical politically integrated regimes are very similar in

the way the use the political power to protect and enhance business. In fact, countries often oscillate

between these regimes: for example, Russia moved from a vertical politically integrated regime under

Boris Yeltsin, to a political patronage under Putin.

        While the perfect goldilocks balance is an unattainable ideal, given that ongoing events will

expose the tradeoffs in any given approach, the countries closest to this ideal are probably the

Scandinavian countries today and the United States in the second part of the twentieth century. Crucial to

the success of a goldilocks balance is a strong administrative state, which operates according to the

principal of impartiality (Rothstein 2011) and a competitive private sector economy.

        In Scandinavian countries the competitiveness of the sector is ensured by the small size of these

countries, which forces them to be open and subjected to international competition. The quality of

government is ensured by a long tradition of benign and enlightened monarchies and ethnic homogeneity

that favors an identification of the citizens with the state.

                                                                                                           21
          Historically, competition in the United States was ensured by the very large size of the country,

which made it more difficult for a small group of producers to “own” the government. During the Cold

War the efficiency of the government was required by the threat of military conflict. Both these aspects

have vanished now, increasing the risk that the United States becomes a vertical politically integrated

regime a la Latina America.




Conclusion


          In a famous speech in 1911, Nicholas Murray Butler, President of Columbia University,

considered the practical advances made by large corporations in the late 19th and early 20th century and

stated:

          I weigh my words, when I say that in my judgment the limited liability corporation is the greatest

          single discovery of modern times, whether you judge it by its social, by its ethical, by its

          industrial or, in the long run,—-after we understand it and know how to use it,—by its political,

          effects. Even steam and electricity are far less important than the limited liability corporation, and

          they would be reduced to comparative impotence without it.

Butler was right, but this discovery of the modern corporate form – like all discoveries – can be used to

both to foster progress or to oppress. The size of many corporations exceeds the modern state. As such,

they run the risk of transforming small- and even medium-sized states into modern versions of banana

republics, while posing economic and political risks even for the large high-income economies.

          To fight these risks, several political tools might be put into use: increases in transparency of

corporate activities; improvements in corporate democracy; better rules against revolving doors and more

attention to the risk of capture of scientists and economists by corporate interests; more aggressive use of

the antitrust authority; and attention to the functioning and the independence of the media market. Yet the

single most important remedy may be broader public awareness. Without an awareness of this risk of




                                                                                                              22
deterioration of the corporate form, and a sense of how to strike the appropriate balance between

corporations and governments, there is little hope for any remedy.




                                                                                                    23
                                              References

Alchian, A. and H. Demsetz, 1972, ``Production, Information Costs and Economic Organization'',
American Economic Review, 777-705.

Aghion, Philippe and Akcigit, Ufuk and Howitt, Peter, What Do We Learn from Schumpeterian Growth
Theory? (June 3, 2013). PIER Working Paper No. 13-026. Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2274704 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2274704

Anderson, Gary M. and Robert D. Tollison, 1982, “Adam Smith's Analysis of Joint-Stock Companies”
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 90, no. 6.

Ansolabehere, Stephen, John M. de Figueiredo and James M. Snyder Jr., 2003, “Why is There so Little
Money in U.S. Politics?” Journal of Economic Perspectives—Volume 17, Number 1—Winter—Pages
105–130

Autor, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson and John Van Reenen, 2017, Concentrating on
the Fall of the Labor Share,” MIT working paper.

Barkai, Simcha. 2016. “Declining Labor and Capital Shares.” Working Paper, University of Chicago

Berle, and Means, 1932, Modern Corporation and Private Property. Transaction Publishers.

Blonigen, Bruce A. and Justin R. Pierce, 2016, “Evidence for the Effects of Mergers on Market Power
and Efficiency,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-082. Washington: Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System.

Brown, Jeffrey R. and Jiekun Huang, 2017, “All the President’s Friends: Political Access and Firm
Value,” University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign working paper.

Butler, Nicholas Murray. 1911. “Politics and Economics.” 143rd Annual Banquet of the Chamber of
Commerce of the State of New York, pp. 43055. | HathiTrust Digital Library,
https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=coo.31924093105660;view=1up;seq=59.

Chandler, Alfred D. , 1977, The Visible Hand. Belknap Press,

Chernow, Ron (1998). Titan: The Life of John D. Rockefeller, Sr., Random House LLC

Committee on Capital Market Regulation, 2014, Annual Shareholder Meetings And The Conundrum Of
“Unelected” Directors, http://www.capmktsreg.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/CCMR-Unelected-
Directors-Statement-2014-06-23-1.pdf

Gao, Xiaohui , Jay R. Ritter, and Zhongyan Zhu, 2013, “Where Have All the IPOs Gone?” Journal Of
Financial And Quantitative Analysis Vol. 48, No. 6, Dec. 2013, pp. 1663–1692.

Global Justice Now. 2016. “10 biggest corporations make more money than most countries in the world
combined.” September 12. http://www.globaljustice.org.uk/news/2016/sep/12/10-biggest-corporations-
make-more-money-most-countries-world-combined.

Gross, Bertram. 1980. Friendly Fascism: The New Face of Power in America.

                                                                                                      24
Grossman, S. and Hart, O., 1986, ``The Costs and the Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of Vertical and
Lateral Integration'' Journal of Political Economy: 691-719.

Grullon, Gustavo , Yelena Larkin and Roni Michaely, 2017, Are US Industries Becoming More
Concentrated? Cornell working paper.

Haber S., A. Razo, and Maurer, N. , 2003, Politics of Property Rights: Political Instability, Credible
Commitments, and Economic Growth in Mexico, 1876-1929, Cambridge University Press

Hart, O. and J. Moore, 1990, ``Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm" Journal of Political Economy
1119-1158.

Jensen, Michael C. and William H. Meckling, 1976, “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency
Costs and Ownership Structure, Journal of Financial Economics , Vol. 3, No. 4, 305-360

Josephson, Matthew (1934), The Robber Barons (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Company).

Klein, Benjamin, Robert G. Crawford and Armen A. Alchian, 1978, “Vertical Integration, Appropriable
Rents, and the Competitive Contracting Process,” The Journal of Law & Economics , Vol. 21, No. 2
(Oct., 1978), pp. 297-326

Lambert, Thomas, 2015, Lobbying on Regulatory Enforcement Actions: Evidence from U.S. Commercial
and Savings Banks, Erasmus University working paper.

Lessig, Lawrence, 2001, “Copyright's First Amendment”, 48 UCLA L. Rev. 1057, 1065.

Manne, H. G.1965, ``Mergers and the Market for Corporate Control,'' Journal of Political Economy, 73,
110-120.

Olson, Mancur, 1965. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press

Pierson, 2016, “Goodbye to Pluralism? Studying Power in Contemporary American Politics,” Berkeley
Working Paper.

Posner, Richard A., Lee Epstein & William M. Landes, "How Business Fares in the Supreme Court," 97
Minnesota Law Review 1431 (2013).

Rajan, R and L. Zingales, 1998, “Power in a Theory of the Firm,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1998,
113: 387-432.

Rajan, R and L. Zingales, 2001, “The Firm as a Dedicated Hierarchy: A Theory of the Origins and
Growth of Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116: 805-852.

Rothstein, Bo, 2011, “The Quality of Government, Corruption, Social Trust, and Inequality In
International Perspective” University of Chicago Press.

Stigler, George. 1958. “The Economies of Scale,” Journal of Law and Economics, 1, 54–71.

Santi, Antonio , 2003, The Book of Italian Wisdom, 2003, Citadel Pre

                                                                                                         25
Shapira, R. and L. Zingales, 2017, “Is Pollution Value Maximizing? The DuPont Case”, Stigler Center
Working Paper


Smith, Adam. 1776 [1904]. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Edited by
Edwin Cannan, London: Methuen & Co., Ltd.

Tabb, Charles Jordan, 2007, “The Top Twenty Issues in the History of Consumer Bankruptcy,”
University of Illinois Law Review 2007 (1): 9-30

Tullock, Gordon. 1972. “The Purchase of Politicians.” Western Economic Journal 10: 354-355.

Varian, Hal R., 1992, Microeconomic Analysis, 3rd ed., W. W. Norton & Company, 1992.

Waller, Spencer Weber,2004,”The Antitrust Legacy of Thurman Arnold” 78 St. John’s Law Review 569
(2004).

Walton, Beatrice. 2011. “The American Ruling Class.” Harvard Political Review, September 6,
http://harvardpolitics.com/books-arts/the-american-ruling-class/.

Williamson, O., 1985, The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, The Free Press, New York.

Zingales, L, 2012, A Capitalism for the People, Norton.

Zingales, Luigi, 2014, Preventing economists’ capture, Preventing Regulatory Capture, eds. Daniel
Carpenter and David Moss, (Cambridge University Press).

Zingales, 2016, “Are Newspapers Captured by Banks? Evidence From Italy,” 12 May 2016,
https://promarket.org/are-newspapers-captured-by-banks/




                                                                                                      26
