NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MARGINS OF LABOR MARKET ADJUSTMENT TO TRADE
Rafael Dix-Carneiro
Brian K. Kovak
Working Paper 23595
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23595

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2017

This project was supported by an Early Career Research Grant from the W.E. Upjohn Institute for
Employment Research. The authors would like to thank Peter Arcidiacono, Penny Goldberg,
Guilherme Hirata, Joe Hotz, Nina Pavcnik, Mine Senses, Lowell Taylor, Eric Verhoogen, and
participants at various conferences and seminars for helpful comments. Dix-Carneiro thanks
Daniel Lederman and the Office of the Chief Economist for Latin America and the Caribbean at
the World Bank for warmly hosting him while part of the paper was written. Remaining errors are
our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Rafael Dix-Carneiro and Brian K. Kovak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Margins of Labor Market Adjustment to Trade
Rafael Dix-Carneiro and Brian K. Kovak
NBER Working Paper No. 23595
July 2017
JEL No. F14,F16,J46,J61
ABSTRACT
We use both longitudinal administrative data and cross-sectional household survey data to study
the margins of labor market adjustment following Brazil's early 1990s trade liberalization. We
document how workers and regional labor markets adjust to trade-induced changes in local labor
demand, examining various adjustment margins, including earnings and wage changes;
interregional migration; shifts between tradable and nontradable employment; and shifts between
formal employment, informal employment, and non-employment. Our results provide insight into
the regional labor market effects of trade, and have important implications for policies that
address informal employment and that assist trade-displaced workers.

Rafael Dix-Carneiro
Department of Economics
Duke University
210A Social Sciences Building
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
rafael.dix.carneiro@duke.edu
Brian K. Kovak
H. John Heinz III College
Carnegie Mellon University
4800 Forbes Avenue, HBH 3012
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
bkovak@cmu.edu

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

1

Introduction

Since at least 1941, when Stolper and Samuelson published their seminal paper, economists have
known that trade is likely to create winners and losers. A voluminous empirical literature then
followed, investigating the differences in trade’s effects on workers with different skills or employed
in different industries. However, starting in the late 2000s, a number of authors documented
substantial differences in the effects of trade and import competition on workers in geographic
regions with different patterns of industrial specialization. Examples of this recent literature include
Topalova (2007) and Kovak (2013), who investigated the regional effects of trade liberalization in
India and Brazil respectively, and Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013), who documented the effects of
increased Chinese imports on U.S. local labor markets.1 A robust conclusion from this literature
is that trade’s costs and benefits are unevenly distributed geographically, not just across industries
or skills.
Given the substantial effects of trade liberalization across local labor markets, it is important
to understand how workers and regional labor markets adjusted to these changes in local labor
demand. Documenting these adjustments is essential to understanding the processes behind tradedisplaced workers’ labor market outcomes. In this paper, we examine various potential adjustment
margins including earnings and wage changes; interregional migration; shifts between tradable
and nontradable employment; and shifts between formal employment, informal employment, and
non-employment. We compare outcomes for workers and regional labor markets facing larger and
smaller tariff reductions, finding a rich pattern of labor market adjustment over time.
We make extensive use of longitudinal administrative data (RAIS) covering the Brazilian formal
labor market between 1986 and 2010. These data cover the universe of formally employed workers
and allow us to follow them over time and across firms, sectors, and regions. However, the RAIS
data do not cover workers outside formal employment. To study the effects of liberalization on
non-employment or informal employment, which are quite common in the Brazilian context, we
use repeated cross-section data from decennial Demographic Censuses from 1970 to 2010. These
data are representative at fine geographic levels and provide information on employment status,
including informality, but do not allow one to follow individual workers over time.
Our empirical strategy exploits the fact that regions with different industry mixes are differently
affected by Brazil’s early 1990s trade liberalization. We find that workers initially employed in
regions facing larger tariff declines (i) spend less and less time formally employed relative to workers
in regions facing smaller tariff declines; (ii) are more likely to transition into nontradable sector
employment, but these transitions do not make up for employment losses in the tradable sector;
(iii) face similar losses when initially employed in tradable or nontradable sectors; and (iv) do
1

Other papers using a similar approach include Costa, Garred and Pessoa (2016), Edmonds, Pavcnik and Topalova
(2010), Hakobyan and McLaren (2016), Hasan, Mitra and Ural (2006), Hasan, Mitra, Ranjan and Ahsan (2012),
Kondo (2014), McCaig (2011), Topalova (2010), and many others.

2

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

not respond to depressed local labor market conditions by migrating to more favorably affected
regions. We also show that harder-hit locations experience relative increases in non-employment
and in informal employment in the medium run (1991 to 2000). However, in the long run (1991
to 2010) non-employment does not respond, and informal employment strongly increases. These
results suggest that after many years the informal sector absorbs a significant portion of formerly
trade-displaced workers who spent years non-employed following liberalization. Surprisingly, we
find no statistically significant long-run effect of liberalization on informal sector earnings or wages,
which sharply contrasts with the formal-sector earnings results documented in Dix-Carneiro and
Kovak (forthcoming).
This paper relates to three literatures investigating the labor market effects of trade. First, we
contribute to a recent but fast growing literature on the regional effects of trade, including Topalova
(2007), Autor et al. (2013), Kovak (2013), Hakobyan and McLaren (2016) and Dix-Carneiro and
Kovak (forthcoming). Second, our paper relates to a recent literature on worker-level effects of trade
using longitudinal administrative datasets such as Menezes-Filho and Muendler (2011), Autor,
Dorn, Hanson and Song (2014), Dauth, Findeisen and Suedekum (2014), and Utar (2017). Our
paper differs from much of this prior literature by studying i) regional rather than industry shocks,
ii) a discrete shock, allowing us to measure dynamic responses to liberalization, and iii) transitions
into the nontradable sector and informal employment, which are salient features of the Brazilian
context.2 Finally, our paper relates to the literature on trade and informality (Goldberg and Pavcnik
2003, Menezes-Filho and Muendler 2011, Bosch, Goñi-Pacchioni and Maloney 2012, McCaig and
Pavcnik 2014, Paz 2014, Cruces, Porto and Viollaz 2014). While much of the previous work on the
Brazilian trade liberalization episode found no significant effects of tariff reductions on informality,
our work finds large effects, especially in the long run. As we discuss, these differences in findings
can be reconciled by differences in research design, unit of analysis, sectoral coverage, and time
horizons.
Our results have important implications regarding the regional labor market effects of trade.
We show that labor market outcomes for formally employed workers initially employed in regions
more exposed to foreign competition steadily deteriorate over time relative to those in less exposed
regions. These worker-level findings are similar to the region-level results on formal labor market
outcomes in Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (forthcoming). However, they contrast with standard spatial equilibrium models (e.g. Blanchard and Katz (1992) and Bound and Holzer (2000)) and the
empirical findings of Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan (1993), in which workers’ labor market outcomes eventually partially recover. Additionally, we show that non-employment strongly increases
in harder-hit locations in the years immediately following liberalization, but that employment in
these locations recovers in the longer run. This employment recovery is entirely accounted for by
2

A notable exception is Menezes-Filho and Muendler (2011). Although they do not consider regional shocks,
they do study the same liberalization episode in Brazil and examine worker transitions into non-manufacturing and
informality.

3

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

an increase in informal employment in harder-hit locations. In other words, after going through
long periods of non-employment, trade-displaced formal-sector workers appear to eventually settle
for the fallback option of informal employment. An important implication is that policies discouraging informal employment may increase non-employment following a trade policy shock, as
trade-displaced workers cannot be as easily absorbed by the informal sector. Finally, we show that
the tradable and non-tradable sectors are closely integrated in the Brazilian labor market. This
cross-sector integration implies that policies such as Trade Adjustment Assistance in the United
States, which target only industries that are directly affected by import competition, omit large
numbers of workers whose employment and earnings prospects were sharply but indirectly affected
by liberalization.
Our paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the history and institutional context
of Brazil’s early 1990s trade liberalization. Section 3 describes the data sources used throughout
the paper. Section 4 explains why trade liberalization had heterogeneous effects across regions and
shows how we measure trade-induced local labor demand shocks. Section 5 investigates the effects
of liberalization on worker-level labor market outcomes using longitudinal data from RAIS. Section
6 complements this analysis by investigating the effects of liberalization on the structure of local
labor markets, with an emphasis on how regional formal employment, informal employment, and
non-employment responded to the trade shocks. Section 7 concludes.

2

Trade Liberalization in Brazil

Brazil’s early 1990s trade liberalization provides an excellent setting in which to study the labor
market effects of changes in trade policy. The unilateral trade liberalization involved large declines
in average trade barriers and featured substantial variation in tariff cuts across industries. As we
will argue below, this variation was plausibly exogenous to counterfactual industry performance,
making it possible to estimate causal effects of liberalization. As a result, many papers have
examined the labor market effects of trade liberalization in the Brazilian context.3
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Brazil ended nearly one hundred years of extremely high
trade barriers imposed as part of an import substituting industrialization policy.4 In 1987, nominal
tariffs were high, but the degree of protection actually experienced by a given industry often
deviated substantially from the nominal tariff rate due to i) a variety of non-tariff barriers such
3
Examples include Arbache, Dickerson and Green (2004), Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (forthcoming), Goldberg and
Pavcnik (2003), Gonzaga, Filho and Terra (2006), Kovak (2013), Krishna, Poole and Senses (2014), Menezes-Filho
and Muendler (2011), Pavcnik, Blom, Goldberg and Schady (2004), Paz (2014), Schor (2004), and Soares and Hirata
(2016) among many others.
4
Although Brazil was a founding signatory of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1947, it
maintained high trade barriers through an exemption in Article XVIII Section B, granted to developing countries
facing balance of payments problems (Abreu 2004). Hence, trade policy changes during the period under study were
unilateral.

4

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

as suspended import licenses for many goods and ii) a system of “special customs regimes” that
lowered or removed tariffs for many transactions (Kume, Piani and de Souza 2003).5 In 1988 and
1989, in an effort to increase transparency in trade policy, the government reduced tariff redundancy
by cutting nominal tariffs and eliminating certain special regimes and trade-related taxes, but there
was no effect on the level of protection faced by Brazilian producers (Kume 1990).
Liberalization effectively began in March 1990, when the newly elected administration of President Collor suddenly and unexpectedly abolished the list of suspended import licenses and removed
nearly all of the remaining special customs regimes (Kume et al. 2003). These policies were replaced
by a set of import tariffs providing the same protective structure, as measured by the gap between
prices internal and external to Brazil, in a process known as tariffication (tarificação) (de Carvalho,
Jr. 1992). In some industries, this process required modest tariff increases to account for the lost
protection from abolishing import bans.6 Although these changes did not substantially affect the
protective structure, they left tariffs as the main instrument of trade policy, such that tariff levels
in 1990 and later provide an accurate measure of protection.
The main phase of trade liberalization occurred between 1990 and 1995, with a gradual reduction
in import tariffs culminating with the introduction of Mercosur. Tariffs fell from an average of 30.5
percent to 12.8 percent, and remained relatively stable thereafter.7 Along with this large average
decline came substantial heterogeneity in tariff cuts across industries, with some industries such as
agriculture and mining facing small tariff changes, and others such as apparel and rubber facing
declines of more than 30 percentage points. We measure liberalization using long-differences in the
log of one plus the tariff rate from 1990 to 1995, shown in Figure 1. During this time period, tariffs
accurately measure the degree of protection faced by Brazilian producers, and tariff reductions from
1990 to 1995 reflect the full extent of liberalization faced by each industry. We do not rely on the
timing of tariff cuts between 1990 and 1995, because this timing was chosen to maintain support
for the liberalization plan, cutting tariffs on intermediate inputs earlier and consumer goods later
(Kume et al. 2003).
As discussed below, along with regional differences in industry mix, the cross-industry variation
in tariff cuts provides the identifying variation in our analysis. Following the argument in Goldberg
and Pavcnik (2005), we note that the tariff cuts were nearly perfectly correlated with the preliberalization tariff levels (correlation coefficient = -0.90). These initial tariff levels reflected a
protective structure initially imposed in 1957 (Kume et al. 2003), decades before liberalization. This
5

These policies were imposed quite extensively. In January 1987, 38 percent of individual tariff lines were subject
to suspended import licenses, which effectively banned imports of the goods in question (Authors’ calculations from
Bulletin International des Douanes no.6 v.11 supplement 2). In 1987, 74 percent of imports were subject to a special
customs regime (de Carvalho, Jr. 1992).
6
Appendix Figure A1 shows the time series of tariffs. Note the tariff increases in 1990 for the auto and electronic
equipment industries.
7
Simple averages of tariff rates across Nı́vel 50 industries, as reported in Kume et al. (2003). See Appendix A.1
for details on tariff data.

5

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

feature left little scope for political economy concerns that might otherwise have driven systematic
endogeneity of tariff cuts to counterfactual industry performance.
To check for any remaining spurious correlation between tariff cuts and other steadily evolving industry factors, we regress pre-liberalization (1980-1991) changes in industry employment
and average monthly earnings on the 1990-1995 tariff reductions, with detailed results reported
in Appendix B.1. We attempted a variety of alternative specifications and emphasize that the
results should be interpreted with care, as they include only 20 tradable-industry observations.
Most specifications exhibit no statistically significant relationship, but heteroskedasticity-weighted
specifications place heavy weight on agriculture and find a positive relationship. Agriculture was
initially the least protected industry, and it experienced approximately no tariff reduction. It also
had declining wages and employment before liberalization, driving the positive relationship with
tariff reductions. Consistent with earlier work, when omitting agriculture, tariff cuts are unrelated
to pre-liberalization earnings trends (Krishna, Poole and Senses 2011). Given these varying results,
we include controls for pre-liberalization trends in all of the analyses presented below, to account
for any potential spurious correlation. Consistent with the notion that the tariff changes were
exogenous in practice, these pre-liberalization controls have little influence on the vast majority of
our results.

3

Data

Our main data source for individual labor market outcomes is the Relação Anual de Informações
Sociais (RAIS), spanning the period from 1986 to 2010. This is an administrative dataset assembled yearly by the Brazilian Ministry of Labor, providing a high quality census of the Brazilian
formal labor market (De Negri, de Castro, de Souza and Arbache 2001, Saboia and Tolipan 1985).
Accurate information in RAIS is required for workers to receive payments from several government
benefits programs, and firms face fines for failure to report, so both agents have an incentive to
provide accurate information. RAIS includes nearly all formally employed workers, meaning those
with a signed work card (carteira assinada), providing them access to the benefits and labor protections afforded by the legal employment system. It omits interns, domestic workers, and other minor
employment categories, along with those without signed work cards, including the self-employed.
These data have recently been used by Dix-Carneiro (2014), Helpman, Itskhoki, Muendler and Redding (forthcoming), Krishna et al. (2014), Lopes de Melo (2013), and Menezes-Filho and Muendler
(2011), though these papers utilize shorter panels. The data consist of job records including worker
and establishment identifiers, allowing us to track workers and establishments over time. We utilize the establishment’s geographic location (municipality) and industry; worker-level information
including gender, age, and education (9 categories); and job-level information such as the date of
accession, date of separation, tenure, occupation, and average monthly earnings.

6

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

These data have various advantages relative to previous work on the effects of trade on local
labor markets. First, because we study a discrete policy shock, we can use the RAIS data to
infer the dynamics of adjustment to trade liberalization, in contrast to studies of steadily evolving
shocks such as Chinese trade, as emphasized by Autor et al. (2014). Second, RAIS is a census
rather than a sample, so it is representative at fine geographic levels.8 Third, the panel dimension
of the data allows us to track workers over time as they potentially transition between jobs, sectors,
and regions.
As is typically the case in administrative employment datasets, the limitation of RAIS is a
lack of information on workers who are not formally employed. When a worker does not appear
in the database in a given month, we can conclude that they are not formally employed at that
time. However, we cannot tell whether the worker is out of the labor force, unemployed, informally
employed, or self-employed. This is important in the Brazilian context, with informality rates often
exceeding 50 percent of all employed workers during our sample period.9 When we need information
on individuals who are not formally employed, or information before 1986, we supplement the
analysis using the decennial Brazilian Demographic Census, covering 1970-2010. While these data
do not permit following individuals over time, they allow us to study the effects of liberalization
on the regional employment structure by covering the entire population, including the informally
employed, unemployed, and those outside the labor force.10 We classify as informally employed
workers without a signed work card, paralleling the formality definition in RAIS and following much
of the literature on Brazilian informality.11 Because the Census is a household survey and workers
face no penalties for reporting informal status, this measure accurately reflects informality.

4

Regional Tariff Reductions

Our empirical analyses compare the evolution of labor market outcomes for workers and regions
facing large tariff declines to those facing smaller tariff declines. Intuitively, regions experience larger
declines in labor demand when their most important industries face larger liberalization-induced
price declines (Topalova 2007). Kovak (2013) presents a specific-factors model of regional economies
capturing this intuition, in which the regional labor demand shock resulting from liberalization is
X

βri P̂i ,

where

i

λri ϕ1i
βri ≡ P
1 .
j λrj ϕj

(1)

8
The National Household Survey (Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicı́lios - PNAD) would be a natural
alternative data source for a yearly analysis, but it only provides geographic information at the state level, does not
allow one to follow individual workers over time, and provides a much smaller sample.
9
See Appendix B.2 for descriptive statistics on informal employment.
10
See Appendix A.3 for more detail on the Demographic Census data.
11
The work-card based definition of formality is standard in papers using household survey data to study Brazilian
informality, including Goldberg and Pavcnik (2003), Menezes-Filho and Muendler (2011), Bosch et al. (2012), Paz
(2014), and many others.

7

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Hats represent proportional changes, r indexes regions, i indexes tradable-sector industries, ϕi is the
cost share of non-labor factors, and λri is the share of regional labor initially allocated to tradable
industry i. P̂i is the liberalization-induced price change facing industry i, and (1) is a weighted
average of these price changes across tradable industries, with more weight on industries capturing
larger shares of initial regional employment.12 Thus, although all regions face the same vector
of liberalization-induced price changes, differences in the regional industry mix generate regional
variation in labor demand shocks.
We operationalize this shock measure by defining the “regional tariff reduction” (RT R), which
utilizes only liberalization-induced variation in prices, replacing P̂i with the change in log of one
plus the tariff rate.
RT Rr = −

X

βri d ln(1 + τi )

(2)

i

τi is the tariff rate in industry i, and d represents the long difference from 1990-1995, the period of
Brazilian trade liberalization. We calculate tariff reductions using data from Kume et al. (2003),
λri using the 1991 Census, and ϕi using 1990 National Accounts data from IBGE.13 Together, these
allow us to calculate the weights, βri . Note that RT Rr is more positive in regions facing larger
tariff reductions, which simplifies the interpretation of our results, since nearly all regions faced
tariff declines during liberalization.
Figure 2 maps the spatial variation in RT Rr . We define a set of consistently identifiable regions
based on the “microregion” definition of the Brazilian Statistical Agency (IBGE), which groups
together economically integrated contiguous municipalities with similar geographic and productive
characteristics (IBGE 2002).14 Regions facing larger tariff reductions are presented as lighter and
yellower, while regions facing smaller cuts are shown as darker and bluer. The region at the 10th
percentile faced a tariff reduction of 0.2 percentage points, while the region at the 90th percentile
faced a 10.7 percentage point decline. Hence, in interpreting the regression estimates below, we
compare regions whose values of RT Rr differ by 10 percentage points, closely approximating the
90-10 gap of 10.5 percentage points. Note that there is substantial variation in the tariff shocks even
12
Following Kovak (2013), we drop the nontradable sector in the calculation of local trade-induced shocks, based
on the assumption that nontradable prices move with tradable prices. In Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (forthcoming), we
confirm this assumption using a measure of local nontradables prices.
13
See Appendix A.4 for more detail on the construction of (2). We use the Census to calculate λri because it allows
for a more detailed industry definition than what is available in RAIS (see Appendix A.1) and because the Census
allows us to calculate weights that are representative of overall employment, rather than just formal employment.
14
We consistently identify 475 regions for analyses falling within 1986-2010 and 405 markets for analyses using
data from 1980 and earlier. Our geographic classification is a slightly aggregated version of the one in Kovak (2013),
accounting for additional boundary changes during the longer sample period. The analysis omits 11 microregions,
shown with a cross-hatched pattern Figure 2. These include i) Manaus, which was part of a Free Trade Area and
hence not subject to tariff cuts during liberalization; ii) the microregions that constitute the state of Tocantins,
which was created in 1988 and hence not consistently identifiable throughout our sample period; and iii) a few other
municipalities that are omitted from RAIS in the 1980s. The inclusion or exclusion of these regions when possible
has no substantive effect on the results.

8

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

among local labor markets within the same state. As we include state fixed effects in our analyses
to control for state-level policy differences such as minimum wages, these within-state differences
provide the identifying variation in our study.15

5

Worker-Level Analysis

5.1

Worker-Level Empirical Specification

We utilize the panel dimension of the RAIS data to follow individual workers over time, tracking
the evolution of labor market outcomes for workers initially employed in regions facing larger tariff
reductions vs. those initially in regions facing smaller tariff cuts. Our main analysis focuses on a
panel of workers who were initially employed in the tradable sector in December 1989, just before
trade liberalization began. In particular, we restrict attention to workers aged 25-44 in December
1989 (who remain of working age through 2010) and whose highest paying job was in the tradable
sector. For computational tractability, we take a 15% sample of individuals meeting these criteria
in regions with more than 2,000 tradable sector workers in 1989 and include all relevant workers
from smaller regions, weighting appropriately in subsequent analyses. This process yields 585,078
individuals in our main tradable sector sample. In Section 5.6, we also consider an alternate
population of workers initially employed in the nontradable sector, in order to investigate the
transmission of the trade shock into this indirectly affected sector. All other restrictions and
sampling procedures are the same, yielding a sample of 973,703 nontradable sector workers. Table
1 provides summary statistics for the tradable sector and nontradable sector samples.
We use the following specification to compare the evolution of labor market outcomes for workers
initially in regions facing larger vs. smaller tariff reductions.
yirt = θt RT Rr + αst + Xir,1989 Φt + ǫirt ,

(3)

where i indexes individuals, t indexes years following the start of liberalization (t ∈ [1990 − 2010]),
and r is the worker’s initial region of employment in December 1989. Note that a worker’s initial
region r is fixed throughout the analysis, even if they are employed elsewhere in later years. yirt
represents various worker-level post-liberalization outcomes, which we define below. Xir,1989 is a rich
set of worker-level controls including demographics (9 education category indicators, gender, age,
age-squared), initial job characteristics for the highest-paying job in December 1989 (84 occupation
category indicators, 14 tradable industry indicators, 12 nontradable industry indicators, tenure
at the plant), initial employer characteristics (log employment, exporting indicator, log exports,
importing indicator, log imports), and initial region characteristics (pre-liberalization (1986-89)
15
A regression of RT Rr on state fixed effects yields an R2 of 0.36; i.e. 64% of the variation in RT Rr is not explained
by state effects. Our main conclusions are unaffected by the inclusion or exclusion of state fixed effects.

9

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

earnings growth and formal employment growth, and pre-liberalization growth in the outcome
of interest).16 This specification compares subsequent labor market outcomes for two otherwise
observationally equivalent workers who in 1989 happened to live in regions facing different local
trade shocks. Since RT Rr does not vary over time, always reflecting tariff reductions from 1990 to
1995, the estimates of θt trace out the cumulative effects of regional tariff reductions on the worker’s
outcome yirt as of year t. Note that we estimate (3) separately for each year t ∈ [1990, 2010], allowing
the regression coefficients (θt , Φt ) and state fixed effects (αst ) to differ across years.

5.2

Employment

We begin by examining how the regional tariff reduction in a worker’s initial region affected their
subsequent formal employment status. We calculate the cumulative average number of months
formally employed per year from 1990 to year t.
t
X
1
M onthsis ,
t − 1989

(4)

s=1990

where M onthsis is the number of months individual i was formally employed in year s.17 Note that
M onthsis includes formal employment in any location, even if the individual moves away from their
initial region following liberalization. Figure 3 reports the effects of liberalization on this dependent
variable, using specification (3). Each point in the figure represents the regression coefficient θt
for the relevant year. The negative estimates imply that workers initially employed in harder hit
regions experience relative declines in employment in the formal sector. The 2010 point estimate
is -4.7, implying that a worker whose initial region faced a 10 percentage point larger tariff decline
(approximately the 90-10 gap in RT Rr ) on average worked in the formal sector for 9.9 fewer total
months between 1990 and 2010. This is a large effect, given that the unconditional average number
of total months worked in the formal sector during this time period for workers in our sample is 125
months.18 In contrast to conventional wisdom, negatively-affected workers’ average employment
outcomes do not recover during the 15 years following liberalization. In fact, the effects grow over
time, implying steady relative declines in formal employment for workers initially in regions facing
16

Firm-level imports and exports for 1990 come from customs data assembled by the Secretaria de Comércio
Exterior (SECEX). The pre-liberalization outcome controls are calculated as follows. We draw a sample of workers
in December 1986, paralleling the main sample, and estimate a version of (3) replacing RT Rr with region indicators.
These first step region indicator coefficients enter as controls in equation (3). Note that when examining accumulated
earnings, we are unable to normalize by pre-1986 earnings, so we instead include the pre-liberalization control related
to months formally employed. For migration-related outcomes, we additionally control for the 1986-1991 probability
of out-migration, obtained from the Census.
17
RAIS reports the month of accession and separation (if any) for each job, so that we can observe formal employment at the monthly level.
18
The employment measure in (4) is cumulative, in the sense that it calculates average months employed from 1990
to subsequent year t. Appendix B.3 presents an alternative non-cumulative measure, the fraction of year t in which
the worker was formally employed, with similarly growing effects over time.

10

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

larger tariff reductions.
This pattern of growing individual-level formal employment effects is similar to our earlier
findings, which used a region-level rather than worker-level research design (Dix-Carneiro and
Kovak forthcoming). In that paper, we present evidence that the surprising growing effects of
liberalization on earnings result from dynamics in labor demand that gradually amplify the shortrun effect of the shock. These dynamics are driven by a combination of slow capital reallocation
and agglomeration economies. In that context, a liberalization-induced decline in labor demand
lowers wages and employment rates on impact. Then, through depreciation and reinvestment
elsewhere, capital slowly reallocates away from the region, reducing regional workers’ marginal
product and further reducing earnings and employment. Agglomeration economies amplify this
effect, reducing marginal products as regional economic activity contracts. In Dix-Carneiro and
Kovak (forthcoming), we present qualitative and quantitative empirical evidence supporting this
mechanism.
In Section 5.4 below, we document the robustness of these growing employment effects to
alternative specification choices and to controlling for a variety of post-liberalization economic
shocks. Appendix B.4 demonstrates that these large and growing effects on formal employment
apply to a variety of worker subsamples, including workers who were initially highly connected to
the formal labor market (employed for at least 36 or 42 out of 48 months during 1986-1989), to
both more educated workers (high school degree or more) and less educated workers (less than high
school), and to younger (initially age 25-34) and older (age 35-44) workers.
Along with the transitions out of formal employment documented in Figure 3, workers also
adjust between tradable and nontradable sector employment. Recall that all of the workers in our
main sample were initially employed in the tradable sector just prior to liberalization. In Figure
4, we examine the average number of months formally employed per year, as in (4), but separate
months into those worked in tradable and nontradable sector employment. As expected, formal
employment losses were concentrated in the tradable sector, which makes sense given that trade
liberalization directly affected the tradable sector and the workers in our sample were initially
employed in tradable industries. In contrast, nontradable employment offsets a fraction of the
employment losses in the tradable sector, indicating that some tradable sector workers facing larger
regional tariff reductions transitioned into nontradable employment. These reallocations into the
nontradable sector allowed some workers initially in negatively affected regions to spend more time
formally employed.19 However, they were not large enough to offset the substantial losses in the
tradable sector, such that overall months formally employed still decline in the hardest-hit locations,
as seen in Figure 3.
19

This result parallels that of Menezes-Filho and Muendler (2011), who show that manufacturing workers whose
industry faced a larger tariff decline were more likely to switch into formal employment in a non-manufacturing
industry.

11

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

5.3

Earnings

Together with changes along the employment margin, workers’ formal earnings may have responded
to liberalization-induced changes in labor demand as well. It is important to keep in mind that
formal earnings effects are likely to be upper bounds on the overall earnings effects, since workers
losing formal earnings may partially offset these losses through earnings in the informal sector.
Although informal earnings are unobserved in the RAIS worker panel, in Section 6.2 we use Census
data to document substantial shifts into informality in regions facing larger tariff reductions.
Following Autor et al. (2014), we calculate a worker’s average yearly earnings from 1990 to each
subsequent year t as a multiple of the worker’s average pre-liberalization (1986-89) yearly earnings:
1
t−1989

Pt

s=1990 Earningsis

M eanEarningsi,1986−89
P1989

(5)

,

where M eanEarningsi,1986−89 ≡ Ps=1986
1989

Earningsis

s=1986 M onthsis

× 12

The numerator is the worker’s average post-liberalization formal earnings from 1990 to t, and
the denominator is the worker’s average pre-liberalization formal earnings from 1986 to 1989.20
Note that formal earnings may decline due to lower wages or due to fewer months or fewer hours
worked in the formal sector. We use this measure because it accounts for worker heterogeneity in
initial earnings while still being well defined for workers with zero earnings after 1989, avoiding
sample selection issues. We then regress this earnings measure for each year t on the regional tariff
reduction (RT Rr ) and the extensive set of controls described above. Figure 5 shows the results.
The point estimate in 2010 is -0.85, implying that over the course of 21 years, a worker whose initial
region faced a 10 percentage point larger tariff decline lost 1.8 times their yearly pre-liberalization
formal earnings, in relative terms.21 As with employment, these formal earnings results correspond
closely to the regional analysis in Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (forthcoming).22
20

Employers’ report workers’ individual average monthly earnings during employed months in a given year. We
construct individual yearly earnings by multiplying average monthly earnings by the number of months employed in
the year and then summing across employers.
21
Note that the earnings measure in (5) is cumulative, in the sense that it averages earnings between 1990 and
subsequent year t. Appendix B.3 presents an alternative non-cumulative measure, earnings in year t as a multiple of
average pre-liberalization earnings, with similarly growing effects over time.
22
Figure 3 in Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (forthcoming) shows that by 2010 a region facing a 10 percentage point
larger tariff reduction experienced a 15.9 percent larger decline in formal earnings. Appendix Figure B4 shows that
tradable-sector workers initially in the same region experienced a 3.9 percent larger decline in the probability of
working in the formal sector by 2010. Combining these estimates, we can calculate the expected decline in individual
yearly earnings as a share of initial yearly earnings.
E 2010 · P 2010
E 2010 · P 2010 − E 1990 · P 1990
= 1990
− 1 = (1 − 0.159)(1 − 0.039) − 1 = −0.192
1990
1990
E
·P
E
· P 1990
where E is average earnings and P is the probability of formal employment in the given year. We compare this
predicted average decline in individual yearly earnings of 19.2 percent to the parallel estimate of 16.4 percent in

12

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

5.4

Robustness

We have implemented a variety of robustness tests demonstrating that the formal employment
effects in Figure 3 and the formal earnings effects in Figure 5 are robust to alternative measurement
and specification choices and to controlling for salient economic shocks occurring after liberalization.
A detailed discussion appears in Appendix B.5, and we summarize the findings here.
We first calculate alternative regional tariff reductions using effective rates of protection, which
account for tariff changes on industry output and industry inputs. Because changes in effective rates
of protection are somewhat larger than changes in output tariffs, the resulting regression estimates
are smaller by approximately the same proportion, but we continue to observe growing effects
over time, and predicted effects on employment and wages are very similar to those in the main
analysis. We also estimate (3) omitting fixed effects for the worker’s initial industry and/or their
initial occupation. These alternative specifications thus capture the direct effects of liberalization
on industries and occupations at the national level and are a bit larger than those controlling for
industry and occupation fixed effects, and we continue to find substantial growth in liberalization’s
effects over time.
Many salient economic shocks hit the Brazilian economy in the years following trade liberalization, and we introduce controls to ensure that these subsequent shocks are not driving our results.
We control for regional tariff reductions occurring after liberalization, using tariff changes from 1995
to each subsequent year t. Exchange rate movements, particularly the large devaluations in 1999
and 2002, could also confound our results if they were correlated with the tariff changes occurring
during liberalization. We construct industry-specific real exchange rate changes from 1990 to each
year t > 1995, and calculate regional exchange rate shocks as weighted averages, following (2). We
control for the wave of privatization in the early 2000s using the initial (1995) share of employment
at state-owned firms or the changes in this share from 1995 to each year t > 1995. Finally, we control for changes in commodity prices. This is particularly important given the commodity-intensive
nature of Brazilian output and the substantial increase in commodity prices beginning in 2004. We
use IMF commodity price data to construct the change in price for 19 separate commodities, and
generate regional weighted averages of these price changes.
In all cases, when controlling for these post-liberalization shocks we continue to find large and
growing effects of liberalization on local formal employment and formal earnings. This robustness
applies to the main tradable-sector sample and the nontradable-sector sample discussed below in
Section 5.6. Together, these results imply that our findings are robust to alternative measurement
and specification choices and that the growing effects we observe over time are not driven by
subsequent shocks to the Brazilian economy. Rather, they reflect growing effects of liberalization
Appendix Figure B5. These magnitudes are quite similar in spite of the fact that Figure 3 in Dix-Carneiro and
Kovak (forthcoming) includes all formal workers, while Figures B4 and B5 include only workers initially employed in
the formal tradable sector.

13

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

over time.23

5.5

Migration

Workers whose initial regions faced larger tariff reductions may have chosen to migrate to more
positively affected labor markets. In earlier work, we used cross-sectional information from the Census to document that regional working-age population does not respond to RT Rr , suggesting that
workers did not systematically move away from harder-hit regions (Dix-Carneiro and Kovak forthcoming). Here, we are able to utilize the panel dimension of the RAIS data to follow individual
workers over time to see whether those initially employed in regions facing larger tariff reductions
were more likely to obtain formal employment elsewhere. Note that if migrants leave the formal
sector, they leave the RAIS sample, and their migration will not be observed. To lessen potential bias due to differential attrition from formal employment, we calculate the share of formally
employed months spent away from the initial region:
M onthsAwayit
.
M onthsit

(6)

This measure mitigates selection concerns by conditioning on formal employment and because the
vast majority of individuals in our sample spend at least one month in the formal sector between
1990 and 2009.
Figure 6 reports the relationship between (6) and RT Rr for the tradable worker panel (similar
results for the nontradable panel appear in Appendix Figure B9). The estimates are small and not
nearly statistically significantly different from zero. The negative point estimates suggest that, if
anything, workers initially employed in regions facing larger tariff declines were less likely to migrate
to a formal job elsewhere than workers initially employed in more favorably affected regions. More
generally, the only way that this analysis would miss a substantial migration response would be
if migrating workers are systematically more likely to switch from formal employment to informal
employment upon migration. While this is possible ex-ante, the lack of working-age population
response documented in Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (forthcoming) rules out this possibility. Hence,
we find no evidence for systematic migration responses to liberalization-induced labor demand
shocks.

5.6

Nontradable Sector Workers

Recall that the empirical results discussed so far in this section apply to workers who initially
worked in tradable industries prior to liberalization, i.e. those in industries directly affected by
the tariff shock. We also implemented all of these analyses using an alternate group of workers
23

See Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (forthcoming) for a more extensive set of robustness tests and alternative commodity
price controls.

14

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

who were initially employed in the nontradable sector. Our objective is to see whether workers
outside tradable sectors are insulated from the local effects trade liberalization, or whether the
tradable and nontradable labor markets are sufficiently integrated that regional trade shocks affect
both sectors’ workers similarly. This integration may occur through changes in consumer demand
for local nontradables or because workers compete for jobs in both the tradable and nontradable
sectors.
For all outcomes, workers initially employed in the nontradable sector experience similar effects
of liberalization to those of initially tradable sector workers. For example, Figure 7 reports the
effects of regional tariff reductions on the average number of months formally employed per year
from 1990 to year t, as in (4). As with tradable sector workers, the effects are large and grow over
time, indicating that nontradable sector workers initially employed in regions facing larger tariff
reductions spend less and less time formally employed compared to workers initially employed in
more favorably affected regions. The long-run (2010) point estimate for the nontradable sector
is -2.7, which implies that a worker whose initial region faced a 10 percentage point larger tariff decline on average worked in the formal sector for 5.7 fewer total months between 1990 and
2010, compared to an unconditional average of 129 months worked in the formal sector for the
nontradable sector sample. This large effect implies that the tradable and nontradable sectors were
sufficiently integrated that the direct effects of liberalization in the tradable sector spill over into
the nontradable sector. However, the nontradable sector effect is 43 percent smaller than that in
the tradable sector (Figure 3), indicating that workers in the nontradable sector were somewhat
insulated from the direct employment effects of liberalization.
The integration of nontradable and tradable sector labor markets is further reinforced by Figure
8, which breaks the employment analysis of Figure 7 into months spent in tradable and nontradable
employment. The results are quite different from those for tradable sector workers in Figure 4. The
biggest formal employment losses for workers initially in the nontradable sector occur in the tradable
sector. Only in the last years of our sample do nontradable sector employment losses become
significantly different from zero, while tradable sector losses are large and significant throughout
the post-liberalization period. This means that in favorably affected markets, nontradable sector
workers regularly transition to tradable employment, but that these transitions become less and
less common in markets facing larger tariff declines, driving much the overall formal employment
losses faced by nontradable sector workers.
The other outcomes considered above also exhibit similar patterns in the nontradable and tradable sectors. Appendix B.3 presents results for migration, earnings, and alternative employment
measures, and Appendix B.5 documents the robustness of the nontradable-sample results to alternative specifications and controls for post-liberalization shocks, using the same specifications
summarized in Section 5.4.

15

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

5.7

Summary of Worker-Level Analysis

The results in this section document substantial and growing effects of trade liberalization on
workers’ formal employment and earnings for 15 years following the end of liberalization. Labor
market outcomes of workers initially employed in harder-hit places steadily deteriorate over time and
never recover. Adversely affected workers spend less time formally employed and exhibit declining
formal earnings compared to workers initially employed in other regions. These findings at the
individual level are similar to the region-level results of Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (forthcoming),
who find large and growing effects on regional formal employment and earnings.
We also found evidence of various adjustment margins within formal employment. Workers
initially in the tradable sector are more likely to transition into nontradable employment when facing
more negative shocks. However, these sectoral transitions are too small on average to compensate
for losses in the tradable sector. We find minimal effect of regional shocks on inter-regional worker
mobility. Although this finding is similar to earlier work, it remains surprising that workers do
not migrate in the face of substantially depressed relative labor market conditions in harder-hit
regions. Rather, on average, worker adjustment appears to operate along other margins within a
given region.
Finally, the evidence strongly supports the conclusion that formal tradable and nontradable
sectors are strongly integrated. Workers initially employed in the nontradable sector experienced
similar employment and earnings effects to those initially employed in the tradable sector, though
with smaller magnitude. Employment losses for initially tradable sector workers were partly offset
by transitions into nontradable employment. More strikingly, employment losses for initially nontradable sector workers occurred primarily through reduced subsequent transitions into tradable
employment, highlighting the close integration of the two sectors.

6

Regional Analysis

In the preceding analyses, we focused on outcomes for formally employed workers. The formal
sector is of particular interest for a variety of reasons. It is more capital intensive, dynamic, and
productive than the informal sector, and formal jobs are generally seen as being of much higher
quality than informal jobs (LaPorta and Schleifer 2008, Bacchetta, Ernst and Bustamante 2009, Fajnzylber, Maloney and Montes-Rojas 2011, LaPorta and Schleifer 2014). Formal employment gives
workers access to all of the benefits and labor protections afforded them by the legal employment
system, while informal jobs generally provide minimal benefits and fail to comply with various labor
regulations. Hence, transitions out of formal employment are likely to involve important declines
in worker wellbeing even if displaced workers later find informal employment.
In this section we seek to better understand what happens to workers in harder-hit regions once
they leave the formal sector. Although the longitudinal data in RAIS do not provide information
16

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

on workers outside the formal sector, we turn to Census data, which allow us to examine the roles
of informal employment and non-employment in regional labor market adjustment.24 Recall that
the Census reports whether a worker has a signed work card, giving them access to the worker
rights and protections afforded them by formal employment. Workers without a signed work card
are informally employed.25 Trade policy’s effects on informality are also of independent interest,
as evidenced by a large and growing academic literature.26 Import competition may increase
pressure on firms to cut costs by neglecting to comply with labor regulations, and informal jobs are
often characterized as providing fewer opportunities for training and advancement and generally
less favorable working conditions (Goldberg and Pavcnik 2007, Bacchetta et al. 2009). Together,
these concerns have made informality a prominent issue in public debates over globalization in the
developing world (Bacchetta et al. 2009).

6.1

Regional Empirical Specification

While the RAIS data allow us to follow workers over time, they do not allow us to observe the
worker’s status outside formal employment. In order to study margins of labor market adjustment
involving informal employment or non-employment, we utilize decennial Census data and an empirical approach that examines outcomes at the region level rather than the worker level.27 In
particular, we estimate specifications of the following form,
yrt − yr,1991 = θt RT Rr + αst + γt ∆yr,pre + ǫrt .

(7)

We estimate this specification separately for each post-liberalization Census year t ∈ {2000, 2010}.
yrt is a labor market outcome in region r and year t, RT Rr is the regional tariff reduction defined
in (2), αst are state fixed effects (allowed to vary by year), and ∆yr,pre is a pre-liberalization change
in the outcome (either 1980-1991 or 1970-1980). We use 1991 as the base year for outcome changes
because that is the closest Census year to the beginning of liberalization. Since RT Rr does not
vary over time, always reflecting tariff reductions from 1990 to 1995, the estimates of θt trace out
the cumulative effects of regional tariff reductions on the regional outcome yr as of year t. Table 2
presents summary statistics on the regional outcomes examined in the following analyses.28
24
We focus on non-employment, which includes both unemployment and out of the labor force. This approach
allows us to avoid changing labor force definitions over time and captures transitions into unemployment and out of
the labor force, both of which may be affected by trade reform.
25
See footnote 11 for papers using the same definition of informality.
26
See Goldberg and Pavcnik (2007) and Paz (2014) for literature reviews with relevant citations.
27
In order to maintain consistent regional definitions across Censuses from 1970-2010, the analysis in this section
partitions Brazil into 405 regions.
28
Table 2 reports unweighted means and standard deviations across time-consistent microregions. Note that these
may differ from similar figures at the national level because of variation in regional populations. See Appendix B.2
for national informality rates etc.

17

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

6.2

Regional Labor Market Structure

We have already documented that workers initially employed in regions facing larger tariff reductions spend less and less time formally employed than otherwise similar workers initially in more
favorably affected regions. Yet from the RAIS data alone, one can not observe whether these
displaced formal workers find informal employment or become non-employed. To shed light on
this question, we use the regional empirical strategy just described to examine the effects of liberalization on the regional shares of working-age (18-64) individuals that are not employed or are
informally employed. To ensure that our results are not driven by changes in the regional composition of workers, we control for worker demographics and education, following an approach similar
to that of Goldberg and Pavcnik (2003). Separately for each Census year t and each employment
category c ∈ {non-employed, informal, informal employee, self-employed}, we estimate regressions
of the following form.
1(categoryirt = c) = µcrt + Xit βtc + ecirt ,

(8)

The dependent variable is an indicator for the employment status of individual i in region r in
year t, µcrt are region fixed effects (allowed to vary across years), and Xit is a set of worker controls including 5 age bins, gender indicator, and indicators for individual years of education. The
regional fixed effect estimates, µ̂crt , then capture the share of working-age individuals in the region
who have the relevant employment status, purged of variation related to these observable worker
characteristics. We use these adjusted employment status shares as dependent variables in regional
analyses following (7). Note that this research design explains differences across regions in the
growth of informal or non-employed shares of the regional working-age population, rather than
aggregate national trends in these shares.29
The results appear in Table 3. Columns (1) - (3) examine changes from 1991 to 2000, while
columns (4) - (6) examine changes from 1991 to 2010. We control for pre-liberalization share
changes for 1980-1991, 1970-1980, and both. Information on formality is unavailable in 1970, so
1970-1980 pre-trends always refer to the non-employed share. All columns include state fixed effects.
Panel A shows that regions facing larger tariff declines experience relative increases in the share
of the working age population that is not employed. The estimate of 0.301 in column (3) implies
that by 2000 a region facing a 10 percentage point larger regional tariff reduction exhibited a 3.01
percentage point larger increase in the non-employed share. This is a large difference, accounting
for 7.6 percent of the baseline average non-employment rate across regions of 0.397 (Table 2). Panel
B shows that harder hit regions experience somewhat smaller increases in the share of workingage population that is informally employed. By 2010, however, the situation is different. The
informal effect increases by even more, while the non-employed effect is small and statistically
indistinguishable from zero. Column (6) of Panel B implies that by 2010 a region facing a 10
29

See Appendix B.2 for information on national informality rates.

18

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

percentage point larger regional tariff reduction exhibited a 5.28 percentage point larger increase
in the informally employed share of the working age population. In the absence of substantial
interregional migration, as documented above, these results suggest that many workers whose
regions faced larger tariff declines were non-employed in the years just following liberalization,
but that many of these individuals later found employment in the informal sector. Appendix B.6.1
reinforces this interpretation by presenting similar findings for a consistent birth cohort across 1991,
2000, and 2010, ensuring that the results are not driven by compositional change in the working-age
population. Hence, transitions to informal employment often occurred following a lengthy spell of
non-employment. Meghir, Narita and Robin (2015) support this interpretation, showing (in their
Table 1) very frequent transitions of unemployed workers to informal employment.30
Panels C and D of Table 3 split informal employment into informal employee and self-employed
status. These results are merely suggestive, as the prevalence of independent contractors blurs
the distinction between informal employment and self-employment, and for practical purposes selfemployment is often similar to informal employment in that workers often do not enjoy government
mandated benefits such as job security, employer social security contributions, etc. The medium-run
increase in informality reflects an increase in the share of informal employees, while the long-run
effect reflects increased self-employment.31 This pattern suggests that after long non-employed
spells, workers have few traditional employment options and must resort to self-employment. The
availability of an informal option may therefore help mitigate long-run employment losses in harder
hit regions. Understanding this interaction between trade policy and labor market policies relating
to informality is an important topic for future work. We show in Appendix B.6.2 that the results in
Table 3 are quite consistent across education levels. We also emphasize that the effects estimated
in Table 3 capture relative effects of trade liberalization across regions facing larger and smaller
tariff reductions, not aggregate national effects.32
The substantial effect of liberalization on local informal employment in Table 3 may appear
to contradict other results in the literature studying the response of Brazilian informality to trade
policy changes. The apparent conflict is resolved by noting differences in methodology and observed
adjustment patterns. For example, Goldberg and Pavcnik (2003) do not find an effect of trade policy
on informality, a finding corroborated by Bosch et al. (2012). These papers restrict attention to
manufacturing sectors and relate changes in within-industry informality to changes in industry30
Transitions from unemployment to informal employment are 4 to 5 times more frequent than transitions from
unemployment to formal employment.
31
de Paula and Scheinkman (2010) present convincing evidence for a mechanism in which increased informality
begets more informality in the presence of value-added taxes (VAT). Because purchases from informal firms do
not generate VAT credits, buyers have an incentive to become informal when more of their suppliers are informal.
However, since the long-run increase in informality that we document reflects primarily self-employment, it is unlikely
to be driven by this mechanism.
32
This point applies to cross-sectional analyses at the region or industry levels, including Goldberg and Pavcnik
(2003), Menezes-Filho and Muendler (2011), and Bosch et al. (2012). See Appendix B.2 for aggregate trends in
informality at the national level.

19

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

specific tariffs. This industry-level approach does not capture any informality responses that occur
through inter-sectoral shifts and omits non-manufacturing sectors entirely. As shown in Appendix
B.2, during the 1990s, informal shares increased in manufacturing industries, which faced larger
tariff cuts, and informal shares declined in agriculture and mining, which faced more positive tariff
changes.33 Our region-level approach captures these shifts between formal and informal employment
that occur across industries, including those outside manufacturing.
Menezes-Filho and Muendler (2011) employ an alternative research design, utilizing worker
panel data from the Pesquisa Mensal de Emprego (PME) to examine yearly employment transitions for individual workers initially employed in manufacturing. This approach has the benefit
of observing worker-level transitions between formal employment, informal employment, and nonemployment rather than relying on repeated cross-sections, but is limited by observing transitions
only at the yearly frequency. They find no significant relationship between tariff reductions and
the likelihood of transitioning into informal employment, but do find that output tariff declines
lead to increased transitions into non-employment. These findings are consistent with our results
if, as suggested by Table 3, many displaced formal sector workers spend more than a year in
non-employment before eventually obtaining informal employment. Our findings more closely parallel those of McCaig and Pavcnik (2014), who find substantial shifts from household (informal)
to enterprise (formal) employment in Vietnam in response to the U.S.-Vietnam Bilateral Trade
Agreement.34
To complete the picture of liberalization’s effects on regional labor market structure, we examine changes in the shares of regional employment falling in the following four categories: formal
tradable, formal nontradable, informal tradable, and informal nontradable. This analysis allows
us to understand the role of shifts across sectors vs. changes in informality within sectors. The
results appear in Table 4.35 Formal tradable employment is clearly the category hardest hit when
facing larger regional tariff reductions. The offsetting growth in informal employment that we saw
in Panel B of Table 3 does not reflect a shift toward nontradables, but occurs primarily within the
tradable sector. Putting these results in context, in Figure 4 we found that formal tradable sector
workers were more likely to transition into formal nontradable sector employment when the initial
region faced a more negative labor demand shock. Yet here we generally find small positive or
insignificant coefficients for the regional formal nontradable employment share, indicating that this
portion of the labor market does not expand to absorb the tradable sector workers transitioning
into nontradable employment. What, then, happened to workers initially in the formal nontradable
sector? Recall from Figure 8 that the biggest employment losses for formal workers initially in the
33

Appendix Figure B1 provides a breakdown of informality changes by more detailed industry.
Paz (2014) and Cruces et al. (2014) provide two other recent examples that find significant effects of tariff changes
on informality using different methodologies.
35
Note that although these categories partition all employed workers, the coefficients do not precisely sum to zero
because of differences in weighting and pre-trends across outcomes.
34

20

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

nontradable sector occurred in the tradable sector. This means that formal nontradable workers
often transition to formal tradable employment, but these transitions occur much less frequently in
markets facing larger tariff declines. It is likely that these formal nontradable sector workers who
are no longer able to find formal tradable or nontradable employment drive a large portion of the
growth in informal tradable employment seen in Table 4.

6.3

Regional Earnings

Given that many formally employed workers in regions facing larger tariff declines transitioned to
informal employment, we now examine the effects of liberalization on regional informal and overall
earnings (including both formal and informal workers). In Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (forthcoming),
we show that regions facing larger tariff reductions experience declining formal sector earnings
compared to other regions and that this difference grows steadily over time following liberalization.
We expect similar results for informal and overall regional earnings because the previous section
documented large shifts between regional formal and informal employment and because there is
substantial overlap in the industry composition of the formal and informal sectors (Appendix B.2).
As in the employment share analysis, we control for changes in the composition of the regional
workforce by estimating regressions of the following form.
ln(earnirt ) = µrt + Xit βt + eirt

(9)

The dependent variable is log earnings for worker i in region r in year t, µrt are region fixed effects
(allowed to vary across years), and Xit is the same set of worker controls used in (8). The regional
fixed effect estimates, µ̂rt , which we refer to as regional earnings premia, then capture average log
earnings in the region, purged of variation related to observable worker characteristics.36
Table 5 reports the results of estimating the relationship between regional earnings premia
and regional tariff reductions, as in (7). Panel A restricts attention to informal workers, i.e. those
without a signed work card, including both informal employees and the self-employed. The results in
columns (1) - (3) show that by 2000, informal earnings declined substantially in regions facing larger
tariff reductions, compared to those in other regions. The estimate in column (3) of -0.433 implies
that a region facing a 10 percentage point larger tariff decline experienced a 4.33 percentage point
larger proportional decline in earnings among informal workers. In contrast, by 2010, these effects
have largely disappeared, as seen in much smaller and statistically insignificant point estimates.
Appendix B.7.1 shows that the earnings effects in Table 5 are robust to using more detailed worker
36

Note that we do not control for industry fixed effects in (9), paralleling the employment category analysis in
(8). This choice allows us to capture both the direct effects of tariff reductions in a worker’s industry and the
indirect effects, operating through regional equilibrium (Hakobyan and McLaren 2016, Acemoglu, Autor, Dorn,
Hanson and Price 2016). Differences from the similar informal and overall earnings results in Dix-Carneiro and
Kovak (forthcoming) result primarily from the exclusion of these industry fixed effects. See Appendix Table B14 for
results controlling for industry fixed effects when calculating regional earnings premia.

21

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

controls when calculating regional earnings premia, following a consistent birth cohort across years,
and examining hourly wages rather than monthly earnings.
The reduction in magnitude of the informal earnings effect is in sharp contrast to the effects
of regional tariff reductions on formal sector earnings, which grow substantially over time. This
contrast is somewhat puzzling; we expected informal wages to fall along with formal sector wages.
The industry distributions of formal and informal output are similar (Ulyssea (2014) and Appendix
B.2), so we expect similar declines in labor demand in both sectors. Also, displaced formal sector
workers flood into informal employment (Figure 3 and Table 3), which we expect to lower informal
workers’ wages. A potential explanation for the lack of effect on informal wages is that consumers
in harder hit regions experience declining incomes and shift toward lower-priced, lower quality
goods produced in the informal sector. Such an increase in demand for informal goods may help
offset wage declines for informally employed workers.37 in Appendix B.7.2, we estimate versions
of Table 5 separately for more and less educated workers, finding that the long-run recovery of
informal earnings occurs exclusively among less-skilled workers. This pattern is consistent with
the hypothesis just mentioned if lower quality products are disproportionately produced using less
educated workers.38 That said, in the absence of regional consumption data distinguishing between
formal and informal goods, we are unable to rigorously test this hypothesis and leave it as a topic
for future work.
Other potential explanations are less plausible. First, because informal firms are generally
less capital intensive than firms in the formal sector (LaPorta and Schleifer 2008, Fajnzylber et
al. 2011), it is unlikely that regional capital reallocates away from formal firms and toward informal
firms, holding up informal wages. Second, displaced formal sector workers who move into informal
employment may have more favorable unobserved characteristics than average informal workers,
even after controlling for education and other demographics we use when calculating regional wage
premia. In the absence of panel data on informal workers we can not strictly rule out selection
on worker unobservables. However, in Appendix B.7.1, we present suggestive evidence against
this mechanism by documenting consistent informal earnings results when sequentially including
more detailed and flexible worker controls when calculating regional informal earnings premia. If
selection on unobservables accompanies selection on observables, then we would observe changes
as we control for more detailed information on worker observables. The absence of such changes
37
Burstein, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2005) show that lower quality goods gain market share in recessions, while
McKenzie and Schargrodsky (2011) make a similar argument in the context of the 2002 economic crisis in Argentina.
While there is little direct evidence on the relative quality of goods produced by formal and informal firms, it is
well known that informal firms are significantly smaller than formal firms (LaPorta and Schleifer 2014, Meghir et
al. 2015, Ulyssea 2014), and Kugler and Verhoogen (2011) show that larger firms produce higher quality goods than
small firms, on average. Moreover, LaPorta and Schleifer (2008) show that informal firms use lower quality inputs
and speculate that they produce lower quality outputs as a result.
38
Similarly, Appendix B.7.3 shows that the long-run recovery in informal earnings occurs primarily among selfemployed workers. This pattern may also suggest a shift toward lower quality products, to the extent that lower
quality products are disproportionately produced by the self-employed.

22

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

partly mitigates concerns about selection on unobservables.39
Finally, we examine the effect of liberalization on overall wages, for formal and informal workers
together. This analysis helps rule out concerns regarding worker selection into informality, based on
the following reasoning. When combining formal and informal workers together, the confounding
influence of worker selection into informality nets out, as long as the quality of the regional workforce
stays constant. If the informal earnings results were driven by worker selection alone, we should
find growing effects of liberalization on overall regional earnings. Panel B of Table 5 shows that
this is not the case. It finds roughly constant earnings effects over time, with substantial effects in
both 2000 and 2010. This pattern is consistent with continuously declining formal sector earnings
and recovery in informal earnings (net of composition).
Together these results show that declining labor demand in regions facing larger tariff declines
led many workers to shift into informal employment or lose employment all together. In the longrun, many of these non-employed workers become self-employed to ensure they have some earnings.
Although we cannot make strict welfare claims without more detailed information on workers and
jobs in the informal sector, it is quite likely that the observed increases in non-employment and
informality both imply substantial declines in workers’ labor market outcomes given the apparently
undesirable nature of many informal jobs in comparison to formal jobs. Nonetheless, the long-run
shifts into informal employment suggest that the informal sector provides a fallback for tradedisplaced workers who might have remained unemployed in the absence of an informal option or a
more flexible formal labor market.

7

Conclusion

This paper examines various potential margins of labor market adjustment following a large trade
liberalization in Brazil. Using both longitudinal administrative data and cross-sectional household
survey data, we document a rich pattern of adjustment both at the worker level and the regional
level. A worker’s initial region of employment is very important in determining their subsequent
labor market outcomes. Workers initially employed in regions facing larger tariff declines spend
less and less time formally employed and earn less and less in the formal sector than a worker initially employed in a more favorable affected region. Consistent with the importance of geographic
location, we find no evidence for equalizing inter-regional mobility in response to these sharp differences across labor markets, implying that any worker adjustment occurs primarily within region.
These worker-level findings complement our previous region-level analyses of the formal labor market (Dix-Carneiro and Kovak forthcoming), and reinforce the central role of local labor markets in
determining workers’ outcomes during a period of structural change.
Although changes in trade policy are directly incident upon workers in tradable industries, we
39

See Altonji, Elder and Taber (2005) for a more formal version of this kind of argument.

23

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

find similarly sized effects in the nontradable sector, implying close integration of the two sectors
at the regional level. Consistent with this interpretation, in regions facing larger tariff declines,
workers are more likely to transition from the tradable sector to the nontradable sector, although
these reallocations are not large enough to offset employment declines in the formal tradable sector.
This close integration across sectors raises concerns about policies providing targeted compensation
for workers in industries experiencing increased import competition, such as Trade Adjustment
Assistance in the U.S. When regional labor markets are reasonably integrated across sectors, even
workers whose industry did not directly face a trade shock experience the labor market effects of
that shock. Policies with industry targeting will fail to address declining earnings and employment
rates for for these indirectly affected workers.
We also document substantial effects of trade liberalization on regional rates of informal employment. Our results suggest that in regions facing larger tariff declines, after long periods of
non-employment, trade-displaced formal-sector workers eventually settle for the fallback option of
informal employment. This pattern suggests that in the absence of increased flexibility in the formal
labor market, policies discouraging informal employment may increase non-employment following a
trade policy shock, as trade-displaced workers cannot be as easily absorbed by the informal sector.
Although this paper focuses on a middle-income country with a large informal share of employment,
with the emergence of the so-called “gig economy” an increasing share of high-income country jobs
come with minimal job security, no benefits, and possibly part-time work. Our findings on informality are therefore increasingly relevant to the labor market effects of globalization in high-income
contexts as well. More generally, understanding these deeper interactions between labor regulations
and changes in trade policies is an important avenue for future work.

24

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

References
Abreu, Marcelo de Paiva, “The Political Economy of High Protection in Brazil before 1987,” Inter-American
Development Bank Special Initiative on Trade and Integration Working Paper, 2004, (SITI-08A).
Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor, David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, and Brendan Price, “Import Competition and the Great US Employment Sag of the 2000s,” Journal of Labor Economics, January 2016, 34 (S1),
S141–S198.
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber, “Selection on Observed and Unobserved
Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools,” Journal of Political Economy, Februray 2005, 113
(1), 151–184.
Arbache, Jorge Saba, Andy Dickerson, and Francis Green, “Trade Liberalisation and Wages in Developing
Countries,” Economic Journal, 2004, 114 (493), F73–F96.
Áureo de Paula and José A. Scheinkman, “Value-Added Taxes, Chain Effects, and Informality,” American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2010, 2, 195–221.
Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson, “The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of Import
Competition in the United States,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (6).
,
,
, and Jae Song, “Trade Adjustment: Worker Level Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2014, 129 (4), 1799–1860.
Bacchetta, Marc, Ekkehard Ernst, and Juana P. Bustamante, “Globalization and Informal Jobs in Developing Countries,” Technical Report, International Labour Office and Secretariat of the World Trade Organization
2009.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Lawrence F. Katz, “Regional Evolutions,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
1992, (1), 1–75.
Bosch, Mariano, Edwin Goñi-Pacchioni, and William Maloney, “Trade Liberalization, Labor Reforms and
Formal-Informal Employment Dynamics,” Labour Economics, 2012, 19 (5), 5653–667.
Bound, John and Harry J. Holzer, “Demand Shifts, Population Adjustments, and Labor Market Outcomes
during the 1980s,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2000, 18 (1), 20–54.
Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, “Large Devaluations and the Real Exchange Rate,”
Journal of Political Economy, August 2005, 113 (4), 742–784.
Costa, Francisco J.M., Jason Garred, and João Paulo Pessoa, “Winners and Losers from a Commoditiesfor-Manufactures Trade Boom,” Journal of International Economics, 2016, 102, 50–69.
Cruces, Guillermo, Guido Porto, and Mariana Viollaz, “Trade Liberalization and Informality: Short Run
and Long Run Adjustment Mechanisms,” unpublished, 2014.
Dauth, Wolfgang, Sebastian Findeisen, and Jens Suedekum, “The Rise of the East and the Far East: German
Labor Markets and Trade Integration,” Journal of the European Economics Association, 2014, 12 (6), 1643–1675.
de Carvalho, Jr., Mário C., “Alguns Aspectos da Reforma Aduaneira Recente,” FUNCEX Texto Para Discussão,
1992.
De Negri, João Alberto, Paulo Furtado de Castro, Natalia Ribeiro de Souza, and Jorge Saba Arbache,
“Mercado Formal de Trabalho: Comparação entre os Microdados da RAIS e da PNAD,” IPEA Texto Para
Discussão, 2001, (840).
Dix-Carneiro, Rafael, “Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Dynamics,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (3).
and Brian K. Kovak, “Trade Liberalization and the Skill Premium: A Local Labor Markets Approach,”
American Economic Review - Papers and Proceedings, 2015, 105 (5), 551–557.
and

, “Trade Liberalization and Regional Dynamics,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Edmonds, Eric, Nina Pavcnik, and Petia Topalova, “Trade Adjustment and Human Capital Investment:
Evidence from Indian Tariff Reform,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2010, 2 (4), 42–75.
Fajnzylber, Pablo, William F. Maloney, and Gabriel V. Montes-Rojas, “Does formality improve micro-firm
performance? Evidence from the Brazilian SIMPLES program,” Journal of Development Economics, 2011, 94
(2), 262 – 276.

25

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Goldberg, Pinelopi and Nina Pavcnik, “Trade, Wages, and the Political Economy of Trade Protection: Evidence
from the Colombian Trade Reforms,” Journal of International Economics, 2005, 66 (1), 75–105.
and
, “Distributional Effects of Globalization in Developing Countries,” Journal of Economic Literature,
2007, XLV, 39–82.
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou and Nina Pavcnik, “The response of the informal sector to trade liberalization,”
Journal of Development Economics, 2003, 72 (3), 463–496.
Gonzaga, Gustavo, Naercio Menezes Filho, and Cristina Terra, “Trade liberalization and the evolution of
skill earnings differentials in Brazil,” Journal of International Economics, 2006, 68 (2), 345–367.
Hakobyan, Shushanik and John McLaren, “Looking for Local Labor Market Effects of NAFTA,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 2016, 98 (4), 728–741.
Hasan, Rana, Devasish Mitra, and Beyza P. Ural, “Trade Liberalization, Labor-Market Institutions, and
Poverty Reduction: Evidence from Indian States,” India Policy Forum, 2006, 3.
,
, Priya Ranjan, and Reshad N. Ahsan, “Trade Liberalization and Unemployment: Theory and
Evidence from India,” Journal of Development Economics, 2012, 97 (2).
Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki, Marc-Andreas Muendler, and Steven J. Redding, “Trade and Inequality: From Theory to Estimation,” Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
IBGE, Censo Demográfico 2000: Documentação das Microdados da Amostra, Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e
Estatı́stica, 2002.
Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan, “Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers,”
American Economic Review, 1993, 83 (4), 685–709.
Kondo, Illenin O., “Trade Reforms, Foreign Competition, and Labor Market Adjustments in the U.S.,” unpublished,
2014.
Kovak, Brian, “Regional Efects of Trade Reform: What is the Correct Measure of Liberalization?,” American
Economic Review, 2013, 103 (5), 1960–1976.
Krishna, Pravin, Jennifer P. Poole, and Mine Zeynep Senses, “Wage Effects of Trade Reform with Endogenous Worker Mobility,” NBER Working Paper, 2011, (17256).
,
, and
, “Wage Effects of Trade Reform with Endogenous Worker Mobility,” Journal of International
Economics, 2014, 93 (2), 239–252.
Kugler, Maurice and Eric Verhoogen, “Prices, Plant Size, and Product Quality,” Review of Economic Studies,
2011, 79 (1), 307–339.
Kume, Honório, “A Polı́tica Tarifária Brasileira no Perı́odo 1980-88: Avaliação e Reforma,” Série Épico, March
1990, (17).
, Guida Piani, and Carlos Frederico Bráz de Souza, “A Polı́tica Brasileira de Importação no Perı́odo
1987-1998: Descrição e Avaliação,” in Carlos Henrique Corseuil and Honorio Kume, eds., A Abertura Comercial
Brasileira nos Anos 1990: Impactos Sobre Emprego e Salário, Rio de Janiero: MTE/IPEA, 2003, chapter 1,
pp. 1–37.
LaPorta, Rafael and Andrei Schleifer, “The Unofficial Economy and Economic Development,” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, 2008, 47 (1), 123–135.
and

, “Informality and Development,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2014, 28 (3), 109–126.

Lopes de Melo, Rafael, “Firm Wage Differentials and Labor Market Sorting: Reconciling Theory and Evidence,”
unpublished, 2013.
MacKinnon, James G., “Thirty Years of Heteroskedasticity-Robust Inference,” Queen’s Economics Department
Working Paper, 2011, (1268).
McCaig, Brian, “Exporting Out of Poverty: Provincial Poverty in Vietnam and US Market Access,” Journal of
International Economics, 2011, 85 (1).
and Nina Pavcnik, “Export Markets and Labor Allocation in a Low-income Country,” NBER Working Paper,
2014, (20455).

26

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

McKenzie, David and Ernesto Schargrodsky, “Buying less, but shopping more: Changes in consumption
patterns during a crisis,” Economı́a, 2011, 11 (2), 1–35.
Meghir, Costas, Renata Narita, and Jean-Marc Robin, “Wages and Informality in Developing Countries,”
American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (4), 1509–1546.
Menezes-Filho, Naercio and Marc-Andreas Muendler, “Labor Reallocation in Response to Trade Reform,”
NBER Working Paper, 2011, (17372).
Pavcnik, Nina, Andreas Blom, Pinelopi Goldberg, and Norbert Schady, “Trade Liberalization and Industry
Wage Structure: Evidence from Brazil,” World Bank Economic Review, 2004, 18 (3), 319–334.
Paz, Lourenço, “The impacts of trade liberalization on informal labor markets: an evaluation of the Brazilian case,”
Journal of International Economics, 2014, 92 (2), 330–348.
Saboia, João L. M. and Ricardo M. L. Tolipan, “A relação anual de informações sociais (RAIS) e o mercado
formal de trabalho no Brasil: uma nota,” Pesquisa e Planejamento Economico, 1985, 15 (2), 447–456.
Schor, Adriana, “Heterogeneous productivity response to tariff reduction. Evidence from Brazilian manufacturing
firms,” Journal of Development Economics, 2004, 75 (2), 373–396.
Soares, Rodrigo R. and Guilherme Hirata, “Competition and the Racial Wage Gap: Testing Becker’s Model
of Employer Discrimination,” IZA Discussion Paper, Februray 2016, (9764).
Stolper, Wolfgang F. and Paul A. Samuelson, “Protection and Real Wages,” Review of Economic Studies,
1941, 9 (1), 58–73.
Topalova, Petia, “Trade Liberalization, Poverty, and Inequality: Evidence from Indian Districts,” in Ann Harrison,
ed., Globalization and Poverty, University of Chicago Press, 2007, pp. 291–336.
, “Factor Immobility and Regional Impacts of Trade Liberalization: Evidence on Poverty from India,” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2010, 2 (4).
Ulyssea, Gabriel, “Firms, Informality and Development: Theory and evidence from Brazil,” unpublished, 2014.
Utar, Hâle, “Workers Beneath the Floodgates: Impact of Low-Wage Import Competition and Workers’ Adjustment,” Unpublished, 2017.

27

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

0.00
-0.05
-0.10
-0.15
-0.20

Petroleum, Gas, Coal

Rubber

Petroleum Refining

Pharma., Perfumes, Detergents

Plastics

Other Manuf.

Machinery, Equipment

Auto, Transport, Vehicles

Electric, Electronic Equip.

Chemicals

Mineral Mining

Footwear, Leather

Paper, Publishing, Printing

Nonmetallic Mineral Manuf

Textiles

Food Processing

Wood, Furniture, Peat

Metals

Apparel

-0.25

Agriculture

Change in ln(1+tariff), 1990-95

Figure 1: Tariff Changes

Tariff data from Kume et al. (2003), aggregated to allow consistent industry definitions across data sources. See
Appendix Table A1 for details of the industry classification. Industries sorted based on 1991 national employment
(largest on the left, and smallest on the right)

28

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Figure 2: Regional Tariff Reductions

Belém
Belém
Manaus
Manaus

Fortaleza
Fortaleza

Recife
Recife

Salvador
Salvador
Brasília
Brasília

8% to 15%
4% to 8%

Belo Horizonte
Horizonte
Belo

3% to 4%
1% to 3%

São Paulo
Paulo
São
Curitiba
Curitiba

-1% to 1%

Porto Alegre
Alegre
Porto

mean
0.044

10
0.002

25
0.012

percentile
50
75
0.031
0.066

90
0.107

Local labor markets reflect microregions defined by IBGE, aggregated slightly to account for border changes between
1986 and 2010. Regions are colored based on the regional tariff reduction measure, RT Rr , defined in (2). Regions
facing larger tariff reductions are presented as lighter and yellower, while regions facing smaller cuts are shown as
darker and bluer. Dark lines represent state borders, gray lines represent consistent microregion borders, and crosshatched migroregions are omitted from the analysis. These microregions were either i) part of a Free Trade Area ii)
part of the state of Tocantins and not consistently identifiable over time, or iii) not included in the RAIS sample
before 1990.

29

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Figure 3: Cumulative Average Months Formally Employed Per Year - Tradable Worker Sample 1990-2010
+#$%
./01234/53678 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%97:;!4/01234/53678%

$#$%
+,,$% +,,+% +,,*% +,,)% +,,(% +,,'% +,,&% +,,"% +,,-% +,,,% *$$$% *$$+% *$$*% *$$)% *$$(% *$$'% *$$&% *$$"% *$$-% *$$,% *$+$%

!+#$%

!*#$%

!)#$%

!(#$%

!'#$%

!&#$%

!"#$%

Each point reflects an individual regression coefficient, θ̂t , following (3), where the dependent variable is the average
months formally employed per year from 1990 to the year listed on the x-axis. The independent variable is the
regional tariff reduction (RT Rr ), defined in (2). Note that RT Rr always reflects tariff reductions from 1990-1995.
The regressions include state fixed effects and extensive controls for worker, initial job, initial employer, and initial
region characteristics (see text for details). Negative estimates imply that workers initially in regions facing larger
tariff reductions spend a smaller average share of the relevant years formally employed than workers in other regions.
The vertical bar indicates that liberalization began in 1990 and was complete by 1995. Dashed lines show 95 percent
confidence intervals. Standard errors adjusted for 106 mesoregion clusters.

30

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Figure 4: Average Months Formally Employed in Tradable or Nontradable Sectors Per Year Tradable Worker Sample - 1990-2010
'$#%
./01234/53678 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%97:;!4/01234/53678%

($#%

!"#$%&'(')*+,

)$#%

#$#%
"**#% "**"% "**)% "**+% "**(% "**,% "**'% "**-% "**&% "***% )###% )##"% )##)% )##+% )##(% )##,% )##'% )##-% )##&% )##*% )#"#%

!)$#%

%&'(')*+,

!($#%

!'$#%

!&$#%

!"#$#%

Each point reflects an individual regression coefficient, θ̂t , following (3), where the dependent variable is the average
months formally employed in the relevant sector per year from 1990 to the year listed on the x-axis. The independent
variable is the regional tariff reduction (RT Rr ), defined in (2). Note that RT Rr always reflects tariff reductions from
1990-1995. The regressions include state fixed effects and extensive controls for worker, initial job, initial employer,
and initial region characteristics (see text for details). Negative (positive) estimates imply that workers initially in
regions facing larger tariff reductions spend a smaller (larger) average share of the relevant years formally employed in
the relevant sector than workers in other regions. The vertical bar indicates that liberalization began in 1990 and was
complete by 1995. Dashed lines show 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors adjusted for 106 mesoregion
clusters.

31

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Figure 5: Cumulative Average Earnings - Tradable Worker Sample - 1990-2010
&#$%
./01234/53678 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%97:;!4/01234/53678%

&#&%
"**&% "**"% "**$% "**+% "**)% "**,% "**(% "**-% "**'% "***% $&&&% $&&"% $&&$% $&&+% $&&)% $&&,% $&&(% $&&-% $&&'% $&&*% $&"&%

!&#$%

!&#)%

!&#(%

!&#'%

!"#&%

!"#$%

Each point reflects an individual regression coefficient, θ̂t , following (3), where the dependent variable is the average
yearly earnings from 1990 to the year listed on the x-axis, expressed as a multiple of the worker’s pre-liberalization
(1986-89) average yearly earnings. The independent variable is the regional tariff reduction (RT Rr ), defined in
(2). Note that RT Rr always reflects tariff reductions from 1990-1995. The regressions include state fixed effects
and extensive controls for worker, initial job, initial employer, and initial region characteristics (see text for details).
Negative estimates imply that workers initially in regions facing larger tariff reductions experience earnings reductions
compared to workers in other regions. The vertical bar indicates that liberalization began in 1990 and was complete
by 1995. Dashed lines show 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors adjusted for 106 mesoregion clusters.

32

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Figure 6: Fraction of Formally Employed Months in a New Region - Tradable Worker Sample 1990-2010
"#'%

./01234/53678 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%97:;!4/01234/53678%

"#(%

"#"%
())"% ())(% ())'% ())&% ())$% ())*% ())+% ()),% ())-% ()))% '"""% '""(% '""'% '""&% '""$% '""*% '""+% '"",% '""-% '"")% '"("%

!"#(%

!"#'%

!"#&%

!"#$%

Each point reflects an individual regression coefficient, θ̂t , following (3), where the dependent variable is the fraction
of formally employed months in the year listed on the x-axis spent outside the initial region. The independent variable
is the regional tariff reduction (RT Rr ), defined in (2). Note that RT Rr always reflects tariff reductions from 19901995. The regressions include state fixed effects and extensive controls for worker, initial job, initial employer, and
initial region characteristics (see text for details). Negative estimates imply that workers initially in regions facing
larger tariff reductions spend a smaller share of their formal employment outside the initial region than did workers
in other regions. The vertical bar indicates that liberalization began in 1990 and was complete by 1995. Dashed lines
show 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors adjusted for 106 mesoregion clusters.

33

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Figure 7: Cumulative Average Months Formally Employed Per Year - Nontradable Worker Sample
- 1990-2010
$#'%
./01234/53678 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%97:;!4/01234/53678%

$#$%
)**$% )**)% )**(% )**&% )**"% )**'% )**+% )**,% )**-% )***% ($$$% ($$)% ($$(% ($$&% ($$"% ($$'% ($$+% ($$,% ($$-% ($$*% ($)$%

!$#'%

!)#$%

!)#'%

!(#$%

!(#'%

!&#$%

!&#'%

!"#$%

Each point reflects an individual regression coefficient, θ̂t , following (3), where the dependent variable is the average
months formally employed per year from 1990 to the year listed on the x-axis. The independent variable is the
regional tariff reduction (RT Rr ), defined in (2). Note that RT Rr always reflects tariff reductions from 1990-1995.
The regressions include state fixed effects and extensive controls for worker, initial job, initial employer, and initial
region characteristics (see text for details). Negative estimates imply that workers initially in regions facing larger
tariff reductions spend a smaller average share of the relevant years formally employed than workers in other regions.
The vertical bar indicates that liberalization began in 1990 and was complete by 1995. Dashed lines show 95 percent
confidence intervals. Standard errors adjusted for 111 mesoregion clusters.

34

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Figure 8: Average Months Formally Employed in Tradable or Nontradable Sectors Per Year Nontradable Worker Sample - 1990-2010
(#'%

./01234/53678 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%97:;!4/01234/53678%

(#$%

$#'%

$#$%
())$% ())(% ())&% ())"% ())*% ())'% ())+% ()),% ())-% ()))% &$$$% &$$(% &$$&% &$$"% &$$*% &$$'% &$$+% &$$,% &$$-% &$$)% &$($%

!$#'%

!"#$%&'(')*+,

!(#$%

!(#'%

%&'(')*+,
!&#$%

!&#'%

!"#$%

Each point reflects an individual regression coefficient, θ̂t , following (3), where the dependent variable is the average
months formally employed in the relevant sector per year from 1990 to the year listed on the x-axis. The independent
variable is the regional tariff reduction (RT Rr ), defined in (2). Note that RT Rr always reflects tariff reductions from
1990-1995. The regressions include state fixed effects and extensive controls for worker, initial job, initial employer,
and initial region characteristics (see text for details). Negative (positive) estimates imply that workers initially in
regions facing larger tariff reductions spend a smaller (larger) average share of the relevant years formally employed in
the relevant sector than workers in other regions. The vertical bar indicates that liberalization began in 1990 and was
complete by 1995. Dashed lines show 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors adjusted for 111 mesoregion
clusters.

35

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table 1: Individual Analysis Summary Statistics
Tradable Sector Sample
mean
std. dev.

Nontradable Sector Sample
mean
std. dev.

Education
Illiterate
4th grade incomplete
4th grade complete
8th grade incomplete
8th grade complete
High School incomplete
High School complete
College incomplete
College complete

0.02
0.13
0.25
0.19
0.15
0.05
0.13
0.02
0.07

0.13
0.33
0.43
0.39
0.35
0.21
0.34
0.15
0.26

0.01
0.10
0.18
0.14
0.14
0.06
0.21
0.04
0.13

0.11
0.30
0.38
0.34
0.35
0.23
0.41
0.19
0.33

Female
Age

0.24
32.8

0.43
5.4

0.32
32.8

0.46
5.5

1,906
19,170
18,997

2,447
23,822
21,058

1,837
18,683
18,065

2,669
26,002
21,596

10.2
8.2
7.1
6.4
6.0

3.5
3.8
3.7
3.7
3.7

9.9
8.2
7.2
6.6
6.1

3.8
3.9
3.9
3.9
3.9

0.09
0.10

0.29
0.31

0.11
0.12

0.31
0.32

December 1989 Earnings (in 2010 R$)
1989 Yearly Earnings (in 2010 R$)
Average Annualized Earnings 1986-1989 (in 2010 R$)
Months formally employed per year
1990
1990-1995
1990-2000
1990-2005
1990-2010
Migration
Employed in a different region in 1994 than in 1989
Employed in a different region in 2000 than in 1989
Observations

585,078

973,703

RAIS data. Weighted to account for 15% sample of individuals in regions with more than 2000 traded sector workers
in 1989 and 100% sample in other regions. All monetary values reported in 2010 R$. In Dec 31, 2010, a US dollar
was worth 1.66 Brazilian Reais.

36

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table 2: Regional Analysis Summary Statistics
1991

2000

2010

mean

std. dev.

mean

std. dev.

mean

std. dev.

Shares of Working-Age Population
Not-employed
Informal
Informal employee
Self-employed

0.397
0.418
0.225
0.193

0.046
0.090
0.062
0.081

0.399
0.435
0.221
0.214

0.059
0.082
0.045
0.084

0.355
0.370
0.216
0.154

0.076
0.077
0.061
0.040

Shares of Employment
Formal tradable
Formal nontradable
Informal tradable
Informal nontradable

0.111
0.191
0.394
0.304

0.094
0.092
0.203
0.078

0.102
0.172
0.323
0.403

0.074
0.085
0.176
0.078

0.121
0.292
0.259
0.328

0.082
0.101
0.153
0.056

731
708

396
337

941
890

435
363

890
938

379
326

Average informal earnings (in 2010 R$)
Average overall earnings (in 2010 R$)
Observations

405

405

405

Decennial Census data. Reports unweighted means and standard deviations across time-consistent microregions.
Note that these may differ from similar figures at the national level because of variation in regional populations. See
Appendix B.2 for national informality rates etc. All monetary values reported in 2010 R$. In Dec 31, 2010, a US
dollar was worth 1.66 Brazilian Reais.

37

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table 3: Employment Category Shares of Regional Working-Age Population - 2000, 2010
Change in share:
Panel A: Not-employed
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
Not-employed share pre-trend (80-91)

(1)

0.301***
(0.043)
0.036
(0.045)

Not-employed share pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel B: Informal
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
Informal share pre-trend (80-91)

!
0.479

0.170***
(0.050)
0.015
(0.042)

Not-employed share pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel C: Informal employee
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
Informal employee share pre-trend (80-91)

!
0.328

0.297***
(0.031)
-0.096**
(0.038)

Not-employed share pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel D: Self-employed
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
Self-employed share pre-trend (80-91)

!
0.538

-0.098**
(0.045)
-0.058
(0.067)

Not-employed share pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared

!
0.180

1991-2000
(2)

0.306***
(0.040)

-0.031
(0.044)
!
0.479

0.192***
(0.043)

0.076
(0.048)
!
0.334

0.268***
(0.035)

-0.003
(0.053)
!
0.526

-0.084**
(0.037)

0.083
(0.060)
!
0.186

(3)

(4)

0.301***
(0.043)
0.028
(0.057)
-0.012
(0.055)
!
0.479

-0.024
(0.057)
-0.074
(0.057)

0.213***
(0.053)
-0.044
(0.047)
0.112*
(0.058)
!
0.336

0.486***
(0.066)
-0.079
(0.060)

0.312***
(0.037)
-0.112***
(0.041)
0.046
(0.056)
!
0.540

-0.032
(0.071)
0.082
(0.099)

-0.071*
(0.040)
-0.107*
(0.060)
0.121**
(0.061)
!
0.198

0.428***
(0.068)
-0.325***
(0.081)

!
0.584

!
0.564

!
0.552

!
0.660

1991-2010
(5)

-0.029
(0.055)

0.084*
(0.049)
!
0.585

0.463***
(0.067)

-0.000
(0.057)
!
0.559

0.039
(0.094)

0.199**
(0.093)
!
0.562

0.371***
(0.075)

-0.209***
(0.075)
!
0.644

(6)

-0.023
(0.058)
-0.035
(0.071)
0.060
(0.060)
!
0.585

0.528***
(0.077)
-0.136**
(0.068)
0.110*
(0.058)
!
0.567

0.033
(0.090)
0.015
(0.091)
0.192**
(0.084)
!
0.562

0.402***
(0.080)
-0.280**
(0.106)
-0.110
(0.093)
!
0.664

Decennial Census data. Positive (negative) coefficient estimates for the regional tariff reduction (RT R) imply larger
increases (decreases) in the relevant employment category share in regions facing larger tariff reductions. The informal share in Panel B covers both informal employees and the self-employed, shown separately in Panels C and D,
respectively. Changes in employment shares are calculated controlling for regional worker composition (see text for
details). Pre-trends computed for 1980-1991 and 1970-1980 periods. Due to a lack of information on informality in
the 1970 Census, the 1980-1970 pre-trends always refer to the non-employed share. 405 microregion observations.
Standard errors (in parentheses) adjusted for 90 mesoregion clusters. Weighted by the inverse of the squared standard
error of the estimated change in the relevant employment share. *** Significant at the 1 percent, ** 5 percent, * 10
percent level.

38

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table 4: Employment Category × Sector Shares of Regional Employment - 2000, 2010
Change in share:
Panel A: Formal tradable
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
Formal tradable share pre-trend (80-91)

(1)

-0.405***
(0.041)
0.168
(0.103)

Not-employed share pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel B: Formal nontradable
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
Formal nontradable share pre-trend (80-91)

!
0.710

-0.050
(0.062)
0.097
(0.077)

Not-employed share pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel C: Informal tradable
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
Informal tradable share pre-trend (80-91)

!
0.396

0.619***
(0.047)
-0.019
(0.032)

Not-employed share pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel D: Informal nontradable
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
Informal nontradable share pre-trend (80-91)

!
0.719

0.022
(0.048)
-0.094
(0.095)

Not-employed share pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared

!
0.322

1991-2000
(2)

-0.456***
(0.047)

-0.016
(0.030)
!
0.698

-0.114**
(0.044)

-0.057
(0.035)
!
0.393

0.597***
(0.043)

-0.047
(0.053)
!
0.719

0.031
(0.045)

0.108*
(0.055)
!
0.329

(3)

(4)

-0.408***
(0.041)
0.167
(0.102)
-0.007
(0.027)
!
0.710

-0.505***
(0.052)
0.378**
(0.145)

-0.063
(0.063)
0.103
(0.078)
-0.062*
(0.034)
!
0.405

-0.034
(0.094)
0.004
(0.117)

0.604***
(0.046)
-0.007
(0.034)
-0.038
(0.054)
!
0.719

0.944***
(0.080)
-0.058
(0.039)

0.051
(0.045)
-0.113
(0.090)
0.117**
(0.051)
!
0.335

-0.058
(0.080)
-0.506***
(0.089)

!
0.648

!
0.598

!
0.733

!
0.566

1991-2010
(5)

-0.615***
(0.080)

-0.018
(0.050)
!
0.610

-0.045
(0.058)

-0.034
(0.053)
!
0.599

0.870***
(0.073)

-0.166**
(0.070)
!
0.736

-0.090
(0.081)

0.230**
(0.093)
!
0.531

(6)

-0.503***
(0.051)
0.379***
(0.143)
0.005
(0.043)
!
0.648

-0.042
(0.094)
0.007
(0.118)
-0.034
(0.054)
!
0.599

0.882***
(0.081)
-0.012
(0.040)
-0.153**
(0.067)
!
0.736

0.013
(0.081)
-0.549***
(0.082)
0.274***
(0.085)
!
0.601

Decennial Census data. Positive (negative) coefficient estimates for the regional tariff reduction (RT R) imply larger
increases (decreases) in the relevant employment × sector category share in regions facing larger tariff reductions.
Changes in employment × sector shares are calculated controlling for regional worker composition (see text for details).
Pre-trends computed for 1980-1991 and 1970-1980 periods. Due to a lack of information on informality in the 1970
Census, the 1980-1970 pre-trends always refer to the non-employed share. 405 microregion observations. Standard
errors (in parentheses) adjusted for 90 mesoregion clusters. Weighted by the inverse of the squared standard error of
the estimated change in the relevant employment × sector share. *** Significant at the 1 percent, ** 5 percent, * 10
percent level.

39

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table 5: Regional Informal and Overall Earnings Premia - 2000, 2010

Change in log earnings premia:
Panel A: Informal
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Informal earnings pre-trend (80-91)

(1)

-0.432***
(0.148)
-0.163***
(0.049)

Overall earnings pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel B: Overall
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Overall earnings pre-trend (80-91)

✓

R-squared

-0.636***
(0.144)

0.008
(0.055)
✓

(3)

(4)

-0.433***
(0.156)
-0.163***
(0.048)
-0.001
(0.054)
✓

-0.015
(0.251)
-0.222**
(0.089)

✓

1991-2010
(5)

-0.307
(0.262)

0.006
(0.093)
✓

(6)

-0.021
(0.234)
-0.222**
(0.089)
-0.006
(0.092)
✓

0.699

0.683

0.699

0.697

0.684

0.697

-0.392***
(0.119)
-0.224***
(0.055)

-0.718***
(0.132)

-0.405*
(0.237)
-0.332***
(0.088)

-0.874***
(0.254)

✓

-0.102*
(0.053)
✓

-0.495***
(0.136)
-0.224***
(0.053)
-0.102*
(0.052)
✓

-0.535**
(0.206)
-0.332***
(0.084)
-0.137
(0.098)
✓

0.738

0.719

0.743

0.718

Overall earnings pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)

1991-2000
(2)

✓

-0.137
(0.098)
✓
0.697

0.722

Decennial Census data. Negative coefficient estimates for the regional tariff reduction (RT R) imply larger decreases
in earnings in regions facing larger tariff reductions. Regional earnings premia are calculated controlling for regional
worker composition (see text for details). Panel A examines earnings for informal workers only, while Panel B
examines earnings for all workers, including both formal and informal. Pre-trends computed for 1980-1991 and 19701980 periods. Due to a lack of information on informality in the 1970 Census, the 1980-1970 pre-trends always refer to
overall earnings. 405 microregion observations. Standard errors (in parentheses) adjusted for 90 mesoregion clusters.
Weighted by the inverse of the squared standard error of the estimated change in the relevant employment × sector
share. *** Significant at the 1 percent, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent level.

40

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Online Appendices
(Not for publication)
A Data and Definitions
A.1 Tariffs . . . . . . . . . . .
A.2 RAIS Data . . . . . . . .
A.3 Demographic Census . . .
A.4 Regional Tariff Reductions

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

42
42
45
45
46

B Supplemental Empirical Results
B.1 Industry-Level Outcome Pre-Trends vs. Tariff Reductions . . . .
B.2 Informal Sector Descriptives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.3 Additional Worker-Level Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.4 Worker-Level Subsamples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.5 Worker-Level Robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.6 Regional Labor Market Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.6.1 Robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.6.2 Results by Education Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.7 Regional Earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.7.1 Robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.7.2 Results by Education Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.7.3 Regional Informal Employee and Self-Employed Earnings

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

49
49
51
55
62
65
71
71
75
78
78
84
87

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

41

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

A
A.1

Data and Definitions
Tariffs

Tariff data come from Kume et al. (2003), who report nominal tariffs and effective rates of protection from 1987 to 1998 using the Brazilian industry classification Nı́vel 50. We aggregate these
tariffs slightly to an industry classification that is consistent with the Demographic Census data
used to construct local tariff shock measures. The classification is presented in Table A1. In aggregating, we weight each Nı́vel 50 industry by its 1990 industry value added, as reported in IBGE
National Accounts data. Figure A1 shows the evolution of nominal tariffs from 1987 to 1998 for
the ten largest industries. The phases of Brazilian liberalization are visible (see Section 2 for a
discussion and citations). Large nominal tariff cuts from 1987-1989 had little effect on protection,
due to the presence of substantial nontariff barriers and tariff exemptions. In 1990, the majority of
nontariff barriers and tariff exemptions were abolished, being replaced by tariffs providing equivalent protection; note the increase in tariffs in some industries in 1990. During liberalization, from
1990 to 1994, tariffs fell in all industries, then were relatively stable from 1995 onward.
In Section B.5 we calculate post-liberalization tariff changes using UNCTAD TRAINS and use
these to control for tariff changes occurring after liberalization.

42

Tradable

43

Industry Name
Agriculture

Mineral Mining (except combustibles)
Petroleum and Gas Extraction and Coal Mining
Nonmetallic Mineral Goods Manufacturing
Iron and Steel, Nonferrous, and Other Metal Production and Processing
Machinery, Equipment, Commercial Installation Manufacturing, and Tractor Manufacturing
Electrical, Electronic, and Communication Equipment and Components Manufacturing
Automobile, Transportation, and Vehicle Parts Manufacturing
Wood Products, Furniture Manufacturing, and Peat Production
Paper Manufacturing, Publishing, and Printing
Rubber Product Manufacturing
Chemical Product Manufacturing
Petroleum Refining and Petrochemical Manufacturing
Pharmaceutical Products, Perfumes and Detergents Manufacturing
Plastics Products Manufacturing
Textiles Manufacturing
Apparel and Apparel Accessories Manufacturing
Footwear and Leather and Hide Products Manufacturing
Food Processing (Coffee, Plant Products, Meat, Dairy, Sugar, Oils, Beverages, and Other)
Miscellaneous Other Products Manufacturing
Utilities
Construction
Wholesale and Retail Trade

Financial Institutions
Real Estate and Corporate Services

Transportation and Communications

Private Services

Public Administration

Industry
1

2
3
4
5
8
10
12
14
15
16
17
18
20
21
22
23
24
25
32
91
92
93

94
95

96

97

98

42

39, 43

36, 37

38
40, 41

2
3
4
5-7
8
10-11
12-13
14
15
16
17,19
18
20
21
22
23
24
25-31
32
33
34
35

Nível 50
1

2000, 2010 Census (CNAE-Dom)
1101-1118, 1201-1209, 1300, 1401, 1402, 2001, 2002,
5001, 5002
050, 053-059
12000, 13001, 13002, 14001-14004
051-052
10000, 11000
100
26010, 26091, 26092
110
27001-27003, 28001, 28002
120
29001
130
29002, 30000, 31001, 31002, 32000, 33003
140
34001-34003, 35010, 35020, 35030, 35090
150, 151, 160
20000, 36010
170, 290
21001, 21002, 22000
180
25010
200
23010, 23030, 23400, 24010, 24090
201, 202, 352, 477
23020
210, 220
24020, 24030
230
25020
240, 241
17001, 17002
250,532
18001, 18002
190, 251
19011, 19012, 19020
260, 261, 270, 280
15010, 15021, 15022, 15030, 15041-15043, 15050, 16000
300
33001, 33002, 33004, 33005, 36090, 37000
351, 353
40010, 40020, 41000
340, 524
45001-45005
410-424, 582, 583
50010, 50030, 50040, 50050, 53010 ,53020, 53030, 53041,
53042, 53050, 53061-53068, 53070, 53080, 53090, 53101,
53102, 55020
451-453, 585, 612
65000, 66000, 67010, 67020
461-464, 543, 552, 571-578, 584, 589
63022, 70001, 71020, 72010, 74011, 74012, 74021, 74022,
74030, 74040, 74050, 74090, 92013, 92014, 92015, 92020
471-476, 481, 482, 588
60010, 60020, 60031, 60032, 60040, 60091, 60092, 61000,
62000, 63010, 63021 ,64010 ,64020, 91010
511, 512, 521-523, 525, 531, 533, 541, 542. 544,
1500, 50020, 53111, 53112, 53113, 55010, 55030, 63030,
545, 551, 577, 586, 587, 613-619, 622-624, 632, 901, 70002, 71010, 71030, 72020, 73000, 74060, 80011, 80012,
902
80090, 85011, 85012, 85013, 85020, 85030, 90000, 91020,
91091, 91092, 92011, 92012, 92030, 92040, 93010, 93020,
93030, 93091, 93092, 95000
354, 610, 611, 621, 631, 711-717, 721-727
75011-75017, 75020

1970, 1980, 1991 Census (atividade)
011-037, 041, 042, 581

Consistent industry classification used in generating local tariff shocks from Nı́vel 50 tariff data in Kume et al. (2003) and Decennial Census data.

Nontradable

Table A1: Consistent Industry Classification Across Censuses and Tariff Data

Margins of Adjustment to Trade
Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Figure A1: Tariffs - 1987-1998
MD'
!"#$%"&'
LD'
()*+,'!-./&0+-*,'1"234%"&'
KD'
5++6'7-+4"&&3/8'
9+/:"*.%%34';3/"-.%';./)<'
JD'

=%"4*-34,'=%"4*-+/34'=>)30?'

ID'

;.423/"-@,'=>)30:"/*'
;"*.%&'
(8-34)%*)-"'

HD'

GD'

A2":34.%&'

7"*-+%"):'B"C/3/8'

FD'

ED'

D'
EMLK'

EMLL'

EMLM'

EMMD'

EMME'

EMMF'

EMMG'

EMMH'

EMMI'

EMMJ'

EMMK'

EMML'

Nominal tariffs from Kume et al. (2003), aggregated to the industry classification presented in Table A1. The ten
largest industries by 1990 value added are shown.

44

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

A.2

RAIS Data

The Relação Anual de Informações Sociais (RAIS) is a high quality census of the Brazilian formal
labor market. Originally, RAIS was created as an operational tool for the Brazilian government
to i) monitor the entry of foreign workers into the labor market; ii) oversee the records of the
FGTS (Fundo de Garantia do Tempo de Serviço) program, a national benefits program consisting
of employers’ contributions to each of its employees; iii) provide information for administering
several government benefits programs such as unemployment insurance; and iv) generate statistics
regarding the formal labor market. Today it is the main tool used by the government to enable
the payment of the ”abono salarial ” to eligible workers. This is a government program that pays
one additional minimum wage at the end of the year to workers whose average monthly wage was
not greater than two times the minimum wage, and whose job information was correctly declared
in RAIS, among other minor requirements. Thus, workers have an incentive to ensure that their
employer is filing the required information. Moreover, firms are required to file, and face fines until
they do so. Together, these requirements ensure that the data in RAIS are accurate and complete.
Observations in the data are indexed by a worker ID number, the Programa de Integração Social (PIS), and an establishment registration number, the Cadastro Nacional da Pessoa Jurı́dica
(CNPJ). Both of these identifiers are consistent over time, allowing one to track workers and establishments across years. Establishment industry is reported using the Subsetor IBGE classification,
which includes 12 manufacturing industries, 2 primary industries, 11 nontradable industries, and
1 other/ignored.40 Worker education is reported using the following 9 education categories (listing corresponding years of education in parentheses): illiterate (0), primary school dropout (1-3),
primary school graduate (4), middle school dropout (5-7), middle school graduate (8), high school
dropout (9-10), high school graduate (11), college dropout (12-14), and college graduate (≥ 15).
In each year, and for each job, RAIS reports average earnings throughout the year, and earnings
in December.41 We construct individual yearly earnings by multiplying average monthly earnings
by the number of months employed in the year and then summing across employers.

A.3

Demographic Census

We utilize information from the long form of the Demographic Censuses (Censo Demográfico) for
1970, 1980, 1991, 2000, and 2010. The long form micro data reflect a 5 percent sample of the
population in 1970, 1980, and 2010, a 5.8 percent sample in 1991, and a 6 percent sample in 2000.
The primary benefit of the Census for our purposes is the ability to observe those outside formal
employment, who are not present in the RAIS database.
Although our main analysis focuses on monthly earnings, following the information available
in RAIS, the Census provides weekly hours information from 1991-2010, allowing us to calculate
hourly wages as monthly earnings divided by 4.33 times weekly hours. Census results for monthly
earnings and hourly wages are very similar. In 1970 and 1980, hours information is presented in
5 rough bins. Thus, when calculating pre-liberalization trends using data from 1970 and 1980, we
use monthly earnings even when examining hourly wage outcomes.
40

A less aggregate industry classification (CNAE) is available from 1994 onward, but we need a consistent classification from 1986-2010, so we use Subsetor IBGE.
41
From 1994 onward, RAIS reports hours, making it possible to calculate hourly wages. However, since we need a
consistent measure from 1986-2010, we focus on monthly earnings.

45

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

In 1991-2010, the Census asks whether each worker has a signed work card. This is the standard
definition of formal employment, and is necessary for a worker to appear in the RAIS sample.
Thus, we use this as our primary definition of formal employment. In 1980 and 1991, there is an
alternative proxy for formal employment, reporting whether the worker’s job includes contributions
to the national social security system. When calculating pre-liberalization outcome trends for 19801991, we use this alternative measure to identify formally employed workers. The social security
contributions proxy appears to be a good one; in 1991, when both measures are available, 95.9
percent of workers would be classified identically when using either measure. In 1970, there is no
information on formality, so pre-liberalization outcome trends for 1970-1980 are calculated for all
workers.
The definition of employment changes across Census years. In 1970 it includes those reporting
working or looking for work during August 1970 (the questionnaire does not separately identify
working vs. looking for work). In 1980 it includes those who report working during the year
prior to September 1, 1980. In 1991 it includes those reporting working regularly or occasionally
during the year prior to September 1, 1991. In 2000 and 2010 it includes those who report paid
work, temporary leave, unpaid work, or cultivation for own consumption during the week of July
23-29 in 2000 and July 25-31 in 2010. Note that the employment concept changes substantially
across years. This highlights yet another benefit of using RAIS as our primary data source, since
the employment concept in RAIS is consistent throughout the sample. Yet, while the changes
complicate the interpretation of Census-based employment rates over time, there is no reason
to expect systematic differences across regions to result from the changing employment concept.
Thus, our cross-region identification strategy should be valid when using the Census to measure
employment in spite of these measurement issues.

A.4

Regional Tariff Reductions

Regional tariff reductions, defined in (2), are constructed using information from various sources.
Tariff changes come from Kume et al. (2003), and are aggregated from the Nı́vel 50 level to the industry classification presented in Table A1 using 1990 value-added weights from the IBGE National
Accounts. Figure 1 shows the resulting industry-level variation in tariff changes.
The weights, βri in (2) depend upon the initial regional industry distribution (λri ) and the
specific-factor share in production (ϕi ). We calculate the λri using the 1991 Census. We use the
Census because it provides a less aggregate industry definition than what is available in RAIS,
and because the Census allows us to calculate weights that are representative of overall employment, rather than just formal employment. We calculate the ϕi using data from the Use Table of
the 1990 National Accounts from IBGE. The table “Componentes do Valor Adicionado” provides
the wagebill (Remunerações) and gross operating surplus (Excedente Operacional Bruto Inclusive
Rendimento de Autônomos), which reflects the share of income earned by capital. We define ϕi as
capital’s share of the sum of these two components.
Because Brazilian local labor markets differ substantially in the industry distribution of their
employment, the weights βri vary across regions. Figure A2 demonstrates how variation in industry
mix leads to variation in RT Rr . The figure shows the initial industry distribution of employment for
the regions facing the largest tariff reduction (Rio de Janeiro) the median tariff reduction (Alfenas
in southwestern Minas Gerais state), and the smallest tariff reduction (actually a small increase,
Mata Grande in northwest Alagoas state). The industries on the x-axis are sorted from the most

46

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

negative to the most positive tariff change. Rio de Janeiro has more weight on the left side of the
diagram, by virtue of specializing in manufacturing, particularly in apparel and food processing
industries, which faced quite large tariff reductions. Thus, its regional tariff reduction is quite
large. Alfenas is a coffee growing and processing region, which also has some apparel employment,
balancing the large tariff declines in apparel and food processing against the small tariff increase
in agriculture. Mata Grande is located in a sparsely populated mountainous region, and is almost
exclusively agricultural, leading it to experience a small tariff increase overall. Thus, although all
regions faced the same set of tariff reductions across industries, variation in the industry distribution
of employment in each region generates substantial variation in RT Rr .

47

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Figure A2: Variation Underlying Regional Tariff Reduction

Industry Weight

0.50

Rio de Janeiro, RJ (.15)

Alfenas MG (.03)

Mata Grande, AL (-.01)

0.75 0.97

0.40
0.30
0.20

Agriculture

Petroleum, Gas, Coal

Mineral Mining

Footwear, Leather

Metals

Paper, Publishing, Printing

Wood, Furniture, Peat

Chemicals

Textiles

Petroleum Refining

Machinery, Equipment

Food Processing

Electric, Electronic Equip.

Nonmetallic Mineral Manuf

Auto, Transport, Vehicles

Plastics

Pharma., Perfumes, Detergents

Other Manuf.

Apparel

0.00

Rubber

0.10

Industries sorted from most negative to most positive tariff change

Industry distribution of 1991 employment in the regions facing the largest (Rio de Janeiro, RJ), median (Alfenas,
MG) and smallest (Mata Grande, AL) regional tariff reduction. Industries sorted from the most negative to the
most positive tariff change (see Figure 1). More weight on the left side of the figure leads to a larger regional tariff
reduction, and more weight on the right side leads to a smaller regional tariff reduction.

48

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

B
B.1

Supplemental Empirical Results
Industry-Level Outcome Pre-Trends vs. Tariff Reductions

Along with regional variation in the industrial composition of employment, our analysis relies on
variation in tariff cuts across industries. Here we analyze the relationship between tariff cuts during
liberalization (1990-1995) and trends in industry wages and employment before liberalization, 19801991. We calculate these pre-liberalization outcome trends using the Demographic Census, to
provide a longer pre-liberalization period than what is available in RAIS, which starts in 1986.
We implemented a variety of specifications, with results reported in Table B1. In all specifications, the independent variable is the proportional reduction in one plus the tariff rate.
−∆1990−95 ln(1 + τi )
In panels A-C the dependent variable is the change in log industry earnings. Panel A uses average log earnings; Panel B uses average log earnings residuals controlling for individual age, sex,
education, and formal status; and Panel C uses average log earnings residuals controlling for these
individual characteristics and region fixed effects. In Panel D, the dependent variable is the change
in industry log employment. Column (1) weights industries equally, and presents standard errors
based on pairwise bootstrap of the t-statistic, to improve small sample properties with only 20 tradable industry observations. Column (2) uses the same estimator, but drops agriculture. Column (3)
uses heteroskedasticity weights and presents heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, which are
likely understated in this small sample (MacKinnon 2011). Column (4) uses the same estimator,
but drops agriculture. In all cases, the results should be seen primarily as suggestive, because the
analysis uses only 19 or 20 observations.
Nearly all of the earnings estimates are positive, indicating larger tariff reductions in industries
experiencing more positive wage growth prior to liberalization. The majority of the estimates are
insignificantly different from zero, with the exception of weighted results in Panels A and B. These
specifications heavily weight agriculture, which exhibited declining wages prior to liberalization and
experienced essentially no tariff reductions during liberalization, driving the strong positive relationship. By dropping agriculture, Column (4) confirms that the significant relationship is driven
by agriculture. The employment estimates are larger, and change sign across columns. Given the
diversity of findings across earnings and employment specifications, this exercise is somewhat inconclusive. Tariff cuts may or may not have been substantially correlated with pre-liberalization
outcome trends. These findings motivate us to control for pre-liberalization outcome trends whenever possible throughout the paper. This ensures that our results are robust to potential spurious
correlation between liberalization-induced labor demand shocks and ongoing trends.

49

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B1: Pre-Liberalization Industry Trends - 1980-1991
unweighted,
bootstrapped
1980-1991 change in log:

(1)

unweighted,
bootstrapped, omitting
agriculture
(2)

Panel A: average earnings
Industry tariff reduction

0.345
(0.322)
Panel B: earnings premia (with individual controls)
Industry tariff reduction
0.203
(0.273)
Panel C: earnings premia (with individual and region controls)
Industry tariff reduction
0.135
(0.177)
Panel D: employment
Industry tariff reduction

Observations

-1.624
(1.272)
20

weighted

weighted, omitting
agriculture

(3)

(4)

0.111
(0.354)

1.029***
(0.139)

0.510
(0.582)

-0.017
(0.311)

0.610***
(0.157)

-0.235
(0.350)

0.044
(0.209)

0.184
(0.158)

0.018
(0.222)

-2.696**
(1.361)

0.687
(0.417)

-1.651
(1.894)

19

20

19

Decennial Census data. 20 industry observations (19 omitting agriculture). See text for details of dependent and
independent variable construction. Column (1) weights industries equally, and presents standard errors based on
pairwise bootstrap of the t-statistic. Column (2) uses the same estimator as Column (1), but drops agriculture.
Column (3) uses heteroskedasticity weights and presents heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. Column (4) uses
the same estimator as Column (3), but drops agriculture. *** Significant at the 1 percent, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent
level.

50

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

B.2

Informal Sector Descriptives

The following results provide some descriptive evidence on the informal sector in Brazil. Informality
is defined as working without a signed work card (Carteira de Trabalho e Previdência Social ),
which entitles workers to benefits and labor protections afforded them by the legal employment
system. Table B2 shows that the overall rate of informality increased from 1991 to 2000, before
decreasing substantially from 2000 to 2010. Rates of informality are highest in agriculture and
much lower in manufacturing. Figure B1 breaks out informality rates in the manufacturing sector
into individual industries. Figure B2 focuses on the year 2000 and shows the industry distribution
of formal and informal employment. There is very substantial overlap in the industry distributions
of formal and informal employment. The biggest differences occur in agriculture, which comprises a
much larger share of informal employment, and food processing and metals, which comprise larger
shares of formal employment. In contrast, the nontradable share is nearly identical for formal and
informal employment. Figure B3 shows the industry distribution for informal employees and the
self-employed, which together comprise overall informal employment. These distributions are quite
similar, with the exception of agriculture, which makes up a larger share of self-employment, and
nontraded employment, comprising a larger share of informal employees.

51

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B2: Informal Share of Employment - 1991-2010
1991

2000

2010

Overall

0.58

0.64

0.49

Agriculture
Mining
Manufacturing
Nontradable

0.89
0.61
0.28
0.55

0.86
0.45
0.39
0.64

0.83
0.21
0.29
0.48

Author’s calculations using Brazilian Demographic Census data for workers age 18-64. Informality defined as employment without a signed work card.

Figure B1: Informal Share of Employment by Industry - 1991-2010

!"#$%&'()*+'%,)$#)!"-./0%1)2&3($1&,"0)

$"

4554)

!#,"

6777)
!#+"

6747)

!#*"
!#)"
!#("
!#'"
!#&"
!#%"
!#$"

HD:714L0L"

2A1GC.57.10"

<071D50.=>"T4?>"PD45"

9G:0145"9G:G:A"

KDD7R041>"S047801"

90745?"

<4301>"<./5G?8G:A>"<1G:B:A"

QDDL>"K.1:G7.10>"<047"

P80=GC45?"

E0OB50?"

<071D50.="-0N:G:A"

94C8G:01M>"IJ.G3=0:7"

KDDL"<1DC0??G:A"

I50C71GC>"I50C71D:GC"IJ.G3#"

HD:=07455GC"9G:0145"94:.;"

2.7D>"E14:?3D17>"F08GC50?"

<54?BC?"

<841=4#>"<01;.=0?>"@0701A0:7?"

67801"94:.;#"

2334105"

-.//01"

!"

Authors’ calculations using Brazilian Demographic Census data for workers age 18-64. Informality defined as employment without a signed work card. Industries sorted from most negative to most positive tariff change (with the
exception of the nontraded sector).

52

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Figure B2: Industry Distribution of Formal and Informal Employment - 2000

!"%&##!"*!#!"),##

:93=7?#

!"!,#
@.:93=7?#

!"!+#
!"!*#
!"!)#
!"!(#
!"!'#
!"!&#
!"!%#

>:/,%)B$B&

'7%=9"*,"%$&

2$,%:*$"34&J)54&F:)*&

.=/$%)*&.=/=/7&

A::,H$)%4&I$),-$%&

.$,)*5&

2)($%4&2"#*=5-=/74&2%=/8/7&

G::B4&A"%/=,"%$4&2$),&

F-$3=9)*5&

;$E8*$5&

2$,%:*$"3&!$D/=/7&

.)9-=/$%C4&?@"=(3$/,&

A::B&2%:9$55=/7&

?*$9,%=94&?*$9,%:/=9&?@"=(1&

>:/3$,)**=9&.=/$%)*&.)/"0&

'",:4&;%)/5(:%,4&<$-=9*$5&

2*)5895&

2-)%3)14&2$%0"3$54&6$,$%7$/,5&

+,-$%&.)/"01&

!"!!#

'(()%$*&

!"!$#

!"##$%&

-./01234#56738#9:#58;293#<=>?94=8.2#

!"$!#

Authors’ calculations using year 2000 Brazilian Demographic Census data for workers age 18-64. Informality defined
as employment without a signed work card. Industries sorted from most negative to most positive tariff change (with
the exception of the nontraded sector).

53

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Figure B3: Industry Distribution of Informal Employees and Self-Employment - 2000

!">?##!"@A#!"?&##

<*65/93;#49:;5044#

!"(%#

-4;6=49:;504+#

!"($#
!"(!#
!"!'#
!"!&#
!"!%#

>:/,%)B$B&

'7%=9"*,"%$&

2$,%:*$"34&J)54&F:)*&

.=/$%)*&.=/=/7&

A::,H$)%4&I$),-$%&

.$,)*5&

2)($%4&2"#*=5-=/74&2%=/8/7&

G::B4&A"%/=,"%$4&2$),&

F-$3=9)*5&

;$E8*$5&

2$,%:*$"3&!$D/=/7&

.)9-=/$%C4&?@"=(3$/,&

A::B&2%:9$55=/7&

?*$9,%=94&?*$9,%:/=9&?@"=(1&

>:/3$,)**=9&.=/$%)*&.)/"0&

'",:4&;%)/5(:%,4&<$-=9*$5&

2*)5895&

2-)%3)14&2$%0"3$54&6$,$%7$/,5&

+,-$%&.)/"01&

!"!!#

'(()%$*&

!"!$#

!"##$%&

)*+,-./0#123/4#56#147.5/#89:;5094*.#

!"(&#

Authors’ calculations using year 2000 Brazilian Demographic Census data for informal workers age 18-64. Informality
defined as employment without a signed work card. Industries sorted from most negative to most positive tariff change
(with the exception of the nontraded sector).

54

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

B.3

Additional Worker-Level Outcomes

This section presents supplementary results to complement those discussed in Section 5. Each
figure presents estimates of θt from (3) for additional outcomes not discussed in the main text.
First, we present additional outcomes for the sample of workers initially employed in the formal
tradable sector. Figure B4 examines the effects of regional tariff reductions on the share of the year
formally employed.
M onthsit
(10)
12
Workers initially employed in regions experiencing larger tariff reductions spend a smaller and
smaller fraction of the year formally employed compared to workers initially employed in other
regions. The largest effect, -0.55, appears in 2004, implying that on average a worker whose
initial region faced a 10 percentage point larger tariff reduction spent 0.66 fewer months in formal
employment. Figure B5 examines the effects of regional tariff reductions on average yearly earnings
in the formal sector.
Earningsit
(11)
M eanEarningsi,1986−89
This measure is a yearly version of the cumulative measure in (5). The results in Figure B5
parallel those in Figure 5, with workers whose initial regions faced larger tariff reductions experience
declining formal earnings compared to those in more favorably affected regions.
We then turn to the sample of workers initially employed in the formal nontradable sector.
Figure B6 examines (10), the fraction of the year formally employed, finding similar results to
those for tradable sector workers, but with somewhat smaller magnitudes. Figure B7 examines
cumulative average earnings (5), finding resutls that parallel those for the tradable sector. Workers
initially in harder-hit regions experience declining earnings compared to those initially in other
regions. Figure B8 finds similar results for the yearly non-cumulative earnings measure in (11).
Finally, Figure B9 examines the fraction of formally employed months in a new region, (6). As in
the tradable sector, if anything, the negative point estimates imply that workers initially in regions
facing larger tariff reductions were less likely to migrate to a formal job elsewhere than workers
initially in more favorably affected regions.

55

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Figure B4: Fraction of the Year Formally Employed - Tradable Worker Sample - 1990-2010
"#+%

./01234/53678 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%97:;!4/01234/53678%

"#,%

"#"%
,--"% ,--,% ,--+% ,--*% ,--)% ,--(% ,--'% ,--&% ,--$% ,---% +"""% +"",% +""+% +""*% +"")% +""(% +""'% +""&% +""$% +""-% +","%
!"#,%

!"#+%

!"#*%

!"#)%

!"#(%

!"#'%

!"#&%

!"#$%

Each point reflects an individual regression coefficient, θ̂t , following (3), where the dependent variable is the share of
the year formally employed in the year listed on the x-axis. The independent variable is the regional tariff reduction
(RT Rr ), defined in (2). Note that RT Rr always reflects tariff reductions from 1990-1995. The regressions include state
fixed effects and extensive controls for worker, initial job, initial employer, and initial region characteristics (see text
for details). Negative estimates imply that workers initially in regions facing larger tariff reductions spend a smaller
share of the year formally employed than workers in other regions. The vertical bar indicates that liberalization began
in 1990 and was complete by 1995. Dashed lines show 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors adjusted for
106 mesoregion clusters.

56

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Figure B5: Average Yearly Earnings - Tradable Worker Sample - 1990-2010
&#$%
./01234/53678 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%97:;!4/01234/53678%

&#&%
'((&% '(('% '(("% '(()% '((*% '(($% '((+% '((,% '((-% '(((% "&&&% "&&'% "&&"% "&&)% "&&*% "&&$% "&&+% "&&,% "&&-% "&&(% "&'&%

!&#$%

!'#&%

!'#$%

!"#&%

!"#$%

Each point reflects an individual regression coefficient, θ̂t , following (3), where the dependent variable is the average
yearly earnings in the year listed on the x-axis, expressed as a multiple of the worker’s pre-liberalization (1986-89)
average yearly earnings. The independent variable is the regional tariff reduction (RT Rr ), defined in (2). Note
that RT Rr always reflects tariff reductions from 1990-1995. The regressions include state fixed effects and extensive
controls for worker, initial job, initial employer, and initial region characteristics (see text for details). Negative
estimates imply that workers initially in regions facing larger tariff reductions experience earnings reductions compared
to workers in other regions. The vertical bar indicates that liberalization began in 1990 and was complete by 1995.
Dashed lines show 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors adjusted for 106 mesoregion clusters.

57

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Figure B6: Fraction of the Year Formally Employed - Nontradable Worker Sample - 1990-2010
"#)%

./01234/53678 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%97:;!4/01234/53678%

"#*%

"#"%
*++"% *++*% *++)% *++(% *++'% *++&% *++$% *++,% *++-% *+++% )"""% )""*% )"")% )""(% )""'% )""&% )""$% )"",% )""-% )""+% )"*"%

!"#*%

!"#)%

!"#(%

!"#'%

!"#&%

!"#$%

Each point reflects an individual regression coefficient, θ̂t , following (3), where the dependent variable is the share of
the year formally employed in the year listed on the x-axis. The independent variable is the regional tariff reduction
(RT Rr ), defined in (2). Note that RT Rr always reflects tariff reductions from 1990-1995. The regressions include state
fixed effects and extensive controls for worker, initial job, initial employer, and initial region characteristics (see text
for details). Negative estimates imply that workers initially in regions facing larger tariff reductions spend a smaller
share of the year formally employed than workers in other regions. The vertical bar indicates that liberalization began
in 1990 and was complete by 1995. Dashed lines show 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors adjusted for
111 mesoregion clusters.

58

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Figure B7: Cumulative Average Earnings - Nontradable Worker Sample - 1990-2010
"#'%

./01234/53678 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%97:;!4/01234/53678%

"#(%

"#"%
)**"% )**)% )**(% )**+% )**'% )**,% )**&% )**-% )**$% )***% ("""% ("")% (""(% (""+% (""'% ("",% (""&% (""-% (""$% (""*% (")"%

!"#(%

!"#'%

!"#&%

!"#$%

Each point reflects an individual regression coefficient, θ̂t , following (3), where the dependent variable is the average
yearly earnings from 1990 to the year listed on the x-axis, expressed as a multiple of the worker’s pre-liberalization
(1986-89) average yearly earnings. The independent variable is the regional tariff reduction (RT Rr ), defined in
(2). Note that RT Rr always reflects tariff reductions from 1990-1995. The regressions include state fixed effects
and extensive controls for worker, initial job, initial employer, and initial region characteristics (see text for details).
Negative estimates imply that workers initially in regions facing larger tariff reductions experience earnings reductions
compared to workers in other regions. The vertical bar indicates that liberalization began in 1990 and was complete
by 1995. Dashed lines show 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors adjusted for 111 mesoregion clusters.

59

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Figure B8: Average Yearly Earnings - Nontradable Worker Sample - 1990-2010
&#$%

./01234/53678 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%97:;!4/01234/53678%

$#'%

$#$%
&(($% &((&% &(("% &(()% &((*% &(('% &((+% &((,% &((-% &(((% "$$$% "$$&% "$$"% "$$)% "$$*% "$$'% "$$+% "$$,% "$$-% "$$(% "$&$%

!$#'%

!&#$%

!&#'%

!"#$%

Each point reflects an individual regression coefficient, θ̂t , following (3), where the dependent variable is the average
yearly earnings in the year listed on the x-axis, expressed as a multiple of the worker’s pre-liberalization (1986-89)
average yearly earnings. The independent variable is the regional tariff reduction (RT Rr ), defined in (2). Note
that RT Rr always reflects tariff reductions from 1990-1995. The regressions include state fixed effects and extensive
controls for worker, initial job, initial employer, and initial region characteristics (see text for details). Negative
estimates imply that workers initially in regions facing larger tariff reductions experience earnings reductions compared
to workers in other regions. The vertical bar indicates that liberalization began in 1990 and was complete by 1995.
Dashed lines show 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors adjusted for 111 mesoregion clusters.

60

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Figure B9: Fraction of Formally Employed Months in a New Region - Nontradable Worker Sample
- 1990-2010
"#'%

./01234/53678 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%97:;!4/01234/53678%

"#(%

"#)%

"#*%

"#"%
*++"% *++*% *++)% *++(% *++'% *++&% *++$% *++,% *++-% *+++% )"""% )""*% )"")% )""(% )""'% )""&% )""$% )"",% )""-% )""+% )"*"%
!"#*%

!"#)%

!"#(%

!"#'%

!"#&%

!"#$%

Each point reflects an individual regression coefficient, θ̂t , following (3), where the dependent variable is the fraction
of formally employed months in the year listed on the x-axis spent outside the initial region. The independent variable
is the regional tariff reduction (RT Rr ), defined in (2). Note that RT Rr always reflects tariff reductions from 19901995. The regressions include state fixed effects and extensive controls for worker, initial job, initial employer, and
initial region characteristics (see text for details). Negative estimates imply that workers initially in regions facing
larger tariff reductions spend a smaller share of their formal employment outside the initial region than did workers
in other regions. The vertical bar indicates that liberalization began in 1990 and was complete by 1995. Dashed lines
show 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors adjusted for 111 mesoregion clusters.

61

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

B.4

Worker-Level Subsamples

Tables B3 and B4 present worker-level employment results for different subsamples of our worker
panels, in order to get a sense for potential heterogeneity among workers with different initial characteristics just before liberalization. Note that the theoretical framework underlying our analysis
assumes homogenous labor, so these results are merely suggestive. See Dix-Carneiro and Kovak
(2015) for an analysis of the regional effects of liberalization with two worker types.
In both tables B3 and B4, Panel B restricts the sample to include only workers with strong
labor force attachment prior to liberalization, i.e. at least 36 months of formal employment during
January 1986 - December 1989. Panel C further restricts the sample to require at least 42 months
of formal employment during the same time period. Panels D and E split the sample by education
level – those with a high school degree or more in Panel D and those with less than a high school
degree in Panel E. Panels F and G split the sample by age – those age 25-34 on December 31, 1989
in Panel F and those age 35-44 in Panel G.
In none of these subsamples are the results substantially different from those in the main
specification, including the full sample. We had anticipated potentially weaker effects on those
strongly attached to the formal labor market and larger effects on older and less educated workers,
but do not find significant differences across these groups.

62

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B3: Cumulative Average Months Formally Employed Per Year - Subsamples - Tradable
Worker Sample - 1995, 2000, 2005, 2010
Cumulative Average Months Formally Employed
Per Year

1990-1995
(1)

Panel A: Main specification
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)

1990-2000
(2)

-1.362**
-2.65***
(0.591)
(0.688)
Panel B: Attached (≥36 months formally employed during Jan 1986 - Dec 1989)
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-1.889***
-3.172***
(0.597)
(0.688)
Panel C: Strongly attached (≥42 months formally employed during Jan 1986 - Dec 1989)
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-1.735***
-3.092***
(0.628)
(0.711)
Panel D: More educated (high school degree or more)
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-2.312***
-3.119***
(0.758)
(0.800)
Panel E: Less educated (less than high school)
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-1.158*
-2.492***
(0.642)
(0.771)
Panel F: Younger (age 25-34 on Dec 31, 1989)
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-1.238*
-2.300***
(0.639)
(0.734)
Panel G: Older (age 35-44 on Dec 31, 1989)
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-1.004
-2.534***
(0.621)
(0.764)
State fixed effects (26)
✓
✓

1990-2005
(3)

1990-2010
(4)

-4.026***
(0.751)

-4.675***
(0.777)

-4.531***
(0.754)

-5.122***
(0.775)

-4.422***
(0.767)

-5.017***
(0.778)

-4.051***
(0.850)

-4.608***
(0.862)

-3.934***
(0.834)

-4.598***
(0.862)

-3.561***
(0.784)

-4.285***
(0.799)

-4.030***
(0.809)
✓

-4.536***
(0.806)
✓

The dependent variable is the average months formally employed per year from 1990 to the year listed in the column
heading. Note that RT Rr always reflects tariff reductions from 1990-1995. Panel A replicates the results shown in
Figure 3 for the relevant years. Subsequent panels show results for various worker subsamples, described in the panel
headings. Observations: Panel A: 585,078, Panel B: 417,908, Panel C: 351,482, Panel D: 126,560, Panel E: 458,514,
Panel F: 364,392, Panel G: 220,686. The regressions include state fixed effects and extensive controls for worker,
initial job, initial employer, and initial region characteristics (see text for details). Negative estimates imply that
workers initially in regions facing larger tariff reductions spend a smaller average share of the relevant years formally
employed than workers in other regions. Standard errors adjusted for 106 mesoregion clusters. *** Significant at the
1 percent, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent level.

63

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B4: Cumulative Average Months Formally Employed Per Year - Subsamples - Nontradable
Worker Sample - 1995, 2000, 2005, 2010
Cumulative Average Months Formally Employed
Per Year

1990-1995
(1)

Panel A: Main specification
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)

1990-2000
(2)

-0.711*
-1.448***
(0.392)
(0.390)
Panel B: Attached (≥36 months formally employed during Jan 1986 - Dec 1989)
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-0.513
-1.289***
(0.403)
(0.389)
Panel C: Strongly attached (≥42 months formally employed during Jan 1986 - Dec 1989)
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-0.160
-0.978**
(0.419)
(0.395)
Panel D: More educated (high school degree or more)
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-1.176***
-1.973***
(0.385)
(0.364)
Panel E: Less educated (less than high school)
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-0.549
-1.131**
(0.468)
(0.486)
Panel F: Younger (age 25-34 on Dec 31, 1989)
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-0.739**
-1.427***
(0.356)
(0.384)
Panel G: Older (age 35-44 on Dec 31, 1989)
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-0.515
-1.361***
(0.487)
(0.459)
State fixed effects (26)
✓
✓

1990-2005
(3)

1990-2010
(4)

-2.331***
(0.399)

-2.729***
(0.405)

-2.117***
(0.396)

-2.442***
(0.400)

-1.779***
(0.403)

-2.093***
(0.412)

-2.681***
(0.346)

-2.964***
(0.338)

-2.027***
(0.504)

-2.454***
(0.516)

-2.346***
(0.416)

-2.876***
(0.439)

-2.121***
(0.459)
✓

-2.347***
(0.454)
✓

The dependent variable is the average months formally employed per year from 1990 to the year listed in the column
heading. Note that RT Rr always reflects tariff reductions from 1990-1995. Panel A replicates the results shown in
Figure 7 for the relevant years. Subsequent panels show results for various worker subsamples, described in the panel
headings. Observations: Panel A: 973,703, Panel B: 656,177, Panel C: 537,122, Panel D: 363,418, Panel E: 610,285,
Panel F: 609,013, Panel G: 364,690. The regressions include state fixed effects and extensive controls for worker,
initial job, initial employer, and initial region characteristics (see text for details). Negative estimates imply that
workers initially in regions facing larger tariff reductions spend a smaller average share of the relevant years formally
employed than workers in other regions. Standard errors adjusted for 111 mesoregion clusters. *** Significant at the
1 percent, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent level.

64

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

B.5

Worker-Level Robustness

Tables B5 - B8 present robustness tests for the earnings and employment effects in the tradable and
nontradable worker samples. Table B5 corresponds to Figure 3, Table B6 corresponds to Figure 7,
Table B7 corresponds to Figure 5, and Table B8 corresponds to Figure B7. In each table, Panel A
replicates the findings in the main specification for 1995, 2000, 2005, and 2010.
In Tables B5 - B8, Panel B calculates RT Rr using effective rates of protection rather than
nominal tariffs. Effective rates of protection capture the overall effect of liberalization on producers
in a given industry, accounting for tariff changes on industry inputs and outputs. Kume et al.
(2003) provide effective rates of protection along with the nominal tariffs used in our main analysis.
The magnitude of the changes in effective rates of protection is larger than for nominal tariffs, so
the associated regression coefficients are smaller by roughly the same proportion. Panel C estimates
(3) without controlling for fixed effects reflecting the worker’s initial industry of employment prior
to liberalization. Panel D omits both initial industry and initial occupation fixed effects.
The remaining panels control for salient shocks to the Brazilian labor market that occurred
after liberalization. Panel E controls for tariff changes occurring after liberalization. We calculate
post-liberalization regional tariff reductions as in (2), but use tariff reductions between 1995 and
year t > 1995. Because the Kume et al. (2003) data end in 1998, we use UNCTAD TRAINS to
construct post-liberalization tariff reductions. The TRAINS data are reported by 6-digit HS codes.
In order to maintain as much industry variation as possible, we created an industry mapping from
HS codes to Census industry codes, which yields 44 consistently identifiable tradable industries.
This provides more industry detail than the main industry definition in Table A1.
Panel F controls for changes in real exchange rates. We construct regional real exchange rate
shocks as follows. We begin with real exchange rates between Brazil and its trading partners,
calculated from Revision 7.1 of the Penn World Tables. We then calculate each country’s 1989
shares of Brazil’s imports and exports in each industry using Comtrade. As with post-liberalization
tariff changes, we use the industry definition mapping from HS codes to Census industries. Industryspecific real exchange rates are weighted averages of country-specific real exchange rates, weighting
either by the 1989 import share or export share. We define industry-level real exchange rate shocks
as the change in log industry real exchange rate from 1990 to each subsequent year. Finally we
create regional real exchange rate shocks as weighted averages of industry real exchange rate shocks,
where the region’s industry weights are given by the 1991 industry distribution of employment.
Substantial privatization in Brazil began in 1991 with the administration of President Collor,
but significantly increased during President Cardoso’s administration (1995-2002). Beginning in
1995, the RAIS data allow us to identify as state-owned any firm at least partly owned by the
government. In panel G, we control for the 1995 share of regional employment in state-owned
firms, while in panel H we control for the change in state-owned firm employment share from 1995
to each subsequent year t.
Finally, Panel I controls for commodity price changes, which is particularly important later in
our sample, given the commodity-intensive nature of Brazilian output and the substantial increase in
commodity prices beginning in 2004. We calculate commodity price changes using the IMF Primary
Commodity Price Series, which allows us to measure prices for 19 separate commodities. We
calculate the change in log price index from 1991 to each subsequent year for each IMF commodity
and then generate regional weighted averages of these price changes, where weights reflect the
relevant commodity’s share of regional employment in 1991. Appendix B.8.4 in Dix-Carneiro and

65

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Kovak (forthcoming) presents extensive detail on the commodity price boom and the IMF data
underlying this commodity price change control.
For all of these robustness tests, our main results are confirmed. The regional effects of liberalization on formal earnings and employment grow substantially over time, and in most cases the
magnitudes remain quite similar to those in our main specifications. Thus, neither the measurement and specification choices considered here nor the extensive set of post-liberalization shocks
we control for drives our results.

66

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B5: Cumulative Average Months Formally Employed Per Year - Robustness - Tradable
Worker Sample - 1995, 2000, 2005, 2010
1990-1995
(1)

1990-2000
(2)

-1.362**
(0.591)

-2.65***
(0.688)

-4.026***
(0.751)

-4.675***
(0.777)

-1.046***
(0.389)

-1.692***
(0.440)

-2.462***
(0.492)

-2.832***
(0.510)

-1.592***
-3.021***
(0.564)
(0.679)
Panel D: Omitting initial industry and occupation fixed effects
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-1.134*
-3.000***
(0.574)
(0.732)
Panel E: Post-liberalization tariff reductions
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-1.362**
-2.649***
(0.591)
(0.696)
Post-liberalization (1995 to t) regional
n/a
11.591
tariff reductions
(13.534)
Panel F: Exchange rates
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-1.365**
-2.127***
(0.659)
(0.705)
Import-weighted real exchange rate
0.277
0.855*
(0.381)
(0.467)
Export-weighted real exchange rate
-1.013
-3.995***
(0.949)
(1.259)
Panel G: Privatization: initial state-owned employment share
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-1.359*
-2.477***
(0.708)
(0.771)
State-owned share of 1995 employment
-0.007
-0.455
(0.755)
(0.618)
Panel H: Privatization: change in state-owned employment share, 1995 to t
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-1.362**
-2.618***
(0.591)
(0.731)
Change in state-owned employment share
n/a
0.138
(0.780)
Panel I: Commodity price change controls
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-0.831
-3.358***
(0.685)
(0.974)
Regional commodity price changes
1.570*
1.031
(0.812)
(0.844)
State fixed effects (26)
✓
✓

-4.449***
(0.758)

-5.144***
(0.791)

-4.785***
(0.842)

-5.651***
(0.887)

-3.669***
(0.798)
13.346
(14.702)

-5.119***
(0.921)
5.211
(4.572)

-3.506***
(0.796)
-2.413
(1.633)
0.972
(1.520)

-5.031***
(0.881)
-0.267
(0.725)
-1.070
(1.153)

-3.748***
(0.823)
-0.731
(0.592)

-4.402***
(0.839)
-0.717
(0.573)

-3.901***
(0.831)
0.525
(0.869)

-4.493***
(0.854)
0.637
(0.789)

-3.913***
(0.779)
-1.012
(1.469)
✓

-6.909***
(1.646)
-1.526*
(0.829)
✓

Cumulative Average Months Formally Employed
Per Year
Panel A: Main specification
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Panel B: RTR using effective rates of protection
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Panel C: Omitting initial industry fixed effects
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)

1990-2005
(3)

1990-2010
(4)

The dependent variable is the average months formally employed per year from 1990 to the year listed in the column
heading. Note that RT Rr always reflects tariff reductions from 1990-1995. Panel A replicates the results shown in
Figure 3 for the relevant years. Subsequent panels show robustness tests, described in the text. The regressions include
state fixed effects and extensive controls for worker, initial job, initial employer, and initial region characteristics (see
text for details). Negative estimates imply that workers initially in regions facing larger tariff reductions spend a
smaller average share of the relevant years formally employed than workers in other regions. Standard errors adjusted
for 106 mesoregion clusters.

67

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B6: Cumulative Average Months Formally Employed Per Year - Robustness - Nontradable
Worker Sample - 1995, 2000, 2005, 2010
Cumulative Average Months Formally Employed
Per Year
Panel A: Main specification
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)

1990-1995
(1)

1990-2000
(2)

1990-2005
(3)

1990-2010
(4)

-0.711*
(0.392)

-1.448***
(0.390)

-2.331***
(0.399)

-2.729***
(0.405)

-0.477*
(0.246)

-0.999***
(0.254)

-1.570***
(0.264)

-1.843***
(0.268)

-1.046**
-1.727***
(0.407)
(0.403)
Panel D: Omitting initial industry and occupation fixed effects
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-1.309***
-2.167***
(0.410)
(0.425)
Panel E: Post-liberalization tariff reductions
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-0.806**
-1.591***
(0.393)
(0.396)
Post-liberalization (1995 to t) regional
n/a
6.013
tariff reductions
(7.599)
Panel F: Exchange rates
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-1.142***
-1.638***
(0.406)
(0.417)
Import-weighted real exchange rate
0.040
0.218
(0.225)
(0.350)
Export-weighted real exchange rate
-2.021***
-2.818**
(0.514)
(1.118)
Panel G: Privatization: initial state-owned employment share
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-1.299***
-2.029***
(0.381)
(0.418)
State-owned share of 1995 employment
1.435***
1.288**
(0.461)
(0.498)
Panel H: Privatization: change in state-owned employment share, 1995 to t
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-0.806**
-1.844***
(0.393)
(0.408)
Change in state-owned employment share
n/a
-1.351**
(0.574)
Panel I: Commodity price change controls
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-0.492
-1.243
(0.534)
(0.756)
Regional commodity price changes
0.938
-0.531
(0.698)
(0.871)
State fixed effects (26)
✓
✓

-2.496***
(0.416)

-2.821***
(0.420)

-3.096***
(0.454)

-3.458***
(0.466)

-2.297***
(0.491)
5.679
(8.903)

-3.064***
(0.449)
1.895
(1.840)

-2.775***
(0.437)
-0.877
(1.080)
-2.211*
(1.271)

-3.638***
(0.454)
-0.691*
(0.360)
-1.750***
(0.614)

-2.789***
(0.464)
0.936*
(0.498)

-3.141***
(0.476)
0.715
(0.475)

-2.771***
(0.439)
-1.344**
(0.541)

-3.118***
(0.459)
-0.906*
(0.526)

-2.406***
(0.422)
-0.922
(0.994)
✓

-2.944**
(1.207)
-0.035
(0.700)
✓

Panel B: RTR using effective rates of protection
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Panel C: Omitting initial industry fixed effects
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)

The dependent variable is the average months formally employed per year from 1990 to the year listed in the column
heading. Note that RT Rr always reflects tariff reductions from 1990-1995. Panel A replicates the results shown in
Figure 7 for the relevant years. Subsequent panels show robustness tests, described in the text. The regressions include
state fixed effects and extensive controls for worker, initial job, initial employer, and initial region characteristics (see
text for details). Negative estimates imply that workers initially in regions facing larger tariff reductions spend a
smaller average share of the relevant years formally employed than workers in other regions. Standard errors adjusted
for 111 mesoregion clusters.

68

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B7: Cumulative Average Earnings - Robustness - Tradable Worker Sample - 1990, 2000,
2005, 2010
Cumulative Average Earnings

Panel A: Main specification
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Panel B: RTR using effective rates of protection
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)

1990-1995
(1)

1990-2000
(2)

1990-2005
(3)

1990-2010
(4)

-0.097
(0.080)

-0.282***
(0.105)

-0.578***
(0.104)

-0.850***
(0.110)

-0.073
(0.047)

-0.160**
(0.067)

-0.325***
(0.077)

-0.487***
(0.085)

-0.606***
(0.114)

-0.897***
(0.121)

-0.622***
(0.120)

-0.941***
(0.126)

-0.548***
(0.117)
1.092
(2.647)

-0.801***
(0.119)
-0.580
(0.579)

-0.560***
(0.103)
-0.184
(0.211)
-0.072
(0.206)

-0.888***
(0.109)
-0.057
(0.076)
-0.084
(0.178)

-0.547***
(0.126)
-0.079
(0.139)

-0.819***
(0.135)
-0.081
(0.139)

-0.559***
(0.123)
0.076
(0.164)

-0.804***
(0.135)
0.162
(0.175)

-0.538***
(0.099)
-0.352
(0.218)
✓

-0.804***
(0.254)
0.031
(0.174)
✓

Panel C: Omitting initial industry fixed effects
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)

-0.070
-0.297**
(0.093)
(0.115)
Panel D: Omitting initial industry and occupation fixed effects
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-0.035
-0.278**
(0.105)
(0.124)
Panel E: Post-liberalization tariff reductions
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-0.097
-0.282***
(0.080)
(0.102)
Post-liberalization (1995 to t) regional
n/a
-1.002
tariff reductions
(2.691)
Panel F: Exchange rates
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-0.110
-0.158*
(0.083)
(0.084)
Import-weighted real exchange rate
0.072
0.203**
(0.052)
(0.079)
Export-weighted real exchange rate
-0.360***
-0.684***
(0.111)
(0.197)
Panel G: Privatization: initial state-owned employment share
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-0.084
-0.262**
(0.092)
(0.120)
State-owned share of 1995 employment
-0.032
-0.052
(0.135)
(0.143)
Panel H: Privatization: change in state-owned employment share, 1995 to t
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-0.097
-0.282**
(0.080)
(0.111)
Change in state-owned employment share
n/a
-0.001
(0.157)
Panel I: Commodity price change controls
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-0.019
-0.229*
(0.101)
(0.119)
Regional commodity price changes
0.230
-0.077
(0.170)
(0.171)
State fixed effects (26)
✓
✓

The dependent variable is the average yearly earnings from 1990 to the year listed in the column heading, expressed as
a multiple of the worker’s pre-liberalization (1986-89) average yearly earnings. Note that RT Rr always reflects tariff
reductions from 1990-1995. Panel A replicates the results shown in Figure 5 for the relevant years. Subsequent panels
show robustness tests, described in the text. The regressions include state fixed effects and extensive controls for
worker, initial job, initial employer, and initial region characteristics (see text for details). Negative estimates imply
that workers initially in regions facing larger tariff reductions experience earnings reductions compared to workers in
other regions. Standard errors adjusted for 106 mesoregion clusters.

69

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B8: Cumulative Average Earnings - Robustness - Nontradable Worker Sample - 1990, 2000,
2005, 2010
Cumulative Average Earnings

Panel A: Main specification
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Panel B: RTR using effective rates of protection
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)

1990-1995
(1)

1990-2000
(2)

1990-2005
(3)

0.147**
(0.057)

0.026
(0.080)

-0.219**
(0.088)

-0.458***
(0.098)

0.061
(0.037)

-0.033
(0.051)

-0.191***
(0.056)

-0.346***
(0.063)

-0.327***
(0.091)

-0.544***
(0.100)

-0.423***
(0.091)

-0.665**
(0.102)

-0.374***
(0.120)
-2.336
(2.766)

-0.523***
(0.106)
-0.283
(0.625)

-0.295***
(0.099)
-0.035
(0.207)
0.019
(0.298)

-0.636***
(0.100)
-0.036
(0.082)
-0.256*
(0.144)

-0.409***
(0.098)
0.306**
(0.122)

-0.655***
(0.110)
0.311**
(0.132)

-0.389***
(0.090)
-0.377***
(0.128)

-0.624***
(0.103)
-0.307**
(0.136)

-0.319***
(0.088)
0.229
(0.239)
✓

-0.629**
(0.263)
-0.057
(0.145)
✓

Panel C: Omitting initial industry fixed effects
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)

0.037
-0.100
(0.058)
(0.082)
Panel D: Omitting initial industry and occupation fixed effects
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
0.009
-0.163**
(0.057)
(0.081)
Panel E: Post-liberalization tariff reductions
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
0.090
-0.057
(0.056)
(0.079)
Post-liberalization (1995 to t) regional
n/a
0.179
tariff reductions
(1.832)
Panel F: Exchange rates
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
0.083
-0.034
(0.065)
(0.092)
Import-weighted real exchange rate
0.044
0.043
(0.034)
(0.060)
Export-weighted real exchange rate
-0.173**
-0.085
(0.078)
(0.177)
Panel G: Privatization: initial state-owned employment share
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
-0.004
-0.174**
(0.050)
(0.081)
State-owned share of 1995 employment
0.275***
0.339***
(0.079)
(0.109)
Panel H: Privatization: change in state-owned employment share, 1995 to t
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
0.090
-0.124
(0.056)
(0.077)
Change in state-owned employment share
n/a
-0.350***
(0.109)
Panel I: Commodity price change controls
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
0.106
-0.157
(0.065)
(0.139)
Regional commodity price changes
0.047
0.155
(0.098)
(0.159)
State fixed effects (26)
✓
✓

1990-2010
(4)

The dependent variable is the average yearly earnings from 1990 to the year listed in the column heading, expressed
as a multiple of the worker’s pre-liberalization (1986-89) average yearly earnings. Note that RT Rr always reflects
tariff reductions from 1990-1995. Panel A replicates the results shown in Figure B7 for the relevant years. Subsequent
panels show robustness tests, described in the text. The regressions include state fixed effects and extensive controls
for worker, initial job, initial employer, and initial region characteristics (see text for details). Negative estimates
imply that workers initially in regions facing larger tariff reductions experience earnings reductions compared to
workers in other regions. Standard errors adjusted for 111 mesoregion clusters.

70

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

B.6
B.6.1

Regional Labor Market Structure
Robustness

Table B9 estimates a version of the regional labor market structure analysis in Table 3, following
a consistent cohort of workers over time, those age 25-43 in 1989. This analysis reinforces our
interpretation of Table 3 as implying that many workers transition to informal employment following
long periods of non-employment. The results for informal workers, including informal employees and
the self-employed, are very similar to those in Table 3, indicating that these results are not driven by
worker entry and exit from the working-age population over time. The long-run not-employed share
responds somewhat differently for this cohort than for the working-age population as a whole. While
the not-employed share response decreases substantially between 2000 to 2010 for the consistent
cohort (Table B9), it disappears completely for the overall working-age population (Table 3). Thus,
while many non-employed workers in the cohort appear to find informal employment in the long
run, accounting for the large increase in the informal share effect and the decrease in the nonemployed share effect, some of the even larger decline in the non-employed effect in Table 3 reflects
worker entry and exit from the working-age population. Note also that in Table 3, the sum of nonemployed and informal effects is roughly constant over time, while the sum of these effects grows
over time for the consistent cohort in B9. The cohort pattern is more in line with the growing
worker-level formal employment effects in Figures 3 and 7.
Table B10 examines the relationship between pre-liberalization changes in employment category
shares and regional tariff reductions (RT Rr ) during liberalization. Note that our main results in
Table 3 control for these pre-liberalization changes, but we present these results for completeness.
We find that for regions that would later face larger tariff reductions, the not-employed share of
the working-age population decreased more during the 1970s and increased more during the 1980s
than in regions facing smaller tariff reductions. Due to the lack of information on informality in
the 1970 Census, we can only examine the informal share of working-age population during 19801991. This share was increasing more during the 1980s in regions that faced larger tariff reductions
during liberalization. These significant pre-liberalization relationships motivate our inclusion of
pre-liberalization trend controls in Table 3. That said, Table B11 shows that the non-employed
and informal results in Table 3 are very similar even when omitting the pre-liberalization trend
controls.

71

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B9: Employment Category Shares of Regional Working-Age Population, Following a Consistent Cohort - 2000, 2010
Change in share:
Panel A: Not-employed
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
Not-employed share pre-trend (80-91)

(1)

0.524***
(0.054)
0.019
(0.044)

Not-employed share pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel B: Informal
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
Informal share pre-trend (80-91)

!
0.466

0.156**
(0.067)
-0.056
(0.036)

Not-employed share pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel C: Informal employee
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
Informal employee share pre-trend (80-91)

!
0.207

0.526***
(0.044)
-0.228***
(0.058)

Not-employed share pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel D: Self-employed
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
Self-employed share pre-trend (80-91)

!
0.545

-0.330***
(0.071)
-0.124*
(0.064)

Not-employed share pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared

!
0.326

1991-2000
(2)

0.535***
(0.053)

0.015
(0.046)
!
0.466

0.144**
(0.070)

-0.008
(0.043)
!
0.202

0.444***
(0.043)

-0.080
(0.063)
!
0.498

-0.299***
(0.068)

0.071
(0.056)
!
0.318

(3)

(4)

0.529***
(0.054)
0.068
(0.058)
0.068
(0.057)
!
0.468

0.367***
(0.063)
-0.100**
(0.046)

0.182**
(0.075)
-0.089*
(0.050)
0.061
(0.062)
!
0.209

0.582***
(0.079)
-0.166***
(0.048)

0.538***
(0.048)
-0.239***
(0.064)
0.027
(0.067)
!
0.546

0.141
(0.110)
-0.159
(0.100)

-0.291***
(0.069)
-0.168**
(0.064)
0.126**
(0.062)
!
0.338

0.430***
(0.089)
-0.305***
(0.076)

!
0.473

!
0.465

!
0.476

!
0.633

1991-2010
(5)

0.366***
(0.064)

0.100**
(0.046)
!
0.472

0.525***
(0.089)

-0.086
(0.071)
!
0.446

0.105
(0.130)

0.006
(0.105)
!
0.467

0.419***
(0.110)

-0.089
(0.079)
!
0.604

(6)

0.372***
(0.064)
-0.063
(0.047)
0.051
(0.047)
!
0.474

0.614***
(0.090)
-0.207***
(0.059)
0.075
(0.079)
!
0.467

0.182
(0.127)
-0.197*
(0.101)
0.094
(0.097)
!
0.479

0.434***
(0.104)
-0.309***
(0.095)
0.013
(0.087)
!
0.633

Decennial Census data. Positive (negative) coefficient estimates for the regional tariff reduction (RT R) imply larger
increases (decreases) in the relevant employment category share in regions facing larger tariff reductions. The informal share in Panel B covers both informal employees and the self-employed, shown separately in Panels B and C,
respectively. Changes in employment shares are calculated controlling for regional worker composition (see text for
details). The analysis follows a consistent cohort of workers who were age 27-45 in 1991, 36-54 in 2000, and 46-64
in 2010. Pre-trends computed for 1980-1991 and 1970-1980 periods. Due to a lack of information on informality in
the 1970 Census, the 1980-1970 pre-trends always refer to the non-employed share. 405 microregion observations.
Standard errors (in parentheses) adjusted for 90 mesoregion clusters. Weighted by the inverse of the squared standard
error of the estimated change in the relevant employment share. *** Significant at the 1 percent, ** 5 percent, * 10
percent level.

72

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B10: Employment Category Shares Pre-Trends
Change in share:
Panel A: Not-employed
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel B: Informal
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)

1980-1991

1970-1980

0.330***
(0.068)
!
0.431

-0.212***
(0.072)
!
0.314

0.295***
(0.082)
!
0.383

State fixed effects (26)
R-squared

n/a

Decennial Census data. Positive (negative) coefficient estimates for the regional tariff reduction (RT R) imply larger
increases (decreases) in the relevant employment category share during the pre-liberalization period listed in the
column heading in regions facing larger tariff reductions. Changes in employment shares are calculated controlling
for regional worker composition (see text for details). Due to a lack of information on informality in the 1970 Census,
we only examine 1980-1970 pre-trends for the non-employed share. 405 microregion observations. Standard errors
(in parentheses) adjusted for 90 mesoregion clusters. Weighted by the inverse of the squared standard error of the
estimated change in the relevant employment share. *** Significant at the 1 percent, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent level.

73

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B11: Employment Category Shares of Regional Working-Age Population - 2000, 2010 without Pre-Liberalization Trend Controls
Change in share:

1991-2000

Panel A: Not-employed
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel B: Informal
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared

1991-2010

0.313***
(0.038)
!
0.478

-0.049
(0.053)
!
0.581

0.175***
(0.045)
!
0.328

0.463***
(0.063)
!
0.559

Decennial Census data. Positive (negative) coefficient estimates for the regional tariff reduction (RT R) imply larger
increases (decreases) in the relevant employment category share in regions facing larger tariff reductions. Changes in
employment shares are calculated controlling for regional worker composition (see text for details). Standard errors
(in parentheses) adjusted for 90 mesoregion clusters. Weighted by the inverse of the squared standard error of the
estimated change in the relevant employment share. *** Significant at the 1 percent, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent level.

74

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

B.6.2

Results by Education Level

Tables B12 and B13 present versions of the regional labor market structure analysis in Table 3
separately by education level. Table B12 presents results for workers with a high school degree or
more, and Table B13 presents results for workers with less than a high school degree. All results
are similar across the two education groups.

75

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B12: Employment Category Shares of More Educated Regional Working-Age Population 2000, 2010
Change in share:
Panel A: Not-employed
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
Not-employed share pre-trend (80-91)

(1)

0.206***
(0.031)
-0.027
(0.050)

Not-employed share pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel B: Informal
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
Informal share pre-trend (80-91)

!
0.508

0.097**
(0.048)
-0.0915
(0.065)

Not-employed share pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel C: Informal employee
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
Informal employee share pre-trend (80-91)

!
0.465

0.047
(0.047)
-0.121
(0.074)

Not-employed share pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel D: Self-employed
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
Self-employed share pre-trend (80-91)

!
0.507

0.037**
(0.017)
-0.169***
(0.056)

Not-employed share pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared

!
0.288

1991-2000
(2)

0.230***
(0.033)

0.100**
(0.043)
!
0.526

0.109**
(0.048)

-0.003
(0.033)
!
0.461

0.057
(0.051)

0.009
(0.040)
!
0.502

0.045**
(0.017)

-0.005
(0.017)
!
0.249

(3)

(4)

0.232***
(0.034)
-0.022
(0.047)
0.100**
(0.044)
!
0.526

-0.043
(0.051)
0.008
(0.084)

0.098*
(0.050)
-0.092
(0.064)
0.003
(0.031)
!
0.465

0.433***
(0.086)
-0.187**
(0.087)

0.052
(0.052)
-0.126*
(0.072)
0.018
(0.039)
!
0.507

0.219***
(0.074)
-0.248***
(0.091)

0.035*
(0.018)
-0.170***
(0.055)
-0.008
(0.017)
!
0.288

0.180***
(0.020)
-0.324***
(0.062)

!
0.580

!
0.622

!
0.641

!
0.495

1991-2010
(5)

-0.019
(0.063)

0.088
(0.061)
!
0.586

0.437***
(0.086)

-0.094*
(0.052)
!
0.619

0.211***
(0.075)

-0.089*
(0.049)
!
0.636

0.202***
(0.023)

0.007
(0.018)
!
0.413

(6)

-0.020
(0.060)
0.016
(0.083)
0.089
(0.062)
!
0.586

0.415***
(0.088)
-0.172**
(0.084)
-0.082*
(0.047)
!
0.625

0.202**
(0.077)
-0.231**
(0.088)
-0.073
(0.047)
!
0.644

0.180***
(0.021)
-0.324***
(0.062)
0.003
(0.016)
!
0.495

Decennial Census data. Sample restricted to more educated working-age individuals, those with a high school degree
or more. Positive (negative) coefficient estimates for the regional tariff reduction (RT R) imply larger increases
(decreases) in the relevant employment category share in regions facing larger tariff reductions. The informal share
in Panel B covers both informal employees and the self-employed, shown separately in Panels B and C, respectively.
Changes in employment shares are calculated controlling for regional worker composition (see text for details). Pretrends computed for 1980-1991 and 1970-1980 periods. Due to a lack of information on informality in the 1970
Census, the 1980-1970 pre-trends always refer to the non-employed share. 405 microregion observations. Standard
errors (in parentheses) adjusted for 90 mesoregion clusters. Weighted by the inverse of the squared standard error of
the estimated change in the relevant employment share. *** Significant at the 1 percent, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent
level.

76

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B13: Employment Category Shares of Less Educated Regional Working-Age Population 2000, 2010
Change in share:
Panel A: Not-employed
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
Not-employed share pre-trend (80-91)

(1)

0.370***
(0.053)
0.056
(0.046)

Not-employed share pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel B: Informal
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
Informal share pre-trend (80-91)

!
0.487

0.182***
(0.062)
0.020
(0.039)

Not-employed share pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel C: Informal employee
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
Informal employee share pre-trend (80-91)

!
0.321

0.482***
(0.037)
-0.157***
(0.037)

Not-employed share pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel D: Self-employed
Regional Tariff Reduction (RTR)
Self-employed share pre-trend (80-91)

!
0.657

-0.232***
(0.055)
-0.046
(0.064)

Not-employed share pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared

!
0.232

1991-2000
(2)

0.382***
(0.050)

-0.035
(0.046)
!
0.485

0.213***
(0.057)

0.088*
(0.046)
!
0.328

0.418***
(0.037)

-0.025
(0.056)
!
0.632

-0.203***
(0.046)

0.126*
(0.065)
!
0.247

(3)

(4)

0.370***
(0.053)
0.061
(0.062)
0.009
(0.061)
!
0.487

0.015
(0.058)
-0.082*
(0.047)

0.238***
(0.068)
-0.046
(0.047)
0.128**
(0.061)
!
0.330

0.424***
(0.069)
-0.062
(0.054)

0.508***
(0.042)
-0.180***
(0.037)
0.061
(0.058)
!
0.660

-0.127
(0.084)
0.053
(0.110)

-0.190***
(0.048)
-0.111**
(0.054)
0.168**
(0.069)
!
0.257

0.467***
(0.069)
-0.359***
(0.073)

!
0.519

!
0.442

!
0.549

!
0.680

1991-2010
(5)

-0.001
(0.060)

0.056
(0.045)
!
0.516

0.401***
(0.077)

-0.020
(0.050)
!
0.439

-0.052
(0.097)

0.199**
(0.088)
!
0.560

0.408***
(0.076)

-0.226***
(0.068)
!
0.658

(6)

0.014
(0.058)
-0.087
(0.067)
-0.007
(0.063)
!
0.519

0.450***
(0.083)
-0.092
(0.069)
0.060
(0.061)
!
0.443

-0.040
(0.100)
-0.025
(0.108)
0.211***
(0.078)
!
0.560

0.439***
(0.076)
-0.318***
(0.105)
-0.107
(0.089)
!
0.683

Decennial Census data. Sample restricted to less educated working-age individuals, those with less than a high
school degree. Positive (negative) coefficient estimates for the regional tariff reduction (RT R) imply larger increases
(decreases) in the relevant employment category share in regions facing larger tariff reductions. The informal share
in Panel B covers both informal employees and the self-employed, shown separately in Panels B and C, respectively.
Changes in employment shares are calculated controlling for regional worker composition (see text for details). Pretrends computed for 1980-1991 and 1970-1980 periods. Due to a lack of information on informality in the 1970
Census, the 1980-1970 pre-trends always refer to the non-employed share. 405 microregion observations. Standard
errors (in parentheses) adjusted for 90 mesoregion clusters. Weighted by the inverse of the squared standard error of
the estimated change in the relevant employment share. *** Significant at the 1 percent, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent
level.

77

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

B.7
B.7.1

Regional Earnings
Robustness

In this section, we present various robustness tests for the regional earnings analysis presented in
Table 5.
Table B14 uses an alternative measure of the regional earnings premium for informal workers
and for all workers. The regional earnings premium in Table 5 reflects average regional log earnings, controlling for 5 age bins, a gender indicator, and indicators for individual years of education.
These controls are needed to net out any changes in worker composition, since we can not follow
individual workers over time in the Census data. In Table B14, we additionally control for industry
fixed effects. This approach nets out the national direct effect of liberalization in a worker’s industry, instead restricting attention to the effects of liberalization on regional equilibrium earnings
(Hakobyan and McLaren 2016, Acemoglu et al. 2016). When netting out these direct industry
effects, the significant negative earnings effects in Table 5 disappear, with Table B14 finding much
smaller, and generally insignificant results. Note that Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (forthcoming) control for industry fixed effects when calculating regional earnings premia, so the informal earnings
results presented there are quite similar to those in Table B14.
Tables B15 and B16 further investigate the implications of controlling for worker composition
when calculating regional earnings premia. Panel A of both tables replicates the main results from
Table 5, for comparison. Panel B calculates regional earnings premia controlling for additional
worker-level observable characteristics: an indicator for urban residence, 4 race indicators, and a
married indicator. Panel C includes these additional controls, and pairwise interactions between all
of the observable characteristics included in Panel B. For both informal earnings in Table B15 and
overall earnings in Table B16, these more detailed earnings premium controls have little effect on
our conclusions. We still find a lack of robust long-run effect of liberalization on regional informal
earnings and reasonably consistently sized effects on overall regional earnings over time, as in the
main specifications.
The consistency across panels of tables B15 and B16 helps ameliorate concerns regarding worker
selection on unobservables in the Census data. Since the results are consistent when sequentially
controlling for more detailed and flexible observable worker characteristics, we are more confident
that the results would be similarly robust to controlling for unobservable characteristics. To reinforce this conclusion, Table B17 reports earnings results for a consistent cohort of workers across
Census years, those age 25-43 in 1989. These individuals remain of working age throughout our
sample period. The results are very similar to those in Table 5, indicating that the results are not
driven by changes in the working-age population over time.
Table B18 examines changes in regional hourly wages rather than monthly earnings. This
analysis gives us a sense for whether the earnings changes are primarily due to changes in hours
worked or changes hourly wages. Recall that continuous hours measures are unavailable prior to
1991, so the pre-liberalization trend controls still utilize earnings rather than wages. The wage
results in Table B18 are very similar to the earnings results in Table 5, indicating that the earnings
changes primarily reflect changes in hourly wages rather than changes in hours worked.

78

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B14: Regional Informal and Overall Earnings Premia Controlling for Industry Fixed Effects
- 2000, 2010

Change in log earnings premia:
Panel A: Informal
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Informal earnings pre-trend (80-91)

(1)

0.057
(0.153)
-0.170***
(0.050)

Overall earnings pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel B: Overall
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Overall earnings pre-trend (80-91)

✓

R-squared

-0.147
(0.151)

0.014
(0.061)
✓

(3)

(4)

0.054
(0.161)
-0.170***
(0.049)
-0.003
(0.058)
✓

0.190
(0.237)
-0.256***
(0.087)

✓

0.668

0.650

0.668

0.696

0.010
(0.122)
-0.229***
(0.055)

-0.305**
(0.134)

0.192
(0.217)
-0.356***
(0.092)

✓

-0.098*
(0.056)
✓

-0.086
(0.139)
-0.232***
(0.053)
-0.105*
(0.053)
✓

0.708

0.684

0.714

0.689

Overall earnings pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)

1991-2000
(2)

✓

1991-2010
(5)

-0.143
(0.272)

0.002
(0.101)
✓
0.677

-0.288
(0.253)

-0.141
(0.102)
✓
0.660

(6)

0.170
(0.229)
-0.258***
(0.085)
-0.025
(0.097)
✓
0.696

0.062
(0.198)
-0.359***
(0.086)
-0.150
(0.098)
✓
0.695

Decennial Census data. Negative (positive) coefficient estimates for the regional tariff reduction (RT R) imply larger
decreases (increases) in earnings in regions facing larger tariff reductions. Regional earnings premia are calculated
controlling for regional worker composition and for industry fixed effects (see text for details). Panel A examines
earnings for informal workers only, while Panel B examines earnings for all workers, including both formal and
informal. Pre-trends computed for 1980-1991 and 1970-1980 periods. Due to a lack of information on informality in
the 1970 Census, the 1980-1970 pre-trends always refer to overall earnings. 405 microregion observations. Standard
errors (in parentheses) adjusted for 90 mesoregion clusters. Weighted by the inverse of the squared standard error of
the estimated change in the relevant employment × sector share. *** Significant at the 1 percent, ** 5 percent, * 10
percent level.

79

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B15: Regional Informal Earnings Premia with Detailed Worker Controls - 2000, 2010

Change in log informal earnings premia:
Panel A: Main controls
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Informal earnings pre-trend (80-91)

(1)

-0.432***
(0.148)
-0.163***
(0.049)

Overall earnings pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel B: Detailed controls
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Informal earnings pre-trend (80-91)

✓

R-squared
Panel C: Detailed controls with interactions
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Informal earnings pre-trend (80-91)

R-squared

0.008
(0.055)
✓

(4)

-0.433***
(0.156)
-0.163***
(0.048)
-0.001
(0.054)
✓

-0.015
(0.251)
-0.222**
(0.089)

✓

0.683

0.699

0.697

-0.206
(0.138)
-0.175***
(0.046)

-0.452***
(0.135)

-0.230
(0.142)
-0.177***
(0.045)
-0.026
(0.051)
✓

0.076
(0.227)
-0.248***
(0.076)

✓

-0.015
(0.052)
✓

✓

0.669

0.648

0.669

0.702

-0.203
(0.135)
-0.179***
(0.044)

-0.448***
(0.132)

-0.229
(0.138)
-0.181***
(0.044)
-0.090
(0.048)
✓

0.102
(0.214)
-0.263***
(0.072)

0.659

0.699

Overall earnings pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)

-0.636***
(0.144)

(3)

0.699

Overall earnings pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)

1991-2000
(2)

✓
0.659

-0.017
(0.049)
✓
0.636

✓

1991-2010
(5)

-0.307
(0.262)

0.006
(0.093)
✓
0.684

-0.271
(0.248)

-0.015
(0.088)
✓
0.683

-0.256
(0.240)

-0.018
(0.082)
✓
0.676

(6)

-0.021
(0.234)
-0.222**
(0.089)
-0.006
(0.092)
✓
0.697

0.050
(0.208)
-0.250***
(0.075)
-0.030
(0.088)
✓
0.702

0.072
(0.200)
-0.265***
(0.071)
-0.037
(0.080)
✓
0.700

Decennial Census data. Negative (positive) coefficient estimates for the regional tariff reduction (RT R) imply larger
decreases (increases) in informal earnings in regions facing larger tariff reductions. Regional earnings premia are
calculated controlling for regional worker composition. Panel A uses the worker controls used in the main specifications
(Table 5): 5 age-range indicators, sex, and year of education indicators. Panel B includes these controls, and adds
an urban indicator, a married indicator, and 4 race indicators. Panel C included all of these controls and pairwise
interactions. See text for more detail. Pre-trends computed for 1980-1991 and 1970-1980 periods. Due to a lack
of information on informality in the 1970 Census, the 1980-1970 pre-trends always refer to overall earnings. 405
microregion observations. Standard errors (in parentheses) adjusted for 90 mesoregion clusters. Weighted by the
inverse of the squared standard error of the estimated change in the relevant employment × sector share. ***
Significant at the 1 percent, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent level.

80

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B16: Regional Overall Earnings Premia with Detailed Worker Controls - 2000, 2010

Change in log overall earnings premia:
Panel A: Main controls
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Overall earnings pre-trend (80-91)

(1)

(3)

(4)

-0.405*
(0.237)
-0.332***
(0.0883)

✓

-0.102*
(0.0529)
✓

-0.495***
(0.136)
-0.224***
(0.0529)
-0.102*
(0.0524)
✓

0.738

0.719

-0.224*
(0.115)
-0.233***
(0.0535)

-0.570***
(0.122)

-0.392***
(0.119)
-0.224***
(0.0553)

R-squared
Panel B: Detailed controls
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Overall earnings pre-trend (80-91)

State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel C: Detailed controls with interactions
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Overall earnings pre-trend (80-91)

✓

0.743

0.718

0.697

0.722

-0.322
(0.232)
-0.330***
(0.0808)

-0.796***
(0.245)

✓

-0.114**
(0.0501)
✓

-0.336***
(0.127)
-0.233***
(0.0516)
-0.114**
(0.0493)
✓

✓

-0.144
(0.0951)
✓

-0.456**
(0.201)
-0.330***
(0.0763)
-0.144
(0.0948)
✓

0.707

0.684

0.714

0.707

0.684

0.713

-0.208*
(0.119)
-0.236***
(0.0520)

-0.557***
(0.123)

-0.289
(0.228)
-0.339***
(0.0767)

-0.776***
(0.244)

✓

-0.118**
(0.0485)
✓

-0.318**
(0.129)
-0.237***
(0.0499)
-0.121**
(0.0467)
✓

✓

-0.153*
(0.0867)
✓

-0.425**
(0.206)
-0.342***
(0.0718)
-0.158*
(0.0846)
✓

0.688

0.663

0.697

0.699

0.673

0.706

Overall earnings pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared

-0.874***
(0.254)

(6)

-0.137
(0.0983)
✓

Overall earnings pre-trend (70-80)

-0.718***
(0.132)

1991-2010
(5)

-0.535**
(0.206)
-0.332***
(0.0840)
-0.137
(0.0984)
✓

Overall earnings pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)

1991-2000
(2)

Decennial Census data. Negative (positive) coefficient estimates for the regional tariff reduction (RT R) imply larger
decreases (increases) in overall earnings in regions facing larger tariff reductions. Regional earnings premia are
calculated controlling for regional worker composition. Panel A uses the worker controls used in the main specifications
(Table 5): 5 age-range indicators, sex, and year of education indicators. Panel B includes these controls, and adds
an urban indicator, a married indicator, and 4 race indicators. Panel C included all of these controls and pairwise
interactions. See text for more detail. Pre-trends computed for 1980-1991 and 1970-1980 periods. 405 microregion
observations. Standard errors (in parentheses) adjusted for 90 mesoregion clusters. Weighted by the inverse of the
squared standard error of the estimated change in the relevant employment × sector share. *** Significant at the 1
percent, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent level.

81

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B17: Regional Informal Earnings Premia Following Consistent Cohort - 2000, 2010

Change in log informal earnings premia:

(1)

Regional tariff reduction (RTR)

-0.365**
(0.165)
-0.285***
(0.044)

Informal earnings pre-trend (80-91)
Overall earnings pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared

✓
0.593

1991-2000
(2)
-0.797***
(0.181)

-0.052
(0.067)
✓
0.540

(3)

(4)

-0.412**
(0.165)
-0.297***
(0.043)
-0.096
(0.063)
✓

0.067
(0.308)
-0.389***
(0.071)

0.598

0.623

✓

1991-2010
(5)
-0.508
(0.358)

-0.053
(0.111)
✓
0.573

(6)
0.014
(0.306)
-0.405***
(0.069)
-0.115
(0.102)
✓
0.626

Decennial Census data. Negative (positive) coefficient estimates for the regional tariff reduction (RT R) imply larger
decreases (increases) in informal earnings in regions facing larger tariff reductions. Regional earnings premia are
calculated controlling for regional worker composition and following a consistent cohort of workers who were age
27-45 in 1991, 36-54 in 2000, and 46-64 in 2010. Pre-trends computed for 1980-1991 and 1970-1980 periods. Due to
a lack of information on informality in the 1970 Census, the 1980-1970 pre-trends always refer to overall earnings.
405 microregion observations. Standard errors (in parentheses) adjusted for 90 mesoregion clusters. Weighted by
the inverse of the squared standard error of the estimated change in the relevant employment × sector share. ***
Significant at the 1 percent, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent level.

82

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B18: Regional Informal and Overall Wage Premia - 2000, 2010

Change in log wage premia:
Panel A: Informal
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Informal earnings pre-trend (80-91)

(1)

-0.493***
(0.144)
-0.218***
(0.050)

Overall earnings pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel B: Overall
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Overall earnings pre-trend (80-91)

✓

R-squared

-0.783***
(0.139)

-0.003
(0.056)
✓

(3)

(4)

-0.507***
(0.148)
-0.218***
(0.050)
-0.014
(0.055)
✓

0.385
(0.239)
-0.313***
(0.086)

✓

1991-2010
(5)

-0.095
(0.270)

-0.056
(0.084)
✓

(6)

0.321
(0.227)
-0.316***
(0.085)
-0.072
(0.080)
✓

0.715

0.690

0.715

0.676

0.646

0.677

-0.434***
(0.118)
-0.269***
(0.057)

-0.808***
(0.134)

-0.069
(0.229)
-0.400***
(0.088)

-0.664**
(0.268)

✓

-0.103*
(0.056)
✓

-0.537***
(0.131)
-0.269***
(0.054)
-0.103*
(0.055)
✓

✓

-0.195**
(0.088)
✓

-0.249
(0.213)
-0.400***
(0.081)
-0.194**
(0.083)
✓

0.740

0.711

0.745

0.698

0.665

0.708

Overall earnings pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)

1991-2000
(2)

Decennial Census data. Negative coefficient estimates for the regional tariff reduction (RT R) imply larger decreases
in wages in regions facing larger tariff reductions. Regional wage premia are calculated controlling for regional worker
composition (see text for details). Panel A examines wages for informal workers only, while Panel B examines wages
for all workers, including both formal and informal. Pre-trends computed for 1980-1991 and 1970-1980 periods. Due
to a lack of continuous hours information in the 1970 and 1980 Censuses, pre-trends are based on monthly earnings
rather than hourly wages. Due to a lack of information on informality in the 1970 Census, the 1980-1970 pre-trends
always refer to overall earnings. 405 microregion observations. Standard errors (in parentheses) adjusted for 90
mesoregion clusters. Weighted by the inverse of the squared standard error of the estimated change in the relevant
employment × sector share. *** Significant at the 1 percent, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent level.

83

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

B.7.2

Results by Education Level

Tables B19 and B20 present earnings results for informal and all workers, separately by education
level. Table B19 restricts attention to workers with a high school degree or more, and finds somewhat larger earnings effects for these workers than for less skilled workers, those with less than
a high school degree, in Table B20. Note that the theoretical framework underlying our analysis
assumes homogenous labor, so these results are merely suggestive. See Dix-Carneiro and Kovak
(2015) for an analysis of the regional effects of liberalization with two worker types.

84

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B19: Regional Informal and Overall Earnings Premia for More Educated Workers - 2000,
2010
Change in log earnings premia:
Panel A: Informal
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Informal earnings pre-trend (80-91)

(1)

-0.773***
(0.129)
-0.081
(0.052)

Overall earnings pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel B: Overall
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Overall earnings pre-trend (80-91)

✓

R-squared

-0.864***
(0.115)

-0.069
(0.063)
✓

(3)

(4)

-0.750***
(0.127)
-0.098*
(0.053)
-0.086
(0.062)
✓

-0.585***
(0.163)
-0.095
(0.058)

1991-2010
(5)

-0.687***
(0.184)

(6)

✓

-0.143***
(0.053)
✓

-0.537***
(0.168)
-0.129**
(0.059)
-0.167***
(0.053)
✓

0.739

0.738

0.743

0.752

0.756

0.760

-0.627***
(0.137)
-0.222**
(0.084)

-0.820***
(0.121)

-0.867***
(0.173)
-0.249***
(0.085)

-1.076***
(0.208)

✓

-0.155***
(0.053)
✓

-0.598***
(0.131)
-0.250***
(0.077)
-0.179***
(0.050)
✓

✓

-0.274***
(0.057)
✓

-0.811***
(0.198)
-0.298***
(0.073)
-0.303***
(0.058)
✓

0.771

0.768

0.789

0.805

0.814

0.828

Overall earnings pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)

1991-2000
(2)

Decennial Census data. Sample restricted to more educated working-age individuals, those with a high school degree
or more. Negative coefficient estimates for the regional tariff reduction (RT R) imply larger decreases in earnings
in regions facing larger tariff reductions. Regional earnings premia are calculated controlling for regional worker
composition (see text for details). Panel A examines earnings for informal workers only, while Panel B examines
earnings for all workers, including both formal and informal. Pre-trends computed for 1980-1991 and 1970-1980
periods. Due to a lack of information on informality in the 1970 Census, the 1980-1970 pre-trends always refer to
overall earnings. 405 microregion observations. Standard errors (in parentheses) adjusted for 90 mesoregion clusters.
Weighted by the inverse of the squared standard error of the estimated change in the relevant employment × sector
share. *** Significant at the 1 percent, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent level.

85

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B20: Regional Informal and Overall Earnings Premia for Less Educated Workers - 2000,
2010
Change in log earnings premia:
Panel A: Informal
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Informal earnings pre-trend (80-91)

(1)

-0.309*
(0.174)
-0.185***
(0.051)

Overall earnings pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel B: Overall
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Overall earnings pre-trend (80-91)

✓

R-squared

-0.554***
(0.164)

0.003
(0.063
✓

(3)

(4)

-0.317*
(0.181)
-0.185***
(0.049)
-0.008
(0.061)
✓

0.286
(0.305)
-0.266***
(0.089)

✓

1991-2010
(5)

-0.062
(0.308)

0.022
(0.111)
✓

(6)

0.291
(0.273)
-0.266***
(0.087)
0.005
(0.110)
✓

0.678

0.659

0.678

0.692

0.675

0.692

-0.226
(0.144)
-0.246***
(0.054)

-0.590***
(0.151)

-0.335**
(0.161)
-0.246***
(0.052)
-0.096
(0.062)
✓

-0.089
(0.312)
-0.372***
(0.091)

-0.570*
(0.309)

-0.165
(0.254)
-0.372***
(0.090)
-0.071
(0.122)
✓

0.706

0.662

Overall earnings pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)

1991-2000
(2)

✓
0.702

-0.097
(0.064)
✓
0.675

✓

-0.075
(0.125)
✓
0.631

0.664

Decennial Census data. Sample restricted to less educated working-age individuals, those with a high school degree
or more. Negative coefficient estimates for the regional tariff reduction (RT R) imply larger decreases in earnings
in regions facing larger tariff reductions. Regional earnings premia are calculated controlling for regional worker
composition (see text for details). Panel A examines earnings for informal workers only, while Panel B examines
earnings for all workers, including both formal and informal. Pre-trends computed for 1980-1991 and 1970-1980
periods. Due to a lack of information on informality in the 1970 Census, the 1980-1970 pre-trends always refer to
overall earnings. 405 microregion observations. Standard errors (in parentheses) adjusted for 90 mesoregion clusters.
Weighted by the inverse of the squared standard error of the estimated change in the relevant employment × sector
share. *** Significant at the 1 percent, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent level.

86

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

B.7.3

Regional Informal Employee and Self-Employed Earnings

Table B21 breaks down the informal earnings results in Panel A of Table 5 into those for informal
employees and the self-employed, which together comprise the informal sector. The estimates
are less consistent across pre-trend specifications than those in the main text, but one interesting
observation is that the recovery in informal wages in harder hit places that occurs by 2010 appears
primarily among the self-employed. See Appendix B.2 for more detail on the informal sector and
on the industry distribution of informal employees and the self-employed.

87

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak

Margins of Adjustment to Trade

Table B21: Regional Informal Employee and Self-Employed Earnings Premia - 2000, 2010
Change in log earnings premia:
Panel A: Informal employees
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Informal employee earnings pre-trend (80-91)

(1)

-0.516***
(0.127)
-0.117**
(0.045)

Overall earnings pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)
R-squared
Panel B: Self-employed
Regional tariff reduction (RTR)
Self-employed earnings pre-trend (80-91)

✓

R-squared

-0.715***
(0.124)

-0.063
(0.045)
✓

(3)

-0.583***
(0.134)
-0.118***
(0.044)
-0.066
(0.049)
✓

(4)

-0.321
(0.241)
-0.117
(0.077)

✓

0.704

0.698

0.706

0.661

-0.181
(0.186)
-0.285***
(0.055)

-0.535***
(0.199)

-0.142
(0.195)
-0.283***
(0.056)
0.043
(0.069)
✓

0.541**
(0.250)
-0.403***
(0.092)

0.682

0.728

Overall earnings pre-trend (70-80)
State fixed effects (26)

1991-2000
(2)

✓
0.682

0.067
(0.078)
✓
0.637

✓

1991-2010
(5)

-0.556**
(0.212)

-0.096
(0.078)
✓
0.659

0.037
(0.361)

0.113
(0.124)
✓
0.689

(6)

-0.417**
(0.210)
-0.120
(0.075)
-0.100
(0.080)
✓
0.664

0.612**
(0.269)
-0.399***
(0.093)
0.083
(0.115)
✓
0.729

Decennial Census data. Negative coefficient estimates for the regional tariff reduction (RT R) imply larger decreases
in earnings in regions facing larger tariff reductions. Regional earnings premia are calculated controlling for regional
worker composition (see text for details). Panel A examines earnings for informal employees only, while Panel B
examines earnings for self-employed workers. Pre-trends computed for 1980-1991 and 1970-1980 periods. Due to
a lack of information on informality in the 1970 Census, the 1980-1970 pre-trends always refer to overall earnings.
405 microregion observations. Standard errors (in parentheses) adjusted for 90 mesoregion clusters. Weighted by
the inverse of the squared standard error of the estimated change in the relevant employment × sector share. ***
Significant at the 1 percent, ** 5 percent, * 10 percent level.

88

