NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY HAS REGIONAL INCOME CONVERGENCE IN THE U.S. DECLINED?
Peter Ganong
Daniel W. Shoag
Working Paper 23609
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23609

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2017

We would like to thank Marios Angeletos, Robert Barro, George Borjas, Gary Chamberlain, Raj
Chetty, Gabe Chodorow-Reich, David Dorn, Bob Ellickson, Emmauel Farhi, Bill Fischel, Dan
Fetter, Edward Glaeser, Claudia Goldin, Joe Gyourko, Larry Katz, and seminar participants at
Harvard, Tel Aviv, Bar Ilan, Dartmouth and the NBER Summer Institute for their valuable
feedback. Shelby Lin provided outstanding research assistance. We thank Erik Hurst for alerting
us to the end of regional convergence and spurring us to work on an explanation. Peter Ganong
gratefully acknowledges residence at MDRC when working on this project and funding from the
Joint Center for Housing Studies and the NBER Pre-Doctoral Fellowship in Aging and Health.
Daniel Shoag and Peter Ganong gratefully acknowledge support from the Taubman Center on
State and Local Government. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Peter Ganong and Daniel W. Shoag. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Has Regional Income Convergence in the U.S. Declined?
Peter Ganong and Daniel W. Shoag
NBER Working Paper No. 23609
July 2017
JEL No. E24,J23,J24,R14,R23,R52
ABSTRACT
The past thirty years have seen a dramatic decline in the rate of income convergence across states
and in population flows to high-income places. These changes coincide with a disproportionate
increase in housing prices in high-income places, a divergence in the skill-specific returns to
moving to high-income places, and a redirection of low-skill migration away from high-income
places. We develop a model in which rising housing prices in high-income areas deter low-skill
migration and slow income convergence. Using a new panel measure of housing supply
regulations, we demonstrate the importance of this channel in the data.

Peter Ganong
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
ganong@uchicago.edu
Daniel W. Shoag
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
Dan_Shoag@hks.harvard.edu

Supplementary materials available at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23609:
- online appendix

1

Introduction

The convergence of per-capita incomes across US states from 1880 to 1980 is one of the most
striking patterns in macroeconomics. For over a century, incomes across states converged
at a rate of 1.8% per year. Over the past thirty years, this relationship has weakened
dramatically, as shown in Figure 1.1 The convergence rate from 1990 to 2010 was less than
half the historical norm, and in the period leading up to the Great Recession there was
virtually no convergence at all.
Figure 1 also plots what we call “directed migration”: the relationship between population
growth and income per capita across states. Prior to 1980, people were moving on net
from low-income places to high-income places. Like convergence, this historical pattern has
declined over the last thirty years.
To better understand the decline of income convergence and directed migration, this
paper makes three contributions to the regional economics literature. First, we document
that increased housing prices have differential effects on the returns to migration and the
migration flows of low- and high-skill workers. Second, we develop a model which shows that
changes in the elasticity of housing supply in high-income places can explain the decline in
directed migration and income convergence. Third, we construct a novel panel measure of
land use regulations, which are a determinant of the housing supply elasticity, and use it to
empirically confirm predictions from the model.
The mechanism we propose for explaining the decline in income convergence can be
understood through an example. Through most of the twentieth century, both janitors
and lawyers earned considerably more in the tri-state New York area (NY, NJ, CT) than
their colleagues in the Deep South (AL, AR, GA, MS, SC). This was true in both nominal
terms, and after adjusting for differences in housing prices.2 Migration responded to these
differences, and this labor reallocation reduced income gaps over time.
Today, though nominal premiums to being in the New York area are large for these two
occupations, the high costs of housing in the New York area have changed this calculus.
Lawyers continute to earn much more in the New York area in both nominal terms and net
of housing costs, but janitors now earn less in the New York area after subtracting housing
1

See Barro and Sala-i Martin [1992], Barro and Sala-i Martin [1991], and Blanchard and Katz [1992] for
classic references on convergence. For prior work documenting the decline in convergence, see Crain [2003],
DiCecio and Gascon [2008], and Berry and Glaeser [2005].
2
In 1960, wages were 38% and 84% higher in NY than in the Deep South for lawyers and janitors
respectively. After adjusting for housing costs (12 times monthly rent or 5% of home value), these premia
were 39% and 70%.

2

costs than they do in the Deep South.3 This sharp difference arises in part because for
lawyers in the New York area, housing costs are equal to 21% of their income, while housing
costs are equal to 52% of income for New York area janitors. While it may still be worth
it for lawyers to move to New York, high housing prices offset the nominal wage gains for
janitors.
Our paper’s first contribution is to show that the patterns described above for janitors
and lawyers generalize to all low- and high-skill workers. Prior research shows that income
differences across states have been increasingly capitalized into housing prices in the last
fifty years (Van Nieuwerburgh and Weill 2010, Glaeser et al. 2005b, Gyourko et al. 2013).
We calculate the gains to moving separately by skill group in terms of income net of housing
costs using Census data. Through most of the twentieth century, the returns net of housing
costs to migrating from a low-income place to a high-income place were similar for lowand high-skill workers. However, low-skill workers spend a larger fraction of their income
on housing. For these low-skill workers, rising house prices have eroded the gains from
migration. We document that migration flows have responded to these changing returns to
migration. In the mid-twentieth century, low- and high-skill workers moved from low-income
to high-income places. In recent years, as high-skill workers move to high-income places,
low-skill workers leave. We call this phenomenon “skill sorting”.
We build a model to formalize the mechanism by which directed migration could have
driven income convergence in the past, and to explore the consequences of increased land use
regulations for directed migration and convergence. Our model analyzes two locations that
have fixed productivity differences. When the population in the more productive location
rises, the marginal product of labor falls due to downward-sloping labor demand. When
the local housing supply is unconstrained, workers of all skill types will choose to move
to the more productive location. This migration pushes down wages and skill differences,
generating income convergence. Low-skill workers are more sensitive to changes in housing
prices. When housing supply becomes constrained in the productive area, the model makes
three predictions: (1) total migration to the productive location is reduced, (2) migration of
low-skill workers in particular slows, and (3), as a result of the first two changes in migration,
income convergence slows.
To test the model, we construct a new panel measure of land use regulation. Our measure
is a scaled count of the number of appeals and supreme court decisions for each state that
mention “land use,” as tracked through an online database. We validate this measure of
3

In nominal terms, the wages of lawyers and janitors are 46% and 28% higher in the New York area
respectively in 2010. After adjusting for housing prices, these premia are 39% and -7%.

3

regulation using existing cross-sectional survey data. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first national panel measure of land use regulations in the US.4 We show that tight land
use regulations weaken the historic link between high incomes and new housing permits.
Instead, income differences across places become more capitalized into housing prices.
Using differential regulation patterns across states, we show that the impact of housing
supply limits in the data matches the three predictions from the model. Constrained housing
supply reduces total migration to high-income areas. Net migration of workers of all skill
types from low-income to high-income places is replaced by skill sorting. Finally, income
convergence persists among places unconstrained by these regulations, but it is diminished
in areas with supply constraints.
To assess whether housing supply constraints are causing a reduction in income convergence, and not the other way around, we conduct two tests. First, we use a state’s historical
tendency to regulate land use as measured by the number of land use cases per capita around
1965. We use this measure of regulations because it predates the decline in income convergence, which occurred around 1980. We find that income convergence rates fell after 1985,
but only in those places with a high tendency to regulate land use. Second, we repeat this
exercise using another predetermined measure based on geographic land availability from
Saiz [2010]. Again, we find income convergence declined the most in areas with supply
constraints.
In this paper, we highlight a single channel – labor mobility – which can help explain
both regional income convergence through 1980 and its subsequent disappearance from 1980
to 2010. Much of the literature on regional convergence has focused on the role of capital,
racial discrimination, or sectoral reallocations.5 We build on an older tradition of work by
economic historians (Easterlin 1958 and Williamson 1965) as formalized by Braun [1993],
in which directed migration drives convergence. Finally, much of the existing literature on
regional patterns since 1980 in the U.S. emphasizes changes in labor demand from skill-biased
technological change and trade (Autor and Dorn 2013, Diamond 2016, Artuç et al. 2010).
In contrast, our channel emphasizes the role of housing supply constraints.
The study of regional convergence is also important for understanding trends in inequality.
From 1940 to 1980, the standard deviation of hourly earnings (a common measure of inequality) significantly declined. We calculate that cross-state convergence in wages accounted for
4
Prior work has examined housing price changes, quantity changes, and cross-sectional measures of regulation to provide suggestive evidence of increasing supply constraints (Sinai 2010, Glaeser et al. 2005a,
Glaeser et al. 2005b, Quigley and Raphael 2005, and Glaeser and Ward 2009).
5
See Barro and Sala-i Martin [1992], Caselli and Coleman [2001], Michaels et al. [2012], and Hseih et al.
[2013].

4

34% of this drop.6 Had convergence continued apace through 2010, implementing the same
methodology indicates that the increase in hourly wage inequality from 1980 to 2010 would
have been 8% smaller. Thus, our results imply that forces such as housing regulation that
slow regional convergence also increase inequality.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we show that increased
housing prices have differential impacts on low- and high-skill workers. In Section 3, we
develop a model where directed migration drives convergence and an increase in housing
supply constraints changes migration patterns and reduces convergence. Section 4 introduces
a new measure of land use regulation, and directly assesses its impact on convergence, and
Section 5 concludes.

2

Motivating Facts on Housing Prices and Migration

Figure 1 shows a dramatic reduction in income convergence as well as in directed migration
from low-income to high-income places.7 In this section, we show that changes in housing
prices may be reducing directed migration and changing its composition in ways that could
impact convergence using three stylized facts. Specifically, we show (1) a disproportionate
rise in housing prices in high-income areas; (2) that the returns to migrating to high-income
areas for low-skill workers has fallen in recent years after taking into account housing costs;
and (3) that low-skill workers have redirected their migration away from high-income places.
At the end of the section, we discuss how these changes in migration flows may affect income
convergence.
We construct these three facts using public data from the Census for each decade from
1940 to 2000 and the American Community Survey for 2006-2010 to capture 2010 (Ruggles
et al. 2010).8 In each year, we observe household wage income, monthly rent or self-reported
home value, education, sex, race, age, location of residence today and location of residence
five years ago. In this section, we analyze two measures of state-level income: nominal
6

From 1940 to 1980, the standard deviation of log hourly wages for adult males working full-time fell
from 0.781 to 0.618, which is a drop of 0.163. Over the same period, the standard deviation of state-level
means for log hourly wages fell from 0.300 to 0.106, which is a 65% drop in cross-state inequality. In the
indiv
absence of regional convergence, we assume that the distribution of wages would have been Yno
conv,1980 =
indiv
state
state
indiv
state
state
Ydata,1980 + Y1940, no conv ≠ Y1980,no conv = Ydata,1980 + Y1940, no conv ≠ 0.35 ◊ Y1940,no conv . We calculate that
indiv
indiv
indiv
indiv
V ar(Yno
conv,1980 )/V ar(Y1940 ) is 34% smaller than V ar(Y1980 )/V ar(Y1940 ).
7
The decline in income convergence is robust to the choice of income measure and level of geographic
aggregation (Online Appendix Table 1). The decline in directed migration is robust to the choice of migration
measure and level of geographic aggregation (Online Appendix Table 2).
8
We omit 1950 because no housing cost data are available in that year.

5

wage income for the entire population and income net of housing costs, which is computed
separately by skill group. In order to estimate annual housing costs for the entire population,
we use 12 times the monthly rent or 5% of home value for homeowners.9 Our analysis focuses
on states in the continental U.S., omitting Hawaii and Alaska.
Fact 1 The first fact is that differences in housing prices have doubled relative to differences in incomes. This fact has been documented in prior work by Van Nieuwerburgh and
Weill [2010], Glaeser et al. [2005b], and Gyourko et al. [2013]. The top two panels of Figure
2 plot the relationship between log income and log housing prices in 1960 and 2010. Each
observation is a state’s mean income and median house value from the Census. In 1960,
housing prices are 1 log point higher in a state with 1 log point higher income. By 2010,
the slope doubles, with housing prices 2 log points higher in a state where income is 1 log
point higher. The bottom panel of Figure 2 shows that the patterns from 1960 and 2010
reflect a secular trend towards higher capitalization of income differences into housing prices.
This increased capitalization may lower the return to migration from a low-income place to
a high-income place.
Fact 2 The second fact is that housing prices have specifically lowered the return to
migration for low-skill workers. Our goal is to test whether the difference in income less
housing cost between high-income and low-income states is smaller for low-skilled workers
than for high-skilled workers. To establish this fact, we regress:

Yij ≠ Cij
¸

˚˙

˝

Income-Housing Cost

= –+—low≠skill

Yj

¸˚˙˝

Nominal Income

◊(1≠Sij )+—high≠skill Yj ◊Sij +÷Sij +“Xij +Áij

(1)
with i indexing households, j indexing state of residence, where Yisj is household wage
income, Cij is a measure of housing costs, and Sij is the share of the labor force participants
in the household that are high-skill, and Yj is the mean nominal wage income in the state.10
We use a regression because it enables us to collapse the returns to migrating between many
pairs of U.S. states into a single summary statistic. The interpretation of the —low≠skill
9

About two-thirds of households are homeowners and so if we used rent alone to estimate housing costs,
we would miss most of the U.S. population. Van Nieuwerburgh and Weill [2010] and Gyourko et al. [2013]
similarly use housing values as their primary measure of housing costs.
10
Income net of housing cost is a household-level variable, while education is an individual-level variable.
We conduct our analysis at the household level, measuring household skill using labor force participants
ages 25-65. A person is defined as high-skill if he or she has 12+ years of education in 1940, and 16+ years
or a BA thereafter. The household covariates Xij are the size of the household, the fraction of household
members in the labor force who are white, the fraction who are black, the fraction who are male, and a
quadratic in the average age of the adult household members in the workforce.

6

coefficient is that when average nominal income is $1.00 higher in a state, it estimates how
much higher is income for low-skill workers after housing costs. —high≠skill has the same
interpretation for high-skill workers. We report results from this regression separately for
each decade.
Figure 3 shows that the return to migration to high-income states for low-skill workers
has eroded in recent years.11 —low≠skill shows a secular decline from 1970 forward. The
decade-specific coefficients on —high≠skill show, if anything, a slight increase during the same
time period. In 1940 and 1960, high-skill and low-skill households have similar returns to
migrating. By 2010, income net of housing costs is three times more responsive to nominal
income differences by state for high-skill households than for low-skill households. Relying
on Fact 1 alone, one might have thought that increased housing prices would erode the
returns to migration for all workers. However, Fact 2 shows that the returns to migration
have remained constant for high-skill workers and fallen only for low-skill workers. Next,
we use nominal income and income net of housing costs as independent variables to explain
migration flows.
Fact 3 The third fact is that while workers of both skill levels used to migrate on net
to high-income areas, today low-skill workers migrate in reverse, away from high-income
areas.12 To document this fact, we regress a measure of area-level net migration on two
measures of area-level income. We do this exercise separately for low-skill and high-skill
workers.13 We use the most detailed geographies for which migration data are available:
State Economic Areas (SEA) in 1940 (467 regions) and migration Public Use Microdata
Areas (PUMA) in 2000 (1,020 regions). Net migration is defined for people ages 25-65 as the
number of people who have moved in minus the number of people who have moved out, as
a percent of the total population. To estimate area-level income, we construct income using
11

We report coefficients from estimating equation 1 in Online Appendix Table 3 and depict the results
visually in Figure 3. To reduce the bias arising from the endogeneity of state of residence, we also provide
instrumental variables estimates using the mean income level of the household workers’ state of birth as an
instrument in Online Appendix Table 3. We estimate Yij ≠ Pij = – + —low≠skill Yˆj ◊ (1 ≠ Sij ) + —high≠skill Yˆj ◊
Sij + ÷Sij + “Xij + Áij , using Yj,birth and Yj,birth ◊ Sjs as instruments for the two endogenous variables
Ŷj ◊ (1 ≠ Sij ) and Ŷj ◊ Sij . This lessens the likelihood that the apparently greater premia for high-skill
workers are an artifact of greater within-group sorting via migration.
12
The analysis in this paper focuses on net migration from places with persistently low income to places
with persistently high income. For analysis of net migration in response to business cycle fluctuations, see
Blanchard and Katz [1992], Dao et al. [2015], and Yagan [2016]. For an analysis of the secular decline in
gross migration, which is the fraction of people who moved in the past year, see Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl
[2017] and Molloy et al. [2011]. Because gross migration is an order of magnitude larger than net migration,
gross migration remains sufficiently high today to allow for substantial net migration from low-income places
to high-income places.
13
To construct area-by-skill measures, we define households as high-skill if the labor force participants
ages 25-65 are high-skill, and as low-skill if none of them are high-skill.

7

the same approach as we did for Fact 2. In order to capture the incomes of incumbents, we
use only households that did not migrate.
The top panel of Figure 4 shows that from 1935 to 1940, net migration moved people
from places with low nominal income to places with high nominal income. This fact holds
for low-skill and high-skill workers. This demonstrates that directed migration documented
in Figure 1 from low-income to high-income places can be replicated separately for low-skill
and high-skill workers using detailed substate geographies. The bottom panel of the figure
demonstrates that same relationship holds true for income net of housing cost.14
The top panel of Figure 5 shows that from 1995 to 2000, high-skill adults still move
to high-income locations, but net migration for low-skill adults reverses such that they
are actually weakly migrating away from these locations.15 Thus, Figure 5 reveals that the
absence of directed migration on average from low-income to high-income places documented
in Figure 1 masks important heterogeneity. High-skill workers are moving to high-income
places, low-skill workers are moving away, and the net effect summing across skill groups is
that on average, there is zero directed migration.
Low-skill workers’ decision to move away from high-income places can be explained by
taking into account the returns to moving as measured by income net of housing costs. The
bottom panel of Figure 5 shows that when we adjust income to reflect group-specific means
net of housing prices, low-skill workers are continuing to move to places that offer them
high incomes. Recall Fact 2 demonstrates that rising housing prices in high nominal income
areas make these areas particularly costly for low-skill workers. Fact 3 demonstrates that
these changing returns to migration are accompanied by changing migration destinations for
low-skill workers.
Fact 3 shows two distinct channels by which reduced migration of low-skill workers to
high-income places reduces income convergence. First, there is a reduction in population
growth that may push down wages. Second, in the mid-century U.S., low-skill workers were
moving from low-income to high-income places. Later in the paper, we document that this
low-skill migration raised the average skill level in low-income places and lowered the average
14

This is a robust statistical relationship. In Online Appendix Table 4, we report four robustness checks:
doubling housing costs for the income net of housing cost measure, excluding migrants within-state, using
only whites, and using a place of birth migration measure. In 1940, all slopes are positive, and most are
statistically significant. In 2000, all slopes are positive and statistically significant for high-skill workers.
For low-skill workers, the coefficients broadly fit the patterns in Figure 5, although only sometimes are
statistically significant. These results are similar to work by Borjas [2001], who finds that immigrants move
to places which offer them the highest wages.
15
Young et al. [2008] similarly show that from 2000 to 2006, low-income people migrated out from New
Jersey, while high-income people migrated in.

8

skill level in high-income places.16 We refer to this channel as “human capital convergence”.
Consistent with Fact 3, human capital convergence due to migration has fallen in recent
years. In the next section, we develop a model where both channels – population growth
and human capital convergence – contribute to income convergence.

3

A Simple Model of Regional Migration, Housing Prices,
and Convergence

To formalize the link between housing markets, skill-specific migration, and convergence, we
develop a model of regional economies. In the text of the paper, we present a simple model
where downward-sloping regional labor demand curves and non-homothetic housing demand
combine to generate migration and convergence patterns similar to those shown in Figure 1.
In Online Appendix A, we present a richer model that we use for quantitative calibration.17
Our model considers two locations within a national market: a highly productive “North”
and a reservation locale “South.” The productive North features a decreasing returns to scale
production process, whereas the South offers a reservation utility. In the model, workers
have heterogeneous skill types and choose labor supply based on local wages. Higher skill
workers produce more effective labor per unit of effort, and all effective labor is perfectly
substitutable. Low-skill workers in the North spend a larger share of their income on housing
than high-skill workers in the North, meaning that housing demand is non-homothetic. We
solve for the equilibrium in this economy, where the land and labor markets clear.
Next, we consider the interregional allocation of labor. We begin from an initial situation
in which wages are lower in the South. Once we allow migration, labor inflows into the North
drive down wages for all skill types due to decreasing returns to scale in production. This
generates interregional convergence in incomes. After a shock that lowers the elasticity of
housing supply and causes housing prices to rise in the North, then migration flows become
smaller and biased towards high-skill workers. Because fewer people move to the North –
16

Although Fact 3 is informative about the direction of migration, it does not provide a summary statistic
that quantifies the change in income due to human capital movements. We develop such a measure later on
in Section 4.2. Using this measure, we show that in the mid-twentieth century, interstate migration led to
convergence in human capital. However, the rate of human capital convergence has slowed substantially in
recent years.
17
The Online Appendix model delivers the same substantive results as the model in the text of the paper,
but it is richer in three ways: it features (1) skill types that are imperfect substitutes in production, (2) agents
that hold Stone-Geary preferences over housing and consumption and (3) agents who are forward-looking
migration in their migration decision.

9

and because the people who move there are more high-skill – income convergence slows.
The model builds upon a long line of papers in urban economics following the spatial
equilibrium framework of Rosen [1979], Roback [1982], and Blanchard and Katz [1992]. It is
similar to models outlined in Braun [1993] and Gennaioli et al. [2014], who solve models of
migration and regional convergence, and Gennaioli et al. [2013], who study a static regional
model with heterogeneous skill types.
Our interpretation of the data relies on two crucial features of the model.18 First, regional
labor demand slopes downward. Three examples of changes in the labor supply and migration
of natives from U.S. economic history help illustrate this concept.19 First, Acemoglu et al.
[2004] show that states which had more mobilization of men during World War II had
increased female labor force participation both during and after the war. After the war,
both males and females in these places earned lower wages. Second, Hornbeck [2012] studies
the impact of a major negative permanent productivity shock, the Dust Bowl. He finds that
out-migration is the primary factor adjustment which allowed wages to partially recover.
Third, Margo [1997] studies the impact of a positive productivity shock: the Gold Rush. At
first, wages soared, but as people migrated in to California, wages declined.
Second, low-skill workers spend a larger share of their income on housing, meaning that
housing is a non-homothetic good. The intuition for this assumption is that if housing has a
fixed cost, then it will account for a larger share of low-skill workers’ income than high-skill
workers’ income. This assumption can affect migration because a 1% increase in housing
prices will consume a larger share of household budgets for low-skill workers. To support
this assumption, we calculate using Census data that expenditure shares on housing within
a typical city vary from an average of 32% for the lowest-income households to an average
of less than 15% for the highest-income households.20
We formally describe the economy in the North region in Section 3.1, before studying
migration from South to North in Section 3.2.
18

In Online Appendix A we show quantitatively that these assumptions are crucial by showing that our
model’s results do not hold when either of these assumptions is relaxed.
19
There is considerable debate about the impact of immigrants on local wages (e.g. Card 1990, Borjas
2017, Peri and Yasenov 2015), with some researchers arguing that immigrants are substitutes for native labor
and others arguing that they are complements. Our model only requires that the in-migration of natives
lowers wages and does not require us to take a stance on the impact of immigration.
20
Online Appendix Figure B.1 documents this fact. When researchers have studied national U.S. data,
some have found that housing is homothetic (e.g. Davis and Ortalo-Magné 2011), which seems to be in
tension with our model’s assumption of non-homotheticity. However, the fact that expenditure shares are
the same between low- and high-skill workers in this prior work emerges from two empirical patterns which
cancel each other out. The first empirical pattern is that high-skill workers select into places with high
housing prices, which pushes up their average housing expenditure. The second pattern is that within any
given city, high-skill workers spend a smaller share of their income on housing than low-skill workers.

10

3.1

Households, Production, and Housing in the North

The North is populated by agents of type k with associated skill type Âk and utility is defined
by
1+1/Á

¸
max U (c, p, ¸jk ) = c ≠ p ≠ k
subject to c = wÂk ¸k + ﬁ
c,¸k
1 + 1/Á
The wage rate w is the cost of one unit of effective labor, and ﬁ are lump-sum federal
transfers of profits. ¸k indexes effort. With a statewide wage of w, a worker with numeraire
skill (Â = 1) will optimally supply ¸1 = wÁ units of labor. In comparison, a worker with skill
Âk will optimally supply
¸Supply
= (Âk w)Á
(2)
k
for an effective labor supply of Âk1+Á ¸1 .
We assume that every worker inelastically demands one plot of land. We denote the
number workers of type k as µk . Since each worker requires one plot, housing demand is
equal to the total number of workers and is insensitive to the price and housing demand can
q
be expressed as H Demand = k µk .
We assume a state-level production function with decreasing returns to scale.
Y

= AL1≠–

The first term A can encompass capital differences, natural advantages, institutional
strengths, different sectoral compositions, amenities, and agglomeration benefits. Each skill
group k has average labor supply of ¸k . Different types of effective labor are perfect substitutes. Using the labor supply equation 2 we can write the labor demand equation as effective
labor (“) times the amount of labor supplied by a worker with numeraire skill. This yields

Y = AL1≠– = A

A
ÿ

µk Âk ¸k

k

B1≠–

=

Q

c
c
c
Ac
c
c
a

“:

ÿ
¸

µk Âk1+Á

k

˚˙

˝

effective labor

R1≠–

d
d
d
¸1 d
d
d
b

Effective labor gets its marginal product w = (1 ≠ –)A(“¸1 )≠– . We solve for labor demand:
¸Demand
(w)
1

=

A

(1 ≠ –)A
w“ –

11

B1/–

(3)

Every state owns a continuum of plots of land, with heterogeneous costs to occupying
each plot. The lowest cost plots are occupied first. Defining the number of plots needed as
H, the cost to occupying the marginal plot is c(H) = H 1/› , which implies that when setting
price equal to marginal cost,
H Supply (pj ) = p›j
State-level production and land profits are returned to consumers as a nationwide lumpsum rebate.
Given this setup, an equilibrium within a state is a set of prices {p, w} and allocations such
that individuals choose their labor supply optimally, workers earn their marginal product,
and the land and labor markets clear.
›,

Land: Using the land market-clearing condition, we compare p as a function of {µk } and
H Demand = H Supply (p)
∆p

M arket≠Clearing

=

A
ÿ

µk

k

B1/›

.

Labor: Before, we derived labor supply and demand schedules as a function of individual
supply and firm production. Now, we impose the labor market-clearing condition for the
numeraire worker:
¸Demand
(w) = ¸Supply
(w)
1
1
∆ wM arket≠clearing =

1

(1 ≠ –)A“ ≠–

2

1
1+–Á

.

Multiplying this by equilibrium labor demand in equation 3 gives earnings for the nu1+Á
1+–Á

meraire worker as w¸1 = ((1 ≠ –)A“ ≠– )
, while workers from skill group k earn wk ¸k =
1+Á
1+Á
≠– 1+–Á
Âk ((1 ≠ –)A“ )
. This gives us an expression for per capita income in the North of
q

1+Á

k

Âk1+Á ((1 ≠ –)A“ ≠– ) 1+–Á µN
k
.
q N
µk

(4)

We express indirect utility for a worker of type k as a function three parameters describing
q
the economy in North: productivity A, effective labor “, and population N = k µk as
v k (A, “, N, Âk ) =

1+Á
Âk1+Á
((1 ≠ –)A“ ≠– ) 1+–Á
1+Á
¸
˚˙
˝

income - effort cost
12

1/›
≠N
+1 + ﬁ.
¸ ˚˙ ˝

land price

(5)

This expression for indirect utility is very similar to the expression for earnings wk ¸k . It
differs by a rescaling of income by 1/(1 + Á) to account for effort costs in labor supply and
subtracting housing costs.

3.2

Directed Migration and Convergence

Next, we consider the behavior of a worker who lives in a second region “South” and is
deciding whether to migrate to the North economy described in the previous section. Flow
utility in South for skill type k is equal to Âk1+‘ for some fixed constant .21 Migration
is modeled as a one-shot choice in which stochastic moving costs xk are rescaled by Âk1+Á
such that they are proportional to flow utility. People choose the location that offers them
the highest indirect utility. Following this rule means they move if their indirect utility in
the North is greater than the reservation utility offered in the South. We can express this
decision criteria as:
1+Á
Âk1+Á
1/›
≠– 1+–Á
((1 ≠ –)AN “N
)
≠ NN Ø
1
+
Á
¸
˚˙
˝

Utility in Productive North

Âk1+Á ≠ 1
¸

˚˙

˝

Reservation Utility in South

xk Âk1+Á

+

¸

˚˙

˝

(6)

Moving Cost

where indirect utility comes from equation 5. The cutoff xúk is implicitly defined when
equation 6 holds with equality.
1
Proposition 1 If (1) utility in North is sufficiently high (vN
>

+ 1),

(2) housing supply in the North is perfectly elastic (› æ Œ), and

(3) the average effective labor is higher in the North than in South (“N /NN >
“S /NS ),
then migration generates per capita income convergence.
Proof See Online Appendix A.4.
The intuition behind Proposition 1 is that due to downward-sloping labor demand, as
the number of workers in the North rises, wages fall. Further, since the cutoff moving cost
xúk is independent of skill type, the movement of workers from the initially less high-skill
21

Utility for individuals of type k is proportional to Â 1+‘ when housing prices are zero. The South can
thus be thought of as a less productive state with completely elastic housing supply and constant returns to
scale in labor demand.

13

South to the North will lower lead to lower average Northern human capital levels. These
two channels together generate income convergence.
Proposition 2 If the conditions from Proposition 1 hold, and NN > 1, so that an
decrease in › raises prices, a reduction in › causes
(1) a reduction in directed migration,
(2) directed migration to become biased towards high-skill workers, and
(3) the rate of income convergence to decline.
Proof See Online Appendix A.5.
This proposition shows how changes in the housing supply elasticity affect directed migration and convergence. When the housing supply is perfectly elastic, all skill types migrate to the North due to its higher productivity. When the housing supply elasticity falls,
housing prices rise. As housing prices rise, migration falls from all skill groups. The nonhomotheticity of housing demand means that low-skill types are differentially discouraged
from moving North, as housing is a larger share of low-skill consumption. This change in
returns across skill types mirrors Fact 2 from Section 2. This means that a decrease in ›
in high-income areas reduces the magnitude of directed migration and makes it more skill
biased, which corresponds to Fact 3 from Section 2. Finally, assuming the North is higher
skilled to begin with, a decline in the elasticity of housing supply away from perfect elasticity
slows convergence.
To test the mechanism by which housing supply affects convergence more directly, in the
next section we develop a new proxy measure for the elasticity of the housing supply based
on land use regulations.

4

A Panel Measure of Land Use Regulations

In this section, we develop a new measure of land use regulations based on state appeals
court records and use it to test the three empirical predictions made by the model. Land
use regulations are a good proxy for the parameter › in the model. Our new measure is, to
the best of our knowledge, the first panel of housing supply regulations covering the United
States.22 In Section 4.1, we validate our measure against existing cross-sectional regulation
22

Examples of research using cross-sectional data on land use regulations include Glaeser et al. [2005a],
Katz and Rosen [1987], Pollakowski and Wachter [1990], Quigley and Raphael [2005], and Rothwell [2012]
using US data. See Brueckner and Sridhar [2012] for work on building restrictions in India. In a similar
spirit to our work, Hilber and Vermeulen [2013] analyze a panel of land use regulations in the UK.

14

measures and show that it predicts increased capitalization of income differences into housing
prices. Our empirical analysis in Section 4.2 confirms the model’s three empirical predictions
that regulations lower directed migration, change the skill composition of migration and lower
income convergence. Finally, we conduct three robustness checks in Section 4.3.

4.1

Measuring Land Use Regulations and Their Impact on Housing Prices

Our measure of land use regulations is based upon the number of state supreme and appellate
court cases containing the phrase “land use” over time. The phrase “land use” appears 42
times in the seminal case Mount Laurel decision issued by the New Jersey Supreme Court
in 1975.23 Municipalities use a wide variety of tactics for restricting new construction, but
these rules are often controversial and any such rule, regardless of its institutional origin, is
likely to be tested in court. This makes court decisions an omnibus measure which capture
many different channels of restrictions on new construction. We search the state supreme
and appellate court records for each state-year using an online legal database (Westlaw) and
produce counts of land use cases in per capita terms.
One immediate result from constructing this measure is that the land use cases have
become increasingly common over the past fifty years. The top-left panel of Figure 6 displays
the national regulation measure over time, which exhibits strong secular growth. Growth is
particularly rapid from 1970, when it stood at about 25% of its current level, to 1990, when
it reached about 75% of its present day level. In Online Appendix C, we provide institutional
background on possible causes for the change in land use regulations.
We validate our measure against the existing cross-sectional measures that focus on
supply constraints. One survey, from the American Institute of Planners in 1975, asked
21 land use-related questions of planning officials in each state (The American Institute of
Planners [1976]). To build a summary measure, we add up the total number of yes answers
to the 21 questions for each state. As can be seen in the top-right panel of Figure 6, the 1975
values of our measure are strongly correlated with this measure. Our measure is also highly
correlated with the 2005 Wharton Residential Land Use Regulation Index (WRLURI), as
shown in the bottom-left panel of Figure 6.24 Finally, our measure is correlated with a
measure from Saks [2008] and another from the Wharton Urban Decentralization Project.25
23

We also show similar results for the phrase “zoning” to count supreme and appellate court cases in
Online Appendix Table 5.
24
To construct state-level measures, we weighted the metro estimates in Gyourko et al. [2008] by 1960
population and imputed from neighbors where necessary.
25
We find that all of these measures correlate similarly with each other and with our index. Our measure
has a correlation with the Saks measure of 0.32 and with the WUDP measure of 0.48 when using our data

15

Finally, we show that state-years with high levels of regulation have decreased permitting
and increased capitalization of income into housing prices. We are unaware of a standard in
the literature for what functional form should be used to scale court cases into a regulation
measure. We adopt a flexible and transparent specification – ranking state-years by their
land use cases per capita:
Regj,t = Rank{

LandU seCasesjt
}
P opjt

(7)

where j indexes state and t indexes year.26 We rescale these values to create a variable
ranging from zero for the least regulated state-year to one for the most regulated state-year.
This measure is rising over time, from an average of 0.15 in 1950 to 0.64 in 1990. Table 1
provides summary statistics on this and other variables.
We estimate the following specification:
Yj,t = –t + –t Regj,t + —Incj,t + —high reg Incj,t ◊ Regj,t + Áj,t .

(8)

The coefficient — is the benchmark convergence specification estimated in prior work and it
measures how differences in income affect outcomes in a state-year where there is no land
use regulation.27 The interpretation of —high reg is the relative impact of differences in income
in a highly-regulated state-year.
Our results show that housing regulations lead high-income places to issue fewer housing
permits and consequently see greater house price growth. Intuitively, absent land use restrictions, places with higher income will face greater demand for houses and will permit at
a faster rate. Table 2, column 1 confirms this intuition empirically by estimating equation
8: the base coefficient is positive, indicating that places with 10% higher incomes had an
0.5 percentage point higher annual permitting rate as a share of the existing housing stock.
The interaction term —high reg is negative and similar in size: in the high-regulation regime
there is no correlation between income and permits for new construction. In column 2, we
show that at baseline there is a positive correlation between income and housing prices (with
1% higher income associated with 0.8% higher prices), and that the slope of the relationship
doubles in high regulation state-years. Recall from Section 2 that Fact 1 showed increasing
from a similar period.
26
Our results in Section 4.2 do not depend upon this particular scaling choice. In Online Appendix Table 6,
we investigate three alternative scalings: land use cases per square mile, land use cases per local government,
and land use cases as a fraction of total cases. The results are very similar, which is unsurprising given that
the alternate series have a correlation of 0.87, 0.88, and 0.87 respectively with our per-capita baseline series.
27
This specification follows the literature in not including state fixed effects. See Barro [2012] for a
discussion of how state/country fixed effects can lead to misleading convergence results in short panels.

16

capitalization of income differences into house prices. The estimates in column 2 imply that
increased regulation can explain some of the increase in capitalization documented in fact
1.28

4.2

Testing the Model using a Panel Measure of Regulations

Having established that our regulation measure is a good proxy for housing supply constraints, we test its direct effect on the convergence relationship. We first demonstrate the
effect of land-use regulations on convergence graphically. Figure 7 shows in the top-left panel
that from 1940 to 1960 incomes were converging within states with low and high land use
regulation. In the top right panel, which shows 1990-2010, convergence continues within
the group of low regulation states. Conceptually, we can think of this group of states as
reflecting the model prior to the change in regulations, with within-group reallocations of
people from low-income states to high-income states. In contrast, the top-right panel shows
that there is no convergence at all among the high-regulation states. In order to show that
these results generalize across most twenty-year windows, the bottom panel of the figure
shows convergence coefficients for every twenty-year period in our sample. Convergence
among states with tight regulations display a pronounced weakening over time (although
convergence reappears briefly among high-regulation states during the recent recession).29
We compare the model to the data in terms of the model’s three predictions to the impact
of regulations in high-income places. In our model, states with high income per capita will
draw migrants when housing prices are low (equation 6). This is consistent with the baseline
coefficient in column 3 that shows 0.17% higher annual population growth in places with
10% higher incomes. When income differences are capitalized into prices, the incentive to
move is diminished, and directed migration slows. The positive interaction coefficient shows
that directed migration almost completely disappears in the state-years with high regulation.
This shows that the secular decline in directed migration shown in Figure 1 of the paper
can partly be accounted for by increased regulations high-income places, as predicted by
Proposition 2 in the model.
28

Our findings that increases in regulation raise capitalization are similar to those by Hilber and Vermeulen
[2013] for the UK. Similarly, Saks [2008] and Glaeser et al. [2006] find in the US that employment demand
shocks are capitalized into prices rather than quantities in the high regulation regime. However, see Davidoff
[2010] for a dissenting view about the impact of regulations on housing prices using cross-sectional data.
29
As a robustness check, we divide the states according to a measure of their housing supply elasticity
based upon land availability and the WRLURI constructed by Saiz [2010]. The results are shown in the
bottom-right panel of Figure 7. Again, we find that convergence continues among states without supply
constraints, but has mostly stopped in states with constraints.

17

We also show that regulations in high-income places predict a change in the human capital
composition of migration. This requires a quantitative measure of how much migrationinduced changes in human capital would have affected income. We follow the growthaccounting literature (e.g. Denison 1962, Goldin and Katz 2001) and estimate a Mincer
regression in the IPUMS Census files.30 Under the assumption of a fixed national return to
schooling, a state’s skill mix and these coefficients can be used to estimate its human capital.
‰ be predicted income for each education level k and Share as the share of people
Let Inc
k
kj
in human capital group k living in state j. The value for the human capital index in state j
q ‰
is Human Capitalj © k Inc
k ◊ Sharekj .
Our approach to measuring migration exploits the fact that the Census asks people about
both their state of residence and their state of birth. We estimate the change in the human
capital index due to migration by reverting people to their birthplace, which we construct
as
HCjt ©

ÿ
¸

k

‰ Share
Inc
k
kj,residence,t
˚˙

˝

Realized Human Capital Allocation

≠

ÿ
¸

k

‰ Share ,
Inc
k
kj birth,t
˚˙

.

(9)

˝

No-Migration Counterfactual

To capture recent migration, we focus our analysis on people ages 25 to 34. This focuses on
people who have completed their education, and but migrated in the not-too-distant past.31
We examine the impact of income and regulations on the evolution of human capital HCjt
in column 4. The interpretation of the — coefficient in equation 8 is that a place with 1%
higher income would have —% slower growth in its human capital stock. Slower growth
in the human capital stock – holding population constant – contributes to slower convergence. When housing supply is elastic, the negative baseline coefficient in column 4 indicates
that migration undoes any initial human capital advantage held by high-income places, as
predicted by Proposition 1 in the model. The interaction coefficient is positive, indicating
that human capital convergence slows among high regulation state-years, as predicted by
Proposition 2 in the model.
The data confirm our model’s central prediction, which is that land use regulations
reduce income convergence in high-income places. The un-interacted coefficient in column 5
(-2.0) captures the strong convergence relationship that exists absent land use restrictions,
30

Formally, we estimate the specification log Incik = –k + Áik where Incik is an individual’s annual
income, and –k represent skill bins using data from the 1980 Census. We construct predicted income as
‰ k = exp(ˆ
Inc
–k ). Skill level k is defined as seven possible completed schooling levels (0 or NA, Elementary,
Middle, Some HS, HS, Some College, College+), a dummy for Hispanic, and a dummy for Black..
31
Online Appendix Figure B.2 shows how this summary statistic evolves over time. There was substantial
human capital convergence in the mid-twentieth century, but there is much less today.

18

as predicted by Proposition 1 in the model. However, the interaction coefficient is large and
positive (1.3). This finding indicates that the degree of convergence among states in periods
of high regulation is significantly diminished, as predicted by Proposition 2 in the model.
Table 2 links the theory from Section 3 to the data. The first row of coefficients describe
a world where population flows to high-income areas, human capital converges across places,
and regional incomes converge as in Proposition 1 of the model. The second row of coefficients is consistent with the high regulation regime described in the model, with increased
capitalization, less net migration, and less income convergence as in Proposition 2 of the
model.

4.3

Robustness Checks

In this section, we report results from three robustness checks: a placebo measure of all
appeals court activity, a historical measure of regulations and a measure of differences in the
capacity to build arising from topological features.
One potential concern is that our regulation measure is picking up changes in the overall
regulatory or legal climate, rather than a change which is specific to land use. As a placebo
test, we re-estimate equation 8 for the five outcomes analyzed in Section 4.2 substituting a
placebo measure of total appealsand supreme court cases instead of the number of land use
cases in equation 7. This measure also exhibits secular growth, from an average of 0.30 in
1950 to 0.66 in 1990. If our results in Section 4.2 were due to changes in the overall state-level
regulatory climate or due to time trends, then we should expect to find significant results
as part of this placebo test. Instead, however, the interaction coefficients on the placebo
measure reported in Table 2 are small in magnitude and not statistically significant.
A second concern is that regulation in high-income areas may be a consequence of diminished income convergence rather than a cause of it. To assess this hypothesis, we study the
relationship of land use cases per capita from 1956-1965 with convergence. This approach has
two attractive properties. First, land use restrictiveness in 1965 cannot have been affected by
subsequent changes in income convergence. Second, although our regulation measure is low
in absolute terms everywhere in 1965, states differ in their latent tendency to regulate land
use. This heterogeneity made some states more likely to be affected by change in the national
climate towards land use regulations. Variation in the 1965 permissiveness of laws regarding land use is predictive of subsequent increases in regulation (the correlation between the
measures in 1965 and 2005 is 0.47). Many other authors use a similar identification strategy
19

of using historical differences across places and studying national changes in industry, ethnic
composition or occupations (Bartik 1991, Card 2009, and Autor and Dorn 2013).
We reject the hypothesis that high regulations are a consequence of diminished income
convergence using data on historical land use regulations. To demonstrate this, we reestimate equation 8, splitting the sample into a pre-period, with twenty-year windows from
1940-1960 through 1965-1985, and a post-period, with twenty-year windows from 1965-1985
through 1990-2010. Instead of the time-varying measure of regulations from equation 7,
we analyze regulation measures from a point in time. We find that states with low and
high values of 1965 regulation displayed similar convergence behavior in the pre-period, as
documented in Table 3, column 1. In the post-period, once the latent tendency to regulate
land use had been activated, these states experience a sizeable drop in their degree of income
convergence, as documented in column 2. As a check on the specification, we confirm that
we find similar results in both periods using post-period regulations. Columns 3 and 4
demonstrate that states with high and low regulation in 2005 had similar convergence rates in
the pre-period, but that convergence slowed in high-regulation states after these restrictions
were enacted. The fact that the latent tendency to regulate shows the same pattern as postperiod regulations, suggests that causality runs from regulations to convergence and not vice
versa.
Finally, we show evidence that land use constraints based on geographic features measured by Saiz [2010] have limited convergence since 1985. In 1965, land use was permissive
everywhere, so limited land supply in, for example, Manhattan, led to increased building
heights. Once regulations made it difficult to build up, geographic land features became an
important determinant of housing prices. To implement an empirical approach that exploits
the Saiz land availability measure, we classify counties based upon the geographic availability
of developable land.32 Land availability predicts increased house price capitalization in the
“post” period, giving us an alternative empirical approach to tracing out the impact of house
prices on income convergence. Columns 5 and 6 demonstrate that counties with low geographic land availability did not display different convergence behavior prior to 1965. In the
period with tight building restrictions, however, these counties also experience a reduction
in their rates of income convergence.
32

The Saiz index is constructed at the metro area level. We conduct our analysis at the county level
because county geographies are more stable over time and so it is easier to build a consistent timeseries
for income. We cluster our standard errors at the metro area level because the Saiz index varies at the
metro-area level.

20

5

Conclusion

For more than 100 years, per-capita incomes across U.S. states were strongly converging
and population flowed from low-income to high-income areas. In this paper, we claim that
these two phenomena are related. By increasing the available labor in a region, migration
drove down wages and induced convergence in human capital levels.
Over the past thirty years, both the flow of population to high-income areas and income
convergence have slowed considerably. We show that the end of directed population flows,
and the decline of income convergence, can be explained in part by a change in the relationship between income and housing prices. Although housing prices have always been higher
in higher-income states, housing prices now capitalize a far greater proportion of the income
differences across states. In our model, as prices rise, the returns to living in high-income
areas fall for low-skill households, and their migration patterns diverge from the migration
patterns of the high-skill households. The regional economy shifts from one in which labor
markets clear through net migration to one in which labor markets clear through skill-sorting,
which slows income convergence. We find patterns consistent with these predictions in the
data.
To estimate the effect of these housing price increases, we introduce a new panel instrument for housing supply. Prior work has argued that land use regulations have become
increasingly stringent over time, but panel measures of regulation were unavailable. We create a proxy for these measures based on the frequency of land use cases in state supreme and
appellate court records. Tighter regulations impede population flows to high-income areas,
weaken convergence in human capital and weaken convergence in per capita income.

21

References
Daron Acemoglu, David H Autor, and David Lyle. Women, War, and Wages: The Effect of Female Labor
Supply on the Wage Structure at Midcentury. The Journal of Political Economy, 112(3), 2004.
Erhan Artuç, Shubham Chaudhuri, and John McLaren. Trade Shocks and Labor Adjustment: A Structural
Empirical Approach. American Economic Review, 100(3):1008–1045, June 2010. ISSN 0002-8282. doi:
10.1257/aer.100.3.1008. URL https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.100.3.1008.
David H. Autor and David Dorn. The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization of the US
Labor Market. American Economic Review, 103(5):1553–1597, August 2013. ISSN 0002-8282. doi:
10.1257/aer.103.5.1553. URL https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.103.5.1553.
Robert J Barro. Convergence and Modernization Revisited. 2012.
Robert J Barro and Xavier Sala-i Martin. Convergence across States and Regions. Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, (1):107–182, 1991.
Robert J Barro and Xavier Sala-i Martin. Convergence. Journal of Political Economy, 100(2):223–251, 1992.
Timothy Bartik. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies? W.E. Upjohn Institute
for Employment Research, Kalamazoo, Michigan, 1991.
Christopher R Berry and Edward Glaeser. The Divergence of Human Capital Levels across Cities. Papers
in Regional Science, 84(3):407–444, 2005.
Olivier Jean Blanchard and Lawrence F Katz. Regional Evolutions. Brookings Papers of Economic Activity,
23:1–76, 1992.
David Blanchflower and Andrew Oswald. Does High Home Ownership Impair the Labor Market? 2013.
George J Borjas. Does Immigration Grease the Wheels of the Labor Market? Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 1:69–133, 2001.
George J Borjas. The Wage Impact of the Marielitos: A Reappraisal. Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
(forthcoming), 2017.
Fred Bosselman and David Callies. The Quiet Revolution in Land Use Control. White House Council on
Environmental Quality, 1971.
Juan Braun. Essays on economic growth and migration. PhD thesis, Harvard, 1993.
Jan K. Brueckner and Kala Seetharam Sridhar. Measuring welfare gains from relaxation of landuse restrictions: The case of India’s building-height limits. Regional Science and Urban Economics,
42(6):1061–1067, November 2012. ISSN 01660462. doi: 10.1016/j.regsciurbeco.2012.08.003. URL
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0166046212000737.
Bureau of Economic Analysis. State Personal Income, Tables SA1-SA3, 2012.
David Card. The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market. ILR Review, 43(2):245–257,
1990. URL https://ideas.repec.org/a/sae/ilrrev/v43y1990i2p245-257.html.
David Card. Immigration and Inequality. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 99(2):1–21,
2009.
Francesco Caselli and Wilbur John Coleman. The U.S. Structural Transformation and Regional Convergence:
A Reinterpretation. Journal of Political Economy, 109(3):584–616, 2001.

22

Raj Chetty. Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of Micro and Macro Evidence
on Labor Supply. Econometrica, 2013.
W. Mark Crain. Volatile States: Institutions, Policy, and the Performance of American State Economies.
University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI, 2003.
Mai Dao, Prakash Loungani, and Davide Furceri.
in the United States and Europe.
Economic
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2468018.

Regional Labor Market Adjustments
Policy, 30(84):643–682, 2015.
URL

Thomas Davidoff. What Explains Manhattan’s Declining Share of Residential Construction? Journal of
Public Economics, 94(7-8):508–514, August 2010. ISSN 00472727. doi: 10.1016/j.jpubeco.2010.02.007.
URL http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0047272710000137.
Morris a. Davis and François Ortalo-Magné. Household expenditures, wages, rents. Review of Economic Dynamics, 14(2):248–261, April 2011. ISSN 10942025. doi: 10.1016/j.red.2009.12.003. URL
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1094202509000830.
Edward F. Denison. The Sources of Economic Growth in the United States and the Alternatives Before Us.
Comittee for Economic Development, New York, 1962.
Rebecca Diamond. The Determinants and Welfare Implications of US Workers’ Diverging Location Choices
by Skill: 1980-2000. American Economic Review, 106(3):479–524, March 2016. ISSN 0002-8282. doi:
10.1257/aer.20131706. URL https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.20131706.
Riccardo DiCecio and Charles S Gascon. Income Convergence in the United States: A Tale of Migration
and Urbanization. Annals of Regional Science, 45:365–377, 2008. doi: 10.1007/s00168-008-0284-1.
Richard A. Easterlin. Long Term Regional Income Changes: Some Suggested Factors. Papers in Regional
Science, 4(1):313–325, 1958.
Robert C. Ellickson. Suburban Growth Controls: An Economic and Legal Analysis. The Yale
Law Journal, 86(3):385–511, January 1977.
ISSN 00440094.
doi: 10.2307/795798.
URL
http://www.jstor.org/stable/795798?origin=crossref.
Joseph P Ferrie. Internal Migration. In Susan Carter, editor, Historical Statistics of the United States,
Millennial Edition, volume 1776. 2003.
WA Fischel. An economic history of zoning and a cure for its exclusionary effects. Urban Studies, pages
317–340, 2004. URL http://usj.sagepub.com/content/41/2/317.short.
Price V Fishback, William Horrace, and Shawn Kantor. The Impact of New Deal Expenditures on Mobility
During the Great Depression. Explorations in Economic History, pages 179–222, 2006.
Martin Garrett. Land use regulation: the impacts of alternative land use rights. Praeger Publishers, New
York, 1987.
Nicola Gennaioli, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. Human Capital and
Regional Development. Quarterly Journal of Economics, (forthcoming), 2013.
Nicola Gennaioli, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez De Silanes, and
Growth in regions.
Journal of Economic Growth,
19(3):259–309,
https://ideas.repec.org/a/kap/jecgro/v19y2014i3p259-309.html.

Andrei
2014.

Shleifer.
URL

Edward Glaeser and Bryce Ward. The causes and consequences of land use regulation: Evidence from
Greater Boston. Journal of Urban Economics, 65:265–278, 2009.

23

Edward L Glaeser, Joseph Gyourko, and Raven Saks. Why is Manhattan So Expensive? Regulation and the
Rise in House Prices. Journal of Law and Economics, pages 1–50, 2005a.
Edward L. Glaeser, Joseph Gyourko, and Raven E Saks. Why Have Housing Prices Gone Up? American
Economic Review, 95(2):329–333, 2005b.
Edward L. Glaeser, Joseph Gyourko, and Raven E Saks. Urban growth and housing supply. Journal of
Economic Geography, 6:71–89, 2006.
Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F Katz. The Legacy of U. S. Educational Leadership: Notes on Distribution
and Economic Growth in the 20th Century. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 91(2):
18–23, 2001.
Joseph Gyourko, Albert Saiz, and Anita Summers. A New Measure of the Local Regulatory Environment
for Housing Markets: Regulatory Index. Urban Studies, 45:693–729, 2008.
Joseph Gyourko, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai.
Superstar Cities.
ican
Economic
Journal:
Economic
Policy,
5(4):167–199,
2013.
https://ideas.repec.org/a/aea/aejpol/v5y2013i4p167-99.html.

AmerURL

Michael R. Haines. Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2002
[Computer file]. ICPSR02896-v3. Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, Ann
Arbor, MI, 2010.
Christian Hilber and Fredric Robert-Nicoud. On the Origins of Land Use Regulations: Theory and Evidence
from US Metro Areas. Journal of Urban Economics, 75:29–43, 2013.
Christian Hilber and Wouter Vermeulen. The Impact of Supply Constraints on House Prices in England.
mimeo, 2013.
Richard Hornbeck. The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short- and Long-Run Adjustments
to Environmental Catastrophe. American Economic Review, 102(4):1477–1507, 2012.
Chang Tai Hseih, Erik Hurst, Charles I Jones, and Peter J Klenow. The Allocation of Talent and U.S.
Economic Growth. mimeo, 2013.
Matthew E. Kahn. Do Liberal Cities Limit New Housing Development? Evidence from California. Journal
of Urban Economics, 69(2):223–228, March 2011. ISSN 00941190. doi: 10.1016/j.jue.2010.10.001. URL
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0094119010000720.
Greg Kaplan and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl. Understanding the Long-Run Decline in Interstate Migration.
International Economic Review, 58(1):57–94, February 2017. ISSN 1468-2354. doi: 10.1111/iere.12209.
URL http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/iere.12209/abstract.
Lawrence Katz and Kenneth T. Rosen. The Interjurisdictional Effects of Growth Controls on Housing Prices.
The Journal of Law and Economics, 30(1):149, January 1987. ISSN 0022-2186. doi: 10.1086/467133. URL
http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/467133.
Piyabha Kongsamut, Sergio Rebelo, and Danyang Xie. Beyond Balanced Growth. Review of Economic
Studies, 68(869-882), 2001.
Peter Lindert and Richard Sutch. Consumer Price Indexes for All Items, 1774-2003. In Susan B. Carter,
Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olmstead, Richard Sutch, and Gavin Wright, editors,
Historical Statistics of the United States, pages Table Cc1–2. Cambridge University Press, New York,
2006.
Robert A Margo. Wages in California During the Gold Rush. 1997.

24

Guy Michaels, Ferdinand Rauch, and Stephen J Redding. Urbanization and Structural Transformation.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127:535–586, 2012.
Raven Molloy, Christopher L Smith, and Abigail Wozniak. Internal Migration in the United States. Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 25(2):1–24, 2011.
Casey Mulligan. A Century of Labor Leisure Distortions. NBER Working Paper 8774, 2002.
Giovanni Peri and Vasil Yasenov. The Labor Market Effects of a Refugee Wave: Applying the Synthetic
Control Method to the Mariel Boatlift. NBER Working Paper 21801, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Inc, 2015. URL https://ideas.repec.org/p/nbr/nberwo/21801.html.
Henry O Pollakowski and Susan M Wachter. The Effects of Land-Use Constraints on Housing Prices. Land
Economics, 66(3), 1990.
John Quigley and Steven Raphael. Regulation and the High Cost of Housing in California. American
Economic Review, 95(2):323–328, 2005.
Jennifer Roback. Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life. The Journal of Political Economy, 90(6):1257–1278,
1982.
Sherwin Rosen. Wages-based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life. In Peter Mieszkowski and Mahlon Straszheim,
editors, Current Issues in Urban Economics. John Hopkins University Press, 1979.
Jonathan Rothwell. Housing Costs, Zoning, and Access to High-Scoring Schools. Metropolitan Policy Program
at Brookings, 2012.
Steven Ruggles, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder, and Matthew
Sobek. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-readable database]. 2010.
Albert Saiz. The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3):
1253–1296, 2010.
Raven E Saks. Job Creation and Housing Construction: Constraints on Metropolitan Area Employment
Growth. Journal of Urban Economics, 64:178–195, 2008. doi: 10.1016/j.jue.2007.12.003.
David Schleicher. City Unplanning. Yale Law Journal, 122(7):1670–1737, 2013.
Todd Sinai. Feedback Between Real Estate and Urban Economics. Journal of Regional Science, 50(1):
423–448, 2010.
John Taylor and Norman Williams. American Land Planning Law: Land Use and the Police Power. West
Group, Eagan Minnesota, 2009.
The American Institute of Planners. Survey of State Land Use Planning Activity. 1976.
Charles M. Tolbert and Molly Sizer. US Commuting Zones and Labor Market Areas. Rural Economy
Division, Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Staff Pape, 1996.
U.S. Census Bureau. USACounties, 2012.
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh and Pierre-Olivier Weill.
Why Has House Price Dispersion Gone
Up?
Review of Economic Studies, 77(4):1567–1606, October 2010.
ISSN 00346527.
URL
http://restud.oxfordjournals.org/lookup/doi/10.1111/j.1467-937X.2010.00611.x.
Jeffrey G Williamson. Regional Inequality and the Process of National Development: A Description of the
Patterns. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 13(4):1– 84, 1965.

25

Danny Yagan. Is the Great Recession Really Over? Longitudinal Evidence of Enduring Employment Impacts.
working paper, 2016.
Cristobal Young, Charles Varner, and Douglas S Massey. Trends in New Jersey Migration: Housing, Employment, and Taxation. Policy Research Insitute at the Woodrow Wilson School, (September), 2008.

26

Figure 1: Decline of Income Convergence and Directed Migration
Convergence 1990-2010, Coef: -.99 SE: .28
4

Convergence 1940-1960, Coef: -2.41 SE: .11

Annual Income Growth Rate, 1940-1960
3

ARAL

ND
SD
OK
KY
NC
GA NM KS
NE
TN
SC LA

Annual Income Growth Rate, 1990-2010
2

5

MS

TX
CO
UTMO
IA
WI
ID MN
WV VAAZ
IN
FL WY
NH
VT OR
MT WA
ME
OH
MI
PA IL
MD CA
NV
NJNY
MA
CT

RI

ND
WY

LA SD
MS

VT
ARNMMT
WV
OK TX
IA NE
UT
KS
AL
ME WI
KY TN MO
IDSC AZNCOR

MA
CO
VA
MN
WA
NH
RI
PA
IL

GA
IN OHFL
MI

MD
NJ
NY

CT

CA

DE

NV

0

1

DE

8

9
Log Income Per Capita, 1940

10

10

Migration 1940-1960, Coef: 1.59 SE: .37

10.8

Migration 1990-2010, Coef: -.47 SE: .63
4

AZ
FL

10.4
Log Income Per Capita, 1990

NV

NV

Annual Population Growth Rate, 1990-2010
2

Annual Population Growth Rate, 1940-1960
2
4

CA

NM
MD
ORWA

UT

DE

CO
TX
VA
IN
ID
KS

AL

IL

NY

RIMA
PA

NE IAVT

ID

CO
GA
TX
NC

SC

TN

OK
ALSD
KY

ND

WV

DE

OR

AR MT
MS

FL
WA

NM

LA

VA
CA

WY
MO
IN
WI
NE
KS
IAVT
ME

MN
NH

MD
NJ

IL
OH
MI PA
RI

MA
NY

CT

0

AR

8

UT

OK
ND
WV

MS

0

WY

WI
NH
MNMT
ME
MO

KY SD

NJ

CT

OH

LA
NC
SCGA
TN

MI

AZ

9
Log Income Per Capita, 1940

10

10

10.4
Log Income Per Capita, 1990

10.8

Coefficients for 20-Year Windows at Annual Rate
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2

Convergence and Directed Migration Rates Over Time

Annual Income Convergence Rate
Annual Directed Migration Rate
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

The lines in the first two rows of panels show slopes from linear regressions for 1960 and
2010. The bottom panel shows estimated regression coefficients for every twenty-year
window from 1950 to 2010. The larger circles reflect slopes for 1960 and 2010.

Figure 2: Rising Prices in High-Income States
2010, Coef: 2.04 SE: .25

12

1960, Coef: .95 SE: .08
13

CA

AL
MS
SC

KY
TN
NC
WV

SD
ME
TX
OK

AR

NY
RI
WA

NV

12.5

DE

MD

AZ

DE CO
FL

UT

CT

NH
VA

OR

MN
VT IL

ME
WI
MT
GA
PA
NMMI
NC
OH
MO
SC TN
LA
IN
NE
TXKS
IA SD
KYAL

ID

12

GA

MA
OH
UT MNWI
RIWY
CO
MI
MD
FL
WA
AZ
MT
MO
VA
NM
NHOR
ID
IN PA
ND
VT IA
NE
KS

MA
NJ

Log Housing Value, 2010

11.5

LA

11

Log Housing Value, 1960

CT
NJ NY
CANV
IL

WY

10.5

11.5

ND

9.2

9.4

9.6

9.8

10

AR
MSWV

10.3

OK

10.5

Log Income Per Capita, 1960

10.7

10.9

11.1

Log Income Per Capita, 2010

1

1.5

2

Timeseries of Coefs

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Notes: The first two panels regress median housing value on BEA income per capita at the state
level. The third panel plots coefficients from 20-year rolling windows. The larger red and purple
dots correspond to the coefficients from the first two panels.

Figure 3: Returns to Migration: Skill-Specific Income Net of Housing Cost
1.5

Effect of $1 of Statewide Income on Skill-Specific Inc Net of Housing
Skilled Household

0

.5

Coefficient

1

Unskilled Household

1940

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Notes: This figure plots the relationship between unconditional mean household income and mean skillspecific income net of housing costs for several decades. The regression in each year is Yij ≠ Pij = – +
—low≠skill Yj ◊ (1 ≠ Sij ) + —high≠skill Yj ◊ Sij + ÷Sij + “Xij + Áij for households with at least one labor force
participant aged 25-65. Housing costs are defined as 5% of house value for homeowners and 12X monthly rent
for renters. No coefficient is reported from 1950 because the public use Census data for this year does not
include housing cost data. High-skill households are defined as households in which all adult workers have
12+ years of education in 1940 or 16+ years of education thereafter and low-skill households are defined as
households in which no worker adult worker has this level of education. Mixed skill-type households, which
range from 2%-14% of households, are dropped from the regression sample, but not from the construction
of unconditional state average income. Vertical bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. See Section 2 for
details.

29

Figure 4: Net Migration Flows by Skill Group: Nominal Income vs. Income Net of Housing
Cost, 1935-1940
Skilled Coef: .61 SE: .39

-2

-2

Net Migration
0

Net Migration
0
2

2

Unskilled Coef: 1.31 SE: .47

8.5

9
9.5
10
Log Nominal Income

10.5

8.5

10.5

2
Net Migration
0
-2

-2

2

Skilled Coef: .77 SE: .40

Net Migration
0

Unskilled Coef: 1.23 SE: .36

9
9.5
10
Log Nominal Income

8
8.5
9
9.5
10
Log (Income-Housing Cost) for Unskilled

9
9.5
10
10.5
Log (Income-Housing Cost) for Skilled

Notes: This figure measures net migration over a five-year horizon as a percent of the population ages 25-65
for 467 State Economic Areas (SEA) in the 1940 Census. Each panel stratifies the SEAs into 20 vingtiles
by income, weighting each SEA by its population, and then computes the mean net migration within each
vingtile. The two top panels plot net migration against log household wage income in the destination SEA,
for individuals with less than 12 years of education (top left) and those with 12+ years (top right). The
modest non-linearity amongst high-income places apparent in the 1940 results is due to Chicago and New
York, both of which are very large cities that were hit hard by the Great Depression and failed to attract
as many migrants as predicted. Standard errors are clustered by state. The two bottom panels plot the net
migration rates against log income net of housing costs. See Section 2 for details.

30

Figure 5: Net Migration Flows by Skill Group: Nominal Income vs. Income Net of Housing
Cost, 1995-2000

Net Migration
0
4
-4

-4

Net Migration
0
4

8

Skilled Coef: 4.07 SE: .69

8

Unskilled Coef: -2.17 SE: 1.00

10.8

11 11.2 11.4 11.6 11.8
Log Nominal Income

10.8

8

8

Net Migration
0
4

Net Migration
0
4
-4

Skilled Coef: 4.71 SE: .89

-4

Unskilled Coef: 4.30 SE: 2.00

11 11.2 11.4 11.6 11.8
Log Nominal Income

10.4
10.6
10.8
11
11.2
Log (Income-Housing Cost) for Unskilled

11
11.2
11.4
11.6
11.8
Log (Income-Housing Cost) for Skilled

Notes: This figure measures net migration over a five-year horizon as a percent of the population ages 25-65
for 1,020 3-digit Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA) in the 2000 Census. Each panel stratifies the PUMAs
into 20 quantiles by income, weighting each PUMA by its population, and then computes the mean net
migration within each quantile. The two top panels plot migration rates against log household wage income
in the PUMA, for individuals with less than a bachelor’s degree (top left) and with at least a bachelor’s (top
right). The two bottom panels plot the net migration rates against log income net of housing costs. See
Section 2 for details.

31

Figure 6: Regulation Measure: Timeseries and Validity

3
Cases Per Million People
1
2
0

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

Land Use Cases vs 1975 Survey, Coef: .1 SE: .03

American Institute of Planners Measure
5
10
15

Land Use Cases Per Million People

2000

2010

SD

NC
SCVA

IL

NE
GA
KY
NV
OK
AL
MS
NDIN IA
SCARMO
KS
WV
LA

-1

TX

0

MIUT

CA

CO

NY

DE
ME

KY MI KS
AR
PA NV

VT

MT

GA
WY
NM

ID

AL
ND

LA
OHMS

NH
AZ MO

IL

OKIA NE

WV
TN

0

10
20
30
40
Rank of Land Use Cases Per Capita, 1965-1975

50

Regulations Capitalize Incomes into Prices
Low Reg State-Years

WA

ME

DE
OR
CT

MT

OH
ID
WY
SD

10
20
30
40
Rank of Land Use Cases Per Capita, 1995-2005

Log Housing Value
11.5

FL
VA TN
NC

NJ

FL

High Reg State-Years
VT

CA
PA
NY NM WI MN

OR

11

AZ

NJ

IN MA

NH

MD
CO

WI

TX

UT

12

2
Wharton Index of Regulation
0
1

RI

CT

WA RI MD

Land Use Cases vs 2005 Survey, Coef: .03 SE: .007
MA

MN

50

9.4

9.6

9.8
Log Income

10

10.2

Notes: The top-left panel plots the number of cases containing the phrase “land use” in the court database
in per capita terms.
The top-right panel plots the relationship between the 1975 values of the regulation measure introduced in
the text and the sum of affirmative answers to the regulation questions asked in the 1975 American Institute
of Planners Survey of State Land Use Planning Activities. The correlation between the state regulation
ranking and the AIP is 0.48 (0.36 with the rank measure from equation 7).
The lower-left panel plots the relationship between the 2005 values of the regulation measure introduced
in the text and the 2005 Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory Index. The correlation with the state
regulation ranking is 0.54 (0.36 with the rank measure from equation 7).
The lower-right panel plots deciles of log income with year fixed effects on the x-axis and conditional means
for housing prices for each decile on the y-axis.

32

3

CO
UTMO
WI
MN
AZ
VAIA
WV ID
IN
WY
FL NH
VT MTORWA
ME
OH
MI IL
PA
CA
MD NJ
NV
MA NY
CT
RI

Low Reg

DE

High Reg
8

8.5

9

9.5

10

3
2.5

NC GA

MS
AR

Coef Low Reg States

1990

2000

MN
VA

NE

AL KY

RI

PA
MO
IN
FL
WI
TXOH
IA KS
ORMI
AZ

UTID
WV NM

2010

Convergence for 20-Year Windows at Annual Rate
-3
-2
-1
0

Convergence for 20-Year Windows at Annual Rate
-3
-2
-1
0
1

Split by Land Use Instrument

1980

CT
NJ
CONY
MD
WA
IL
DE
CA

LA

NV
MT

OK
WY

9.9

10

10.1

10.2

10.3

10.4

Log Income Per Cap, 1980

Coef High Reg States

1970

NH

SD
VT
SCND TN
ME

Log Income Per Cap, 1940

1960

MA

High Reg

2

ND
SD
OK
KY
NC
GA NM KS
NE
TN
SC LA
TX

Low Reg

1.5

AR AL

1

ΔInc, 1980-2000 (Annual Rate)

5

MS

1

ΔInc, 1940-1960 (Annual Rate)

Figure 7: Income Convergence by Housing Supply Elasticity

Split by Saiz Housing Supply Elasticity
Coef Constrained States
Coef Unconstrained States

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Notes: The top panels show income convergence for two different twenty-year periods, labeling states according to their estimated regulation levels in 1965. Blue states have below median housing supply regulation
and red states above median regulation.
The bottom-left panel depicts the coefficients from Incs,t = –t + —Incs,t≠20 + Ás,t over rolling twenty
year windows. The regressions are estimated separately for two equally-sized groups of states, split by their
1965 measure of land use regulations from the legal database. The bottom-right panel splits states by their
measure of housing supply elasticity in Saiz [2010].

33

TABLE 1
Summary Statistics

1940
Mean
SD

1960
Mean
SD

1980
Mean
SD

2000
Mean
SD

Personal Income Per Capita ($000, 2012 $)

8.83

3.18

16.34

3.15

26.63

3.63

38.41

5.95

Population (Million)

2.73

2.69

3.72

3.80

4.69

4.76

5.83

6.26

(Relative to Sample Mean)

0.87

0.04

0.93

0.04

1.03

0.04

1.10

0.03

Median House Price ($000, 2012 $)

39.75

15.37

85.15

18.56

129.39

32.11

152.25

44.51

(Centiles of Land Use Cases Per Capita)

0.11

0.21

0.21

0.26

0.66

0.22

0.66

0.29

Fraction Age 25-65 with
12+ Years of Education
16+ Years of Education

0.26
0.05

0.44
0.21

0.45
0.08

0.50
0.28

0.73
0.18

0.44
0.38

0.88
0.27

0.33
0.44

Human Capital Level Per Capita

Regulation Measure

Sources: IPUMS Census extract, BEA Income estimates, Price index from Lindert and Sutch (2006) and an online
database of state court documents.
Notes: n=48 states, excluding Alaska, Hawaii, and DC. Dollar amounts are in real 2012 dollars. Human capital level is
measured using education and race. See Section 4.2 for details on human capital construction. The regulation measure for
1941 is reported in place of the unavailable 1940 statistics.

TABLE 2
Impacts of Regulation on Permits, Prices, Migration, and Convergence

Annual
Construction
Permitst

Log House
Price t

% of Housing
Stock
(1)

(2)

ΔLog
Populationt, t,t+20

Year*Reg FEs
R2
N

-5.868**
(2.290)
Y
0.209
1,536

0.833***
(0.255)
Y
0.890
384

-1.875***
(0.608)
Y
0.138
2,448

Placebo Measure: Quintiles of Total Cases Per Capita scaled [0,1]
Log Inc Per Capt+20
1.313
0.984***
1.017
(1.627)
(0.148)
(0.813)
Log Inc Per Capit *Regit
-1.029
0.269
0.380
(2.396)
(0.267)
(2.616)
Year*Reg FEs
R2
N

Y
0.167
1,536

Y
0.871
384

Δ Log Income Per
Capt,t+20

Annual Rate in % Annual Rate in % Annual Rate in %
(3)
(4)
(5)

Regulation Measure: Quintiles of Land Use Cases Per Capita scaled [0,1]
Log Inc Per Capt+20
5.039**
0.774***
1.688**
(2.106)
(0.105)
(0.637)
Log Inc Per Capit *Regit

Δ Log Human
Capital

Y
0.179
2,448

-0.0662***
(0.00865)

-2.034***
(0.102)

0.0439**
(0.0198)
Y
0.203
288

1.304***
(0.393)
Y
0.809
2,448

-0.0551***
(0.0199)
0.00905
(0.0386)

-1.707***
(0.206)
0.202
(0.400)

Y
0.170
288

Y
0.792
2,448

Notes: The table reports the coefficients β and βreg from regressions of the form: lnyit=αt+αtregit+βlnyit+ βreglnyitregit+εit.
The regulation measure is centiles of land use cases per capita and its construction is described in Section 4.1. The
dependent variables are new housing permits from the Census Bureau, the median log housing price from the IPUMS
Census extracts, population change, the change in log human capital of people ages 25-34 due to migration, and the
change in log per-capita income. For columns (1), (3), and (5), where we have annual data, the regulation measure is
constructed using cases per capita. For columns (2) and (4), where we have decennial data, the regulation measure is
constructed using average cases per capita over the last ten years. Standard errors clustered by state. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1

TABLE 3
Latent Tendency to Regulate, Geographic Land Availability, and Convergence

Year

Log Inc Per Capt-20

Δ Log Income Per Capt-20,t (Annual Rate in %)
Post
Pre
Post
Pre
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Pre
(1)

-1.98*** -1.92*** -1.98*** -1.92***

Post
(6)

-2.49***

-1.20***

(0.13)

(0.42)

(0.13)

(0.42)

(0.06)

(0.08)

0.30
(0.33)

2.27**
(0.91)

0.37
(0.35)

2.18**
(0.83)

-0.11
(0.12)

0.76***
(0.18)

pvalue for equality of interaction (pre v post)

0.003

Log Inc Per Capt-20 *
Constraint Quintile

Year*Constraint Fixed Effects

Y

Controls
R2
N
Unit of Observation
Constraint Measure

Y

0.002
Y

-0.84
1,248
State

Y

<0.001
Y

-0.45
1,200
State

0.84
1,248
State

Y
--

0.44
1,200
State

0.72
8,413
County

0.91
9,244
County

Land Use Cases Per Land Use Cases Per
Share of Land
Capita, 1956-1965 Capita, 1996-2005 Unavailable (Saiz, 2010)

Notes: This table uses time-invariant measures of the housing supply elasticity, while Table 2 uses timevarying measures of the elasticity. The table reports the coefficients β and βconstraint from regressions of the
form Δlnyit,t-20=a1 +α2Constraint i+βlnyit-20+ βConstraintlnyit-20 x Constraint i+εi. The pre period is 20-year
windows ending in 1960 through 1984. The post period is 20-year windows ending in 1985 through 2010.
The constraint measures are all in quintiles normalized such that 0 means least constrained and 1 means
most constrained. The constraint measures are: the cumulative number of land use cases per capita as of
1965 in (1)-(2), the number of land use cases per capita 1996-2005 in columns (3)-(4), and land
availability constructed from Saiz (2010) in columns (5)-(6). The availability measure assumes that all
land is available for construction in non-urban counties. Standard errors clustered by state for columns (1)(4) and by metro area for columns (5)-(6) in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

