                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      REGRESSION DISCONTINUITY IN TIME:
                  CONSIDERATIONS FOR EMPIRICAL APPLICATIONS

                                     Catherine Hausman
                                      David S. Rapson

                                     Working Paper 23602
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23602


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 2017, Revised April 2018




We thank Michael Anderson, Max Auffhammer, Severin Borenstein, Matias Cattaneo, Lucas
Davis, Stephen Holland, Ryan Kellogg, Doug Miller, and Jeff Smith for helpful comments. We
also thank UC Berkeley's Energy Institute at Haas, where Rapson was a visitor while this
research was conducted. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Catherine Hausman and David S. Rapson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Regression Discontinuity in Time: Considerations for Empirical Applications
Catherine Hausman and David S. Rapson
NBER Working Paper No. 23602
July 2017, Revised April 2018
JEL No. C14,C21,C22,Q53

                                          ABSTRACT

Recent empirical work in several economic fields, particularly environmental and energy
economics, has adapted the regression discontinuity (RD) framework to applications where time
is the running variable and treatment begins at a particular threshold in time. In this guide for
practitioners, we discuss several features of this “Regression Discontinuity in Time” (RDiT)
framework that differ from the more standard cross-sectional RD framework. First, many
applications (particularly in environmental economics) lack cross-sectional variation and are
estimated using observations far from the temporal threshold. This common empirical practice is
hard to square with the assumptions of a cross-sectional RD, which is conceptualized for an
estimation bandwidth shrinking even as the sample size increases. Second, estimates may be
biased if the time-series properties of the data are ignored (for instance in the presence of an
autoregressive process), or more generally if short-run and long-run effects differ. Finally, tests
for sorting or bunching near the threshold are often irrelevant, making the framework closer to an
event study than a regression discontinuity design. Based on these features and motivated by
hypothetical examples using air quality data, we offer suggestions for the empirical researcher
wishing to use the RD in time framework.


Catherine Hausman
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
chausman@umich.edu

David S. Rapson
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
dsrapson@ucdavis.edu
       As noted by Lee and Lemieux (2010), the use of the regression discontinuity framework
(RD) has expanded rapidly in economics for two reasons: (1) “RD designs require seemingly
mild assumptions compared to those needed for other nonexperimental approaches”; and
(2) “the belief that the RD design is not ‘just another’ evaluation strategy, and that causal
inferences from RD designs are potentially more credible than those from typical ‘natural
experiment’ strategies” (p. 282). An increasingly popular application of the RD design
uses time as the running variable, with a treatment date as the threshold. Examples of
this “regression discontinuity in time” (RDiT) are given in Table 1. Papers using RDiT
span fields that include public economics, industrial organization, environmental economics,
marketing, and international trade. Many are published in high-impact journals and, as of
the writing of this paper, have received a cumulative citation count of around 1,100.1 In this
paper, we describe potential pitfalls affecting RDiT, illustrate these pitfalls via simulations,
and offer practical advice to researchers considering RDiT.
       Many—although not all—of the papers using RDiT are estimating treatment effects of
environmental and energy policy.2 As a hypothetical example, imagine that some regulation
caused all coal-fired power plants in the United States to install an emissions control device at
the same time, on the same day. The hypothetical RDiT researcher could then examine the
impact on ambient air quality by estimating the change in pollution concentrations in the air
at the time the policy occurred. The typical RDiT application in energy and environmental
economics shares many features with this hypothetical example: (1) there is no available
cross-sectional variation in policy implementation, so a difference-in-difference framework is
not possible; (2) ambient air quality data are available at a daily or hourly frequency over a
long time horizon (e.g., years); and (3) there are many potential time-varying confounders,
which are assumed to change smoothly across the date of the policy change.
       In contrast, a hypothetical cross-sectional RD might, for example, be based around a
   1
     Citation counts were retrieved on Google Scholar on January 29, 2018. This represents a greater than
50 percent increase in citations since our last count in mid-2016.
   2
     A possible explanation for the proliferation if RDiT in energy and environmental economics, relative to
other applied microeconomic fields, is the availability of high-frequency time-series pollution data.


                                                     1
                                  Table 1: Examples of RDiT Papers
            Paper                           Journal                               Setting
            Anderson (2014)                 American Econ Review                  Traffic
            Auffhammer and Kellogg (2011)   American Econ Review                  Air quality
            Bento et al. (2014)             American Econ Journal – Econ Policy   Traffic
            Burger et al. (2014)            Trans Research Part A                 Car accidents
            Busse et al. (2006)             American Econ Review                  Vehicle prices
            Busse et al. (2010)             Marketing Science                     Vehicle prices
            Chen and Whalley (2012)         American Econ Journal – Econ Policy   Air quality
            Chen et al. (2009)              J Marketing Research                  Customer satisfaction
            Davis (2008)                    J Political Econ                      Air quality
            Davis and Kahn (2010)           American Econ Journal – Econ Policy   Vehicle sales
            DePaola et al. (2013)           Empirical Econ                        Car accidents
            Gallego et al. (2013)           J Public Econ                         Air quality
            Grainger and Costello (2014)    J Environmental Econ & Management     Fisheries
            Lang and Siler (2013)           Energy Policy                         Energy use



policy that required the device only for power plants above a certain size threshold (say, 1000
megawatts). The RD researcher could then compare air quality near power plants just above
and below the threshold (e.g., with size 990 to 1010). In this RD, the researcher observes
many units near the threshold, and other confounders are assumed to change smoothly across
the size threshold.3
      In this paper, we argue that the most common deployment of RDiT faces an array of
challenges—due primarily to its reliance on time-series variation for identification. The use of
time-series variation renders the traditional RD toolkit (for example, as described in Lee and
Lemieux (2010)) unavailable to the researcher. Researchers implementing RDiT are advised
to be aware of the multiple ways in which the framework differs from an experimental ideal.
We point to three potential pitfalls, conducting Monte Carlo simulations and providing
recommendations for empirical researchers.
      First, many RDiT designs in the existing literature have required observations far from
the temporal threshold. Identification in cross-sectional RD designs rests upon a conditional
expectation as one approaches the threshold—thus relying on a mass of cross-sectional units
just above and below the threshold. However, because the RDiT framework is frequently
  3
    As another example, not from energy and environmental economics, a cross-sectional RD might estimate
the impact of a tutoring program on student educational outcomes. To qualify for the program, a student
would need to have scored below some threshold (say, 500 points) on an exam. The researcher would then
look at student outcomes after the program only for students with exam scores close to 500 points.




                                                       2
used in studies with no (or insufficient)4 cross-sectional identifying variation, the sample
is too small for estimation as the bandwidth narrows around the threshold. As a result,
many RDiT researchers expand T to obtain sufficient power—thus relying on observations
away from the threshold. In contrast, the typical cross-sectional RD can, in theory, increase
the sample size by growing N even while approaching the threshold. The use in RDiT
of observations remote (in time) from the threshold is a substantial conceptual departure
from the identifying assumptions used in a cross-sectional RD, and we show it can lead to
bias resulting from unobservable confounders and/or the time-series properties of the data
generating process.
       Second, RDiT requires that the researcher consider the time-series nature of the underly-
ing data-generating process. The time-series literature has developed methods to account for
processes that are autoregressive, for instance, but these methods have not generally been
applied in the RDiT context. We demonstrate that such methods are relevant for proper
estimation and interpretation of short-run versus long-run effects.
       Finally, the McCrary (2008) density test, standard in cross-sectional RDs, is often not
applicable when time is the running variable. This test allows researchers to assess whether
observed units have sorted across the threshold, i.e. into or out of treatment, which would
lead to bias in the empirical estimates. When the density of the running variable is uniform
(e.g. time), the test becomes irrelevant. As such, the researcher can evaluate sorting into or
out of treatment only indirectly.
       Commenters have noted the similarity between RDiT and other methods (Shadish et
al., 2002). For instance, the identifying variation in RDiT is similar to that in interrupted
time series or a simple pre/post comparison. Davis (2008) argues that an advantage of
RDiT over a pre/post comparison is the ability to include flexible controls, driven by the
high-frequency nature of the data used in most RDiT papers. This high-frequency data also
   4
    Some RDiT studies observe data series at multiple locations, but with policy implementation occurring
at a single date for all locations. Thus any spatial correlation will undermine the cross-sectional variation.
Other papers observe data series at multiple locations, but estimate a separate RDiT for each individual
location, so that asymptotics are conceptualized in T .


                                                      3
invites comparisons to the widely-used “event study” framework. However, while the context
in which RDiT is used is often similar to the context in which event studies are used, the
specifications used in practice have tended to be quite different, as has the discussion of
identification. For instance, the widely-cited event studies in environmental economics that
have analyzed stock returns5 generally (1) do not use long time horizons, instead focusing on
short windows around the event; (2) do not use a single time series, but rather panel data;
and (3) do not use high-order polynomial controls in time.
        This paper clarifies how the RDiT framework as typically implemented differs from the
cross-sectional RD. In doing so, we encourage researchers implementing RDiT to be aware of
the ways the framework differs from an experimental ideal and to recognize that the failure
of untestable assumptions can lead to biased results.



1         RDiT Framework & Comparison to Other Methods

1.1         RD Framework

In this section we briefly lay out and compare the cross-sectional RD framework and the
RDiT framework. We begin by revisiting the cross-sectional RD framework, with the main
purpose to reiterate the notation that has become common in the RD literature, following
Lee and Lemieux (2010) and Imbens and Lemieux (2008). For context, suppose a researcher
wishes to evaluate the impact on air quality of the policy described in the introduction: a
policy that requires a pollution control device only for power plants above a certain size
threshold, such as 1000 megawatts.
        The appeal of the RD approach can be most clearly seen through the lens of the Neyman-
Rubin potential outcomes framework (Rubin, 1974; Splawa-Neyman, 1923 [1990]) and the
intuitive similarity to the randomized controlled trial (RCT). The empiricist cannot observe
an individual power plant (i) in more than one state of the world at once, so she cannot
    5
        Examples include Hamilton (1995); Konar and Cohen (1997); Dasgupta et al. (2001).


                                                      4
explicitly compare an outcome such as nearby air quality Yi under both treatment status (T )
and control status (C). The causal treatment effect is logically well-defined as the difference
in the outcome variable in the two states of the world (YiT − YiC ), but it is unobservable
at the individual level. Instead, empiricists seek to estimate the average treatment effect
E[YiT − YiC ] using some representative sample of the relevant population. A comparison of
average outcomes of subjects who receive treatment to that of subjects who do not receive
treatment (i.e., E[YiT ] − E[YiC ]) provides an estimate of the average treatment effect. If
the expected outcome of treated subjects had they not been treated is equal to the expected
outcome of non-treated subjects, then an unbiased estimate of the causal impact of the
treatment can be obtained.6
       A well-designed experiment randomly assigns subjects into treatment or control status.
One way to randomize would be to assign each subject a draw, ν, from a distribution. If the
distribution is uniform over the range, say, [0, 1], then a simple assignment rule can allocate
subjects into control and treatment. For a 50/50 split, subjects with a draw of ν > 0.5 are
given the treatment, and those with ν ≤ 0.5 are not.
       The power and appeal of RD designs are derived from their close proximity to this
experimental ideal. Lee and Lemieux (2010) go so far as to describe RD designs as a “local
randomized experiment” (p. 289). In the RD context, treatment occurs on one side, but not
the other, of some threshold c for a treatment assignment variable X.7 That is, a treatment
assignment variable Xi is observed for each individual i. Then, if Xi > c, the subject is
treated, and if Xi < c, the subject is not. Typically many units of observation fall in
the neighborhood of the threshold, allowing estimation via a cross-sectional comparison of
subjects “just above” and “just below” the threshold.
       In the previous example, rather than randomly assigning a power plant’s treatment status
   6
     In the power plant example, the mean potential air quality under treatment near treated power plants
must equal the mean potential air quality under treatment near untreated power plants. Similarly, the mean
potential air quality without treatment near treated power plants must equal the mean potential air quality
without treatment near untreated power plants.
   7
     We refer to this as the “running variable” throughout. It is also commonly referred to as the “forcing
variable” in the RD literature.


                                                    5
by, say, flipping a coin, treatment in the RD framework is determined by whether the power
plant is larger than 1000 megawatts. While very small power plants (e.g. 100 megawatts)
are likely to differ from very large power plants (e.g. 3000 megawatts), the researcher may
reasonably assume that power plants near the threshold are comparable (e.g., a 990 megawatt
plant is comparable to a 1100 megawatt plant). A credible RD design thus is conceptually
similar to the randomized experiment described above: in the neighborhood of the threshold,
whether X is above or below the threshold is “as good as random.” If true, RD designs can
be analyzed, tested and trusted like randomized controlled trials.
       Lee and Lemieux (2010) develop a checklist of recommended diagnostics that can provide
evidence on the quality of causal inference using RD estimates. The purpose of the checklist
is, basically, to determine that there are no other explanations than the treatment itself for
differences in outcomes between treatment and control subjects. If the empirical setting
passes the tests, the RD is generally viewed as producing an unbiased estimate of the causal
average treatment effect.8


1.2       RD in Time Framework

In the typical RDiT framework, the researcher knows the date c of a policy change. She
assumes that for all dates t > c, the unit is treated, and for all dates t < c, the unit is not.
This RDiT set-up uses time-series data, for instance daily or hourly observations, for a given
geographic region (e.g., a city as in Chen and Whalley (2012) or a building as in Lang and
Siler (2013)).9 A common application in the energy and environmental economics literature
is the evaluation of policies impacting air quality (see Table 1).
       Returning to the power plant example, suppose the policy requiring a pollution control
device takes effect on a particular date and impacts all power plants. Suppose the researcher
   8
     The estimate of the average treatment effect is local in the sense that it is representative only of the units
of observation near the threshold; it may differ from the treatment effect for units far from the threshold.
   9
     Some papers leverage cross-sectional variation by observing multiple geographic regions, although typ-
ically the timing of the policy change is common to the different regions. Other papers observe multiple
geographic regions, but estimate a separate RDiT specification for each location. In either case, asymptotics
are primarily or entirely in T , not N .

                                                        6
does not observe emissions from individual firms, but rather ambient air quality within a city.
Rather than observing air quality near some power plants that are treated and others that
are not (as in the cross-sectional RD framework above), the researcher observes air quality
near power plants that are treated in some periods and untreated in others. Among the
identification challenges in such a setting are that (1) there is no cross-sectional variation in
treatment, so no difference-in-differences is possible;10 and (2) there are many confounders,
such as changes in weather and emissions from other industries, that may change at the
same time as the policy change.
       In contrast to the time-series examples provided above, it is possible to imagine an RD
context where time is the running variable but the framework approaches the as-good-as-
random interpretation of a cross-sectional RD. We would exclude such an empirical context
from the RDiT class. Consider Ito (2015), which uses time as the running variable but relies
on asymptotics in N . The time threshold in that study determines eligibility for an electricity
rebate program. Customers who initiated service after the threshold date were ineligible,
while those before were eligible. This threshold date was set retroactively, long after it had
passed. To return to the power plant example, a comparable RDiT would be if coal plants
built after the year 2001 were required to install emissions controls, and this policy were
announced and took effect in the year 2010. For Ito’s design, there is a credible claim to
exogeneity of service initiation date with respect to the threshold (no sorting behavior), a
substantial mass of customers on either side of the threshold (asymptotics in N ), and the
ability to deploy the standard toolkit of cross-sectional RD diagnostics. This design differs
markedly from studies that rely on a time threshold and identify based on asymptotics in T
(rather than N ).
  10
     RDiT can also provide value in settings where difference-in-differences is possible but limited in some
way. For instance, Auffhammer and Kellogg (2011) use a difference-in-difference framework as part of their
analysis, but they additionally use the RDiT approach because they are interested in heterogeneous treatment
effects across space. Some papers also compare RDiT and difference-in-difference estimates, such as Chen
and Whalley (2012) and Gallego et al. (2013)—this comparison can be useful where an untreated unit exists
but its validity as a control is in doubt.




                                                     7
1.3       Conceptual Differences Between RD and RDiT

Comparing the cross-sectional RD with the RDiT, several conceptual differences emerge.
The first is one of interpretation. The previous sections described a “local randomization”
interpretation of the RD design in which, within a small neighborhood around the thresh-
old, treatment status can be thought of as essentially akin to a roll of a die. As noted by
Jacob et al. (2012), while some researchers have focused on local randomization, others have
emphasized instead the RD as characterized by the discontinuity at a threshold. The ran-
domization characterization is emphasized by, for instance, Lee (2008) and Lee and Lemieux
(2010), whereas the discontinuity characterization is emphasized by Hahn et al. (2001). In
part, the distinction is about whether the RD framework is closer to a randomized experi-
ment than are other quasi-experimental frameworks, a matter of some debate (Shadish et al.,
2002). The RDiT framework in the power plant example clearly accords with the “disconti-
nuity at a threshold” interpretation of RD designs (where the discontinuity is at a moment
in time), but it is less clear that it accords with the “local randomization” interpretation
of RD.11 The running variable is time itself—and time cannot be thought of as randomly
assigned within a neighborhood around a threshold.12 To the extent that the RD framework
is simply another quasi-experimental framework (one that uses a discontinuity), RDiT is
conceptually similar. To the extent that RD is closer to a randomized trial (i.e., uses a local
randomization), RDiT is conceptually distinct.
       A second, and more important, difference between RD and RDiT is the way in a which the
sample size is allowed to grow. The standard RD is identified in the N dimension, allowing
the researcher to grow the sample size even as the bandwidth shrinks arbitrarily around the
threshold. In contrast, RDiT is typically identified using variation in the T dimension—of
  11
     A brief discussion of RD in time is given in Lee and Lemieux (2010), motivated by the large number
of studies that use age as the running variable. The focus of that discussion is on the “inevitability” of
treatment.
  12
     The threshold itself (the particular date the treatment is implemented) is also not generally randomly
assigned; rather it is chosen by policymakers and announced in advance.




                                                    8
the fourteen papers we cite, only three use cross-sectional variation in the treatment date.13
When using a time series of air quality data with a single treatment date, a researcher cannot
grow the sample size while simultaneously shrinking the bandwidth (the proximity to the
threshold). Rather than simply a matter of interpretation, the inability to grow the sample
size near a threshold poses operational problems for the empirical researcher. RDiT papers
tend to rely on observations quite far (in time) from the threshold, leaving the researcher
more vulnerable to bias from unobservable confounders. The majority of the RDiT papers
we examine use a sample size of at least two years, and several use eight years or more—a
period over which many unobservable changes could occur.
       A related difference between RD and RDiT is the need to include control variables.
In the cleanest cross-sectional RD, since treatment is as good as random within a narrow
bandwidth, few controls are needed. Researchers include a control for the running variable
itself, so that the necessary assumption is simply that the association between the running
variable and the potential outcomes is smooth. Other covariates can be included to reduce
noise and increase precision, but they are not needed for an unbiased estimate (Lee and
Lemieux, 2010). In contrast, in the RDiT setting, unobservables correlated with the running
variable may have discontinuous impacts on the potential outcome. For instance, supposing
that the power plant policy were implemented on a Monday and the researcher observed air
pollution at the daily level, it is hard to imagine that the potential outcome evolves smoothly
from the weekend to the beginning of the work week. Of the fourteen papers we cite, all
but one include discontinuous controls such as day-of-week or weekend effects. The impact
of such covariates is in part what prevents the researcher from using a very narrow window:
one could not simply compare the day before the threshold to the day after. As a result,
covariates in the RDiT context may need to be included as controls to prevent bias, rather
than simply to improve precision.
       Finally, the assumptions needed for inference are different from those in the cross-sectional
  13
   Some of the papers have multiple cross-sectional sites, but with a common treatment date. Others have
multiple treatment dates, but run the RDiT specifications on site-specific time-series.


                                                   9
RD. In particular, the errors are likely to exhibit persistence. We refer the reader to the
large time-series literature for how to deal with serially correlated errors.
    Two additional observations are worth making with regard to inference. First, for a
local linear RDiT framework, small-sample inference may be necessary. This differs from
the typical implementation of the cross-sectional RD, where the researcher may have a large
sample even close to the threshold. Second, some series (such as commodity prices) will
contain unit roots and as such require different procedures for inference than are found in
cross-sectional RD designs.



2     Monte Carlo Simulations

In this section, we describe Monte Carlo simulations that allow us to examine and decom-
pose threats to identification in the RDiT and to test potential remedies. Using real-world
pollution monitoring data as a base, we impose simulated treatment effects. Essentially, we
are simulating the impact of a policy such as the one described previously, in which power
plants are required to install an emissions control device. We then attempt to retrieve the
policy impact using RDiT approaches. In addition to results using real-world pollution mon-
itoring data (with a simulated treatment), we present results using simulated data in which
we control the data-generating process completely. While the former dataset has properties
similar to data used in many existing RDiT applications, the latter allows us to examine
how our results might generalize to other settings.
    For the results using air quality data, we use the daily ozone and weather data from
Auffhammer and Kellogg (2011) (AK). We drop monitors in California, since those are
subject to the sharply discontinuous treatment found in AK. It is important to note that
the remaining monitors may also face confounding treatments, such as (unobserved to the
researcher) environmental regulations. However, these are the sorts of confounders that the
RD approach is meant to control for. We restrict the sample to those monitors open for the



                                               10
entire sample period and with no two-month gaps in coverage, leaving us with 108 monitors.
The AK data contain daily observations of the maximum measured ozone concentration.
As is standard in the literature, we use the log of ozone concentrations. Control variables
include daily minimum and maximum temperature and daily rain and snowfall totals. Table
A1 in the Appendix gives summary statistics.
       The first set of Monte Carlo simulations is aimed at demonstrating how the RDiT method
recovers the true causal treatment effect when the estimating equation is correctly specified.
We begin by constructing a simulated treatment effect that begins at a known start date
(using ten randomly selected start dates).14 Then for each monitor’s data series xi,t , and using
β = −0.2, we construct our outcome variable yi,t ≡ xi,t + β · 1{t ≥ tstart }. A representative
figure of both the true pollution data series xi,t and the constructed outcome variable yi,t is
given in the Appendix (Figure A1).
       We evaluate the RDiT method for our constructed outcome variable. We assume the
researcher knows the true start date and wishes to uncover the treatment effect β. We run
the usual RDiT regressions, both using a polynomial approach and a local linear approach.15
For the polynomial specifications, we follow Davis (2008) and use an eight-year window
around the treatment start date. We show results using both a global polynomial for the
entire sample period, and using separate polynomials for the pre- and post-periods.16 As is
standard in the air pollution policy evaluation literature, we control in all specifications for
seasonality with month effects and day of week effects and for weather using cubic functions
of minimum daily temperature, maximum daily temperature, rainfall, and snowfall.
       Ambient air quality data can be highly variable (see e.g., Figure A1 in the Appendix), so
  14
     We exclude potential start dates that do not have four years of data each for the pre- and post- periods.
A full list of the treatment start dates is given in the Appendix.
  15
     For the local linear specifications, we use a rectangular kernel and 30 days of data in the pre- and post-
period—so the specification is an OLS regression with a linear time trend using only observations within one
month of the treatment start date.
  16
     The order of the polynomial is chosen by the Bayesian information criterion (BIC). The global polynomial
specification allows up to order nine. When the polynomial is separated into a pre-period polynomial and
post-period polynomial, we use a BIC selection over all nine possible combinations of polynomials of order
one, two, and three.



                                                      11
controls are important for absorbing noise. A difficulty with a local linear specification using
only a few weeks of observations is that controls can be difficult to include. If the treatment
happens to begin on a Monday, a local linear specification needs to separately identify the
“Monday effect” from the treatment effect of interest. We propose an alternative to the
standard local linear specification. We use a two-step procedure, which we refer to hereafter
as “augmented local linear.” First, the impacts of weather and seasonality controls are es-
timated, and the residuals are saved, using an eight-year data window. Then, a local linear
specification is estimated using just the residuals for dates that are within a narrow band-
width, such as 30 days in the pre-period and 30 days in the post-period. The researcher can
retrieve consistent estimates of standard errors by implementing a bootstrapping procedure
that allows first-stage variance to be reflected in the second stage.
       Additionally, to compare the RDiT approach using high frequency data to a simple
pre/post analysis where high frequency data are not available, we collapse the data to
monthly averages and run a regression that controls for the weather and seasonality variables
as well as a linear trend. We run a separate regression for each monitor. For all results, we
show the average and its standard deviation across the ten randomly selected start dates
and 108 monitors.17
       We also show Monte Carlo simulations for a dataset in which the counterfactual is simply
an error term that follows a standard normal distribution (the realization of a Gaussian white
noise process). The length of the observed data series is the same as for the air quality data,
and we show results for 1000 iterations. We again construct a treatment effect beginning at
the known start date: yi,t ≡ β · 1{t ≥ tstart } + εi,t , where now εi,t ∼ N (0, 1).
       As can be seen in Table 2, the RDiT performs well when the treatment start date is
precisely known by the researcher and the treatment effect is constant over time. All five
columns show estimates close to the true treatment effect, although with varying degrees of
  17
    We report the standard deviation of the estimated treatment effect across all monitors and start dates
to give a sense of the variation in the estimated treatment effect. The standard error of the mean of the
estimates would naturally be smaller.



                                                   12
            Table 2: RD in Time Estimates for Simulated Treatment, β = −0.2
                                       (1)             (2)         (3)         (4)               (5)
                                   BIC-chosen      BIC-chosen              Augmented          Pre/Post,
                                     Global         Separate      Local      Local            Monthly
                                   Polynomial      Polynomials    Linear     Linear          Observations
                                                           A. Air Quality Data

              Estimated Beta           -0.20           -0.21         -0.19        -0.18           -0.19
                                      (0.11)          (0.11)        (0.29)       (0.26)          (0.10)
              Observations             2822            2822           59           59              96
                                        (72)            (72)         (3.5)        (3.5)           (1.0)
              Polynomial Order           4.0         1.7, 1.6          -            -               -
                                       (2.9)       (0.8), (0.8)

                                                             B. Simulated Data

              Estimated Beta           -0.20           -0.20         -0.19        -0.19           -0.19
                                      (0.07)          (0.08)        (0.51)       (0.51)          (0.08)
              Observations             2921            2921           61           61              96
                                         -               -             -            -               -
              Polynomial Order          1.0          1.0, 1.0          -            -               -
                                      (0.05)      (0.03), (0.06)
               Note: Each column of this table reports the mean treatment effect coefficient and number
               of observations across 2,080 regressions. The standard deviation of the estimate and of
               the number of observations is in parentheses. Panel A uses ambient air quality data with
               a simulated treatment effect, while Panel B uses white noise with a simulated treatment
               effect. For both panels, the true treatment effect is -0.2. The empirical specification varies
               across the columns; for details see text. Differences in the sample size across regressions
               arise because of missing data points in the air quality data series. Note the observation
               count in Column 4 is for the second estimation step; the first step uses the same number
               of observations as the polynomial specifications in Columns 1 and 2.



precision. The global polynomial results are more precise than the local linear, a standard
finding in the RD literature. In Panel A (using air quality data), the augmented local linear,
which strips out the effects of controls using a much longer data series, is less noisy than the
traditional local linear, as intended. In Panel B, which uses noise data, there are no controls
needed, so the local linear and augmented local linear results are identical. The pre/post
results are similar to the polynomial and local linear results, indicating that little has been
gained by the use of high-frequency controls.
   Figure 1 plots these results at a representative monitor, where “representative” is defined
as having an estimated beta close to the average estimated beta. For space considerations,
only the global polynomial and local linear approaches are plotted. Figure A2 in the Ap-
pendix shows plots for the other specifications. The left-hand panel shows the global poly-
nomial estimation; the right-hand panel shows a local linear specification with a bandwidth




                                                          13
                        Figure 1: Representative RDiT Graphs, No Confounders




Note: These figures plot regression discontinuity in time estimates for a single representative monitor, with separate panels for
two different empirical specifications. Both panels shows residuals after controls have been removed (grey circles) and a line
fitted to those residuals (black line). The left-hand panel uses a global polynomial approach, and the right-hand panel uses a
local linear approach with 30 days of observations on either side of the threshold. Plots for additional specifications (separate
pre/post polynomials; an augmented local linear approach; and a collapse to monthly averages) are provided in the Appendix.



of 30 days before and 30 days after the treatment date.18
       Table 2, Figure 1, and Figure A2 demonstrate how the RDiT method (whether imple-
mented with a polynomial control, a local linear specification, or our augmented local linear
specification) recovers the causal effect of interest when the estimating equation is correctly
specified. Next, we examine how different implementations of the RDiT method perform
when the estimating equation is not correctly specified.



3        Sources of Potential Bias

3.1       Time-Varying Treatment Effects

The RDiT dataset frequently has little or no cross-sectional variation. A study might analyze
outcomes relating to a single cross-sectional unit, or evaluate separate RDiT specifications
for each individual cross-sectional unit. In such cases, the researcher has two choices for
increasing the sample size: (1) increasing the frequency of data (“infill” or “fixed-domain”
  18
    While the BIC-chosen polynomial order happens to be low for this monitor, on average the BIC-chosen
order is 4 for the global specification (see Table 2).




                                                              14
asymptotics) or (2) expanding the time window (“increasing domain” asymptotics). In
practice, RDiT practitioners have done both by using, for instance, daily data across several
years. Both approaches have limitations. Increasing the frequency of the data will not add
much power if the data are serially correlated. Expanding the time window increases the
probability of bias, as data are added far from the threshold. This problem is not unique
to RDiT; the RD literature has documented the bias/precision trade-off as the sample size
increases away from the threshold. However, the problem could be more severe for an RDiT
application because there is frequently only one cross-sectional unit.
   Consider a time series of daily pollution levels, which will exhibit substantial noise from
seasonality and weather—as mentioned in Section 1.2, a common RDiT application is the
evaluation of a policy impacting ambient air quality. To absorb the seasonality and weather
effects, the researcher will want to include several years of data, necessitating inclusion of
observations far from the threshold date when the treatment begins. Two assumptions are
then needed. First, the model must be correctly specified. Any potential confounders such
as other policy changes, weather events, or changes in pollution from other sources must
be either controlled for directly or be sufficiently well-absorbed by the global polynomial
approximation. Of the papers we cite, all but one include controls (such as weather) in
addition to time trends. Second, the researcher must correctly specify the treatment effect.
In particular, she must take a stand on whether the treatment effect is smooth and constant
throughout the post-period, or whether it varies (and, if so, how). Importantly, these two
assumptions may interact: the polynomial must be specified such that it is uncorrelated with
any unobserved (or mis-specified) variation in the treatment effect.
   Of particular interest in environmental applications are time-varying treatment effects. A
time-varying treatment effect violates the assumption (untestable in the RDiT framework)
that the researcher has correctly specified the treatment variable. Again, this potential
problem is not unique to RDiT—researchers using cross-sectional RD must address the
possibility of heterogeneous treatment effects that vary with the running variable. However,


                                             15
the long sample window frequently used in RDiT (to aid with power) make this problem
more relevant than in many cross-sectional RD settings. Recall that the majority of the
papers we examine use a sample window of multiple years.
   All but three of the RDiT papers we examine assume a constant treatment effect in their
main specification. Some discuss short-run versus long-run effects qualitatively, and a few
examine the possibility of time-varying treatment effects using difference-in-differences. The
RDiT method by itself does not allow for direct tests of time-varying treatment; either the
researcher must assume how the treatment effect evolves over the sample window, or control
units are required.
   To demonstrate the impact of a time-varying treatment effect, we next return to the
Monte Carlo simulations. We assume the treatment effect is not constant, and that this
is not known to the researcher. Suppose the treatment effect lasts a given number of days
tlength ∈ [1, n], where n is the number of days in the post-period. After tlength days, the
true treatment effect goes immediately to zero.19 Assume that, since the researcher does
not know the treatment effect varies over time, she models a standard RDiT with a single
dummy for the entire post-treatment period (recall she accurately knows the start date). For
this framework, we again estimate a global polynomial with BIC-chosen order and a local
linear regression.
   Table 3 shows results for a treatment length of one year.20 The results are sensitive to
the specification. The local linear specification performs well, since the treatment effect is
constant within the window studied. However, the BIC-chosen global polynomial gives an
estimate that could be either too large or too small. In Panel A, the estimated treatment
effect is substantially larger than the true beta, while in Panel B the estimated effect is
somewhat smaller than the true effect. The estimate in Panel B would accord with intuition
that the specification is giving an estimate between the true short-run (-0.2) and long-run
  19
     In the Appendix, we consider a smooth decay process, which may accord with adaptive behavior in
general equilibrium.
  20
     In the Appendix, we show results for a treatment length of one month.



                                                16
            Table 3: Treatment Sharply Decays after One Year, βinitial = −0.2
            and βlong−run = 0
                                  BIC-chosen     BIC-chosen             Augmented         Pre/Post,
                                    Global        Separate     Local      Local           Monthly
                                  Polynomial     Polynomials   Linear     Linear         Observations
                                                        A. Air Quality Data

             Estimated Beta           -0.27           -0.29       -0.19       -0.18           -0.15
                                     (0.11)          (0.12)      (0.29)      (0.26)          (0.11)
             Observations             2822            2822         59          59              96
                                       (72)            (72)       (3.5)       (3.5)           (1.0)
             Polynomial Order           5.9         1.7, 2.1        -           -               -
                                      (2.3)       (0.8), (0.6)

                                                           B. Simulated Data

             Estimated Beta           -0.16          -0.18        -0.19       -0.19           -0.15
                                     (0.08)         (0.10)       (0.51)      (0.51)          (0.08)
             Observations             2921           2921          61          61              96
                                        -              -            -           -               -
             Polynomial Order          1.1         1.0, 1.1         -           -               -
                                     (0.33)     (0.03), (0.32)
               Note: Each column of this table reports the mean treatment effect coefficient and number
               of observations across 2,080 regressions—see Table 2 for details. In contrast to Table 2,
               the true treatment effect of -0.2 lasts only one year, then sharply drops to 0.



(0.0) effects. However, this intuition does not hold in Panel A. When the treatment lasts for
one year with the simulated air quality data, the BIC-chosen polynomial gives an estimate
that is larger (-0.27) than the true immediate effect (-0.2). One explanation is that the
polynomial in time adjusts its shape. For the constant-treatment results in Table 2, the
average polynomial order selected is 4. In contrast, for the time-varying treatment results
in Table 3, the BIC-selected order is 6. Related concerns regarding the use of high-order
polynomial controls have been raised by Gelman and Imbens (2017).
   To see the overfitting of the polynomial, Figure 2 shows a monitor for which the esti-
mated treatment effect (discontinuity in the thin black line) is larger than the true effect
(discontinuity in the thick grey line). Because of the noise in the series, this confounder
is not apparent in the residuals to which the polynomial is fitted. While around half of
the RDiT papers we examine mention the possibility of a difference between short-run and
long-run treatment effects, we have not seen discussion of the possibility of bias (from, e.g.,
the polynomial overfitting). However, it appears possible for the estimate to exhibit bias
under a time-varying treatment effect, rather than approximating either the short-run or


                                                        17
           Figure 2: Global Polynomial Can Overfit when Treatment Sharply Decays




Note: This figure plots the RDiT estimate for a representative monitor, with an estimated treatment effect similar to the
average in Panel A of Table 3. The grey circles plot the residuals (after removing covariates) of log ambient air quality with
a simulated treatment effect of -0.2 lasting one year. The thick grey line shows the polynomial a researcher would fit when
(correctly) modeling the temporary nature of the treatment. The thin black line shows the polynomial a researcher would fit
when (incorrectly) modeling the treatment effect as constant. Four outliers have been used for estimation but dropped from
the plot.



the long-run effect.
    As can be seen by comparing Tables 3 and A2, the estimated effect also varies by the
treatment length. To further explore the impact of time-varying treatment effects, we show
plots in the Appendix of the estimated effect for varying treatment lengths and polynomial
orders (Figures A3, A4, and A5). We also explore a smooth decay process (Table A3).
With the global polynomial approach, we estimate effects both substantially smaller than
and larger than the true initial effect, depending on the decay process. Since the long-run
effect is zero, estimates larger (in absolute value) than the short-run effect are not bounded
by the initial and permanent effects. What these simulations make clear is that given a
time-varying treatment effect, the global polynomial RDiT estimate may not simply be a
weighted average of the short-run and long-run effects, nor is it simply the initial impact
local (in time) to the threshold.
    Finally, we have motivated these Monte Carlo simulations with the presence of time-



                                                             18
varying treatment effects. However, the same Monte Carlos could be used to understand
the impact of unobservables correlated with time. For instance, a setting with a constant
treatment effect combined with a sharply discontinuous unobservable of equal magnitude
(and opposite sign) is observationally equivalent to the sharply discontinuous time-varying
treatment effect modeled above. That is, it is easy to imagine settings where unobservables
lead to the polynomial overfitting, even with a constant treatment effect.


3.2    Autoregression

The second potential pitfall we examine in RDiT implementation relates to its use of time-
series data, which are likely to exhibit serial dependence. The first implication of this serial
dependence relates to inference. If there is serial dependence in the residuals, standard errors
must account for it. The existing RDiT literature has generally addressed this by using
clustered standard errors. The second implication is that autoregression in the dependent
variable (even after accounting for serial correlation in the exogenous variables and the
residuals) will impact estimation of short-run versus long-run effects. Local air pollution, for
instance, can dissipate in minutes or days or weeks, depending on the pollutant and local
atmospheric conditions (MacDonell et al., 2014).
   This slow dissipation introduces dynamic effects not generally considered in the RDiT
literature (the two exceptions of which we are aware are Chen and Whalley (2012) and Lang
and Siler (2013)). Consider the power plant policy described above, and suppose that the
regulation will decrease emissions by β. The researcher observes daily pollution levels in the
city for several years before and after the policy change. Assume that plant owners comply
on the first date of the policy and there are no other confounders. Finally, suppose that the
pollutant of interest dissipates at a rate of 1 − α each day, implying that α remains from
one day to the next. Then on the first day of the new policy, the treatment effect on air
pollution levels will be a decrease of β. On the second day, however, the treatment effect
will be a combination of lower emissions plus lower pollution left over from the previous day:


                                              19
                                             β
β + β · α. The long-run effect will be      1−α
                                                .
       The magnitude of the estimated treatment effect will depend on the specification, and
on the extent to which identification is being achieved from a discontinuity (i.e. as the
bandwidth shrinks towards the threshold) or from time-series variation outside of the neigh-
borhood of the threshold. If the study included only the day immediately before and the day
immediately after the policy change, the estimated effect would be the short-run effect. With
a longer window, it is not clear what will be recovered. With a longer window, the researcher
could include the lagged dependent variable in estimation, then recover both the short-run
and long-run effects if the regression is properly specified. However, if the researcher omits
the lagged dependent variable, bias arises from a similar source as that of the time-varying
treatment effects problem described above. Overfitting of the global polynomial may arise.
The degree to which these dynamics will matter in practice depends on how large the true
autoregressive coefficient is, and on researcher choices about bandwidth and specification.
High-frequency data, while allowing for more power, may be more likely to exhibit qualita-
tively important autoregression. The median frequency of the data used in the papers we
examine is daily, and eleven of the fourteen papers use daily or hourly data.
       To explore how important autoregression might be in the air quality setting, we estimate
the autoregressive AR(1) parameters for six pollutants at air quality monitors in the U.S.,
using daily data and controlling flexibly for seasonality and weather (Tables A5 and A6).21
Overall, we obtain estimates of the AR(1) parameter of 0.3 to 0.5, varying by pollutant.22
       To examine how RDiT behaves in the presence of autoregression, we simulate an AR(1)
process with varying degrees of dependence. The process is given by the following equation:


                               yi,t ≡ α · yi,t−1 + β · 1{t ≥ tstart } + εi,t


where the error component is standard normal. We fix β = −0.2 but allow α to vary from
  21
   We use gridded daily weather data from Roberts and Schlenker (2009).
  22
   It is possible some of this estimated autoregression is driven by serially correlated unobservables; see
Appendix.


                                                    20
                                                                                                         −0.2
                Table 4: Dropping AR(1) Term, βinitial = −0.2 and βlong−run =                            1−α
                                                        BIC-chosen     BIC-chosen               Augmented        Pre/Post,
                                                          Global        Separate      Local       Local          Monthly
                                                        Polynomial     Polynomials    Linear      Linear        Observations

  AR(1)          Implied long-run
  parameter α    treatment effect

  0.1            -0.22               Estimated beta        -0.23           -0.22       -0.24        -0.24           -0.21
                                                          (0.08)          (0.09)      (0.55)       (0.55)          (0.08)
  0.3            -0.29               Estimated beta        -0.29           -0.29       -0.30        -0.30           -0.28
                                                          (0.11)          (0.12)      (0.68)       (0.68)          (0.10)
  0.5            -0.40               Estimated beta        -0.41           -0.40       -0.38        -0.38           -0.39
                                                          (0.16)          (0.20)      (0.90)       (0.90)          (0.15)
  0.7            -0.67               Estimated beta        -0.68           -0.67       -0.52        -0.52           -0.65
                                                          (0.38)          (0.42)      (1.34)       (1.34)          (0.24)
  0.9            -2.00               Estimated beta        -1.91           -1.90       -0.65        -0.65           -1.96
                                                          (1.37)          (1.38)      (2.40)       (2.40)          (0.73)
   Note: Each column of this table reports the mean treatment effect coefficient and number of observations across regressions
   using 1,000 simulated datasets. The true data-generating process follows an AR(1) process with a true initial treatment
   effect of -0.2, and therefore a long-run treatment effect of −0.2/(1 − α). The estimation procedure does not include a
   lagged dependent variable; as such, the table shows the impact of incorrectly ignoring a dynamic process.



0.1 to 0.9 in increments of 0.2. Table 4 shows the estimated treatment effect when the
autoregressive component is excluded from the regression.23
    In general, the estimated effect approximates the long-run, rather than the short-run,
effect—perhaps because the treatment effect approaches the long-run impact after only a
few days. In this context, the long-run treatment effect may be more policy-relevant. The
policy-maker is likely to be more interested in the stock of pollutants to which the population
is exposed than to the flow of pollutants on any given day, so the retrieved effect may be
of more policy relevance than the immediate effect. However, this aspect of the estimates
in Table 4 highlights that identification of the treatment effect in an RDiT setting is not
achieved narrowly at the threshold, but rather relies on observations away from the threshold.
    To uncover the true dynamic process, the researcher would need to include the lagged
dependent variable in her regression. These estimates are provided in the Appendix (Ta-
ble A7). As expected, the BIC-chosen global polynomial gives accurate estimates β̂ and α̂,
allowing the researcher to retrieve both the true short-run and long-run effects. The local
  23
     For these data, note the specifications in the local linear and augmented local linear columns are in
practice identical, since there are no controls to include the first step of the augmented local linear. In
contrast, if an AR(1) term is included in the first step, the two estimation procedures will not be identical;
see Appendix.



                                                             21
linear also performs well, although with noise (as expected) and a downward bias on α̂ (typ-
ical for autoregression estimation in small samples). Note that when the data are collapsed
to the monthly level, these two effects are not separable and the estimated treatment effect
is closer to the long-run effect.
       In this section we have explored how an autoregressive process ought to be considered
by the researcher.24 However, we have not yet discussed a closely-related phenomenon:
serial correlation in εit . The concentration of local pollutants may exhibit time dependence
either due to its own natural decay rate, or due to the persistence of factors that augment
or dissipate it. For example, ozone is created as a function of ambient air temperature,
which exhibits its own time dependence. The researcher needs to think carefully about serial
dependence in both εit and possibly yit (via AR1). If there is only serial dependence in εit , and
not autoregression, then including a lagged-dependent variable would be a mis-specification.
In short, time dependence in the data generating process may occur via different channels.
When deploying the RDiT approach, decisions that the researcher makes may affect both
the probability that the retrieved treatment effect estimate is biased, and also its proper
interpretation.


3.3       Sorting and Anticipation Effects

Finally, in a cross-sectional RD, a density test (e.g. McCrary (2008)) is a key check for sorting
behavior. It is generally used to rule out selection into or out of treatment, thus making
it unnecessary to further control for it. When time is the running variable, however, it is
generally not possible to test for such behavior around the threshold. While the researcher
can check for discontinuities in other covariates at the threshold, and for discontinuities in
the outcome variable at other thresholds, the researcher cannot check for discontinuities in
  24
    Of course, the dispersion of pollutants in the atmosphere cannot be completely modeled by the inclusion
of a lagged dependent variable. The dispersion is a function of weather (for instance, wind speeds and the
existence of a thermal inversion) and the properties of the specific chemical compound of interest. What
these simplified AR(1) simulations are meant to show is that dynamics in the endogenous variable introduce
a type of time-varying treatment effect, which the researcher should address explicitly.



                                                    22
the conditional density of the running variable. That the density of the running variable
(time) is uniform renders such tests logically irrelevant.
    Consider the hypothetical power plant example. In this RD, the outcome variable would
be air quality in a city, and the unit of observation would be a daily pollution monitor
reading in that city. One could imagine a type of sorting in which power plants change their
behavior to avoid the policy or to preemptively comply. For instance, some of the plants
could decide to install the emissions control device early. Thus the plant would be treated
in the pre-period—this is analogous to the test scores example of a canonical RD in which
an untreated student successfully changes her behavior in order to be treated. However, in
the RDiT case there is an important difference relating to the researcher’s ability to identify
this behavior. With a cross-sectional RD, one can test for these effects (via the McCrary
test, for example), but in RDiT with time-series data, it is untestable.
    As a result, estimates retrieved from RDiT are of a compound effect: the causal treatment
effect of interest (i.e. what we try to retrieve from, say, a randomized controlled trial) and
any unobserved sorting/anticipation/adaptation/avoidance effects that may exist but cannot
be tested for. The extent to which the results should be interpreted solely as the causal
treatment effect of interest depend on the researcher’s ability to make a compelling case that
the sorting effects are not present. Furthermore, the absence of these effects is a necessary
but insufficient condition for identification, as we discussed above.



4     Recommendations and Conclusion

We have demonstrated that the RDiT differs in conceptualization and in implementation
from the cross-sectional RD. Table 5 summarizes pitfalls that the RDiT researcher may en-
counter. Empirical researchers wishing to use RDiT ought to expose their assumptions to
many opportunities to fail. Below, we offer a checklist along the lines of Lee and Lemieux
(2010) applied to the context of RDiT. Recall that we have identified three main features of



                                              23
                        Table 5: Summary of Concerns for RDiT Practitioners
 Concern                              Intuition
 Unobservables correlated with time   Covariates are more important than in many cross-sectional RDs. Even with covariates
                                      included, bias is possible—for instance, a global polynomial control may overfit.

 Time-varying treatment effects       Mis-specification of the treatment effect will lead to bias, particularly when using a
                                      global polynomial control.

 Autoregressive properties            Short- and long-run treatment effects will differ. Unless the nature of autoregression
                                      is known, estimates could approximate the short- or long-run effects, or neither.

 Selection and strategic behavior     The running variable follows a uniform distribution across the discontinuity. It is thus
                                      impossible to test for sorting/selection around the threshold (e.g. the McCrary test).




the RDiT setting that may induce bias: time-varying treatment effects, autoregression, and
selection into or out of treatment. So, in addition to the standard cross-sectional RD diag-
nostics, researchers using RDiT should make every effort to test for and eliminate potential
bias from those sources. Our recommendations focus on these issues. While there is some
overlap with the suggestions from Lee and Lemieux (2010), the recommendations serve a
different purpose in the context of time-series data. Additional suggestions from Lee and
Lemieux (2010) should also be deployed whenever relevant.


   1. Plot the raw data or residuals after removing covariates (e.g., weather). Overlay the
       various polynomial and local linear controls. If results differ across alternate time
       trends, it may be a sign of time-varying treatment effects.

   2. Present several robustness checks. When using a global polynomial, recognize the
       possibility of overfitting. Show robustness to polynomial order and robustness to al-
       ternative local linear bandwidths.25

   3. Placebo tests. Estimate parallel RDs on nearby geographical areas that were not
       subject to the treatment, and using other dates.

   4. Plot a parallel RD estimated on control variables (e.g. weather, economic activity) to
       demonstrate continuity.
   25
      In addition to multiple columns for different regression specifications, a plot of estimated treatment
effects across bandwidths, as in Figure 18 of Lee and Lemieux (2010), is informative.


                                                           24
   5. Estimate a “donut” RD (removing observations near the threshold; see Barreca et al.
         (2011)) to mitigate concerns about short-run selection/anticipation/avoidance effects.

   6. Test for the presence of autoregression in the outcome variable of interest using pre-
         intervention data. If it is present, consider including the lagged dependent variable as
         a regressor, and consult the time-series literature for additional options.

   7. Consider deploying our “augmented local linear” methodology to increase power of
         the local linear specification. This two-step procedure uses the full sample to identify
         important regressors (e.g. temperature and various fixed effects), then estimates the
         conditioned second stage on a smaller sample bandwidth.26 This procedure eliminates
         the need for a global polynomial and the overfitting concerns that accompany its use.

Many of these strategies have been deployed by some of the papers we cite, although not in a
comprehensive way. Table 6 displays the proportion of the papers using these strategies. It
is worth noting that frequently the robustness check is mentioned but results are not shown;
we include these instances in our counts. Passing these diagnostic tests is necessary but
insufficient for identification, so consumers of RDiT should evaluate the evidence as they
would any quasi-experimental paper. There is no set of tests that, if passed, indicate that
the desired causal effect has been retrieved. Instead, one must assess the preponderance of
evidence, keeping in mind that certain features in the data-generating process will lead to
different potential biases (or require stronger assumptions).
       In this paper we have articulated reasons why using time as the running variable in a
regression discontinuity design, an increasingly popular empirical strategy, is worth closer ex-
amination and a deeper understanding. RDiT requires assumptions for identification that are
often strong and inherently untestable. When N = 1, RDiT approaches should be thought
of as being more like event studies or pre-post analyses than like randomized controlled tri-
als. Papers should state clearly the extent to which identification relies upon observations
  26
    Low power may be unavoidable in the augmented local linear specification. It is important to recognize
that this is simply a feature of an RDiT that has little or no cross-sectional variation in the treatment status.

                                                       25
                     Table 6: Robustness Checks Used in the Literature
               Check                                                          Proportion of Papers
               Plot of data                                                   0.79
               Robustness: bandwidth or polynomial order                      0.79
               Placebo                                                        0.29
               RD on continuous controls (e.g. weather, economic activity)    0.36
               Donut RD                                                       0.14
               Test for autoregression                                        0.14
               Augmented local linear                                         0.14
                Note: We count the proportion of papers conducting each check, of the fourteen
                papers listed in Table 1. We include checks mentioned by the authors but not shown.
                It is worth noting that while 79 percent of the papers conduct some sort of robustness
                check on either the bandwidth or the polynomial order, only 43 percent conduct checks
                on both the bandwidth and the polynomial order. Also, several papers conduct
                sensitivity to a polynomial of e.g. order 7 versus 8 but not a lower order; both
                higher-order specifications may overfit.



far away from the threshold, and should explore whatever options are available to mitigate
concerns about autoregression and dynamic behavior. While regression discontinuity designs
have been a tremendously valuable addition to the suite of identification strategies, we must
also recognize that the RDiT framework strays in important ways from the experimental
ideal.




                                                       26
References
Anderson, Michael L, “Subways, Strikes, and Slowdowns: The Impacts of Public Transit
 on Traffic Congestion,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (9), 2763–2796.
Auffhammer, Maximilian and Ryan Kellogg, “Clearing the Air? The Effects of Gaso-
 line Content Regulation on Air Quality,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (6),
 2687–2722.
Barreca, Alan, Melanie Guldi, Jason Lindo, and Glen Waddell, “Saving Babies?
 Revisiting the Effect of Very Low Birth Weight Classification,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 2011, 126 (4), 2117–2123.
Bento, Antonio, Daniel Kaffine, Kevin Roth, and Matthew Zaragoza-Watkins,
 “The Effects of Regulation in the Presence of Multiple Unpriced Externalities: Evidence
 from the Transportation Sector,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2014, 6
 (3), 1–29.
Burger, Nicholas E, Daniel T Kaffine, and Bo Yu, “Did California’s Hand-Held Cell
 Phone Ban Reduce Accidents?,” Transportation Research Part A, 2014, 66 (1), 162–172.
Busse, Meghan, Jorge Silva-Risso, and Florian Zettelmeyer, “$1,000 Cash Back:
 The Pass-Through of Auto Manufacturer Promotions,” American Economic Review, 2006,
 96 (4), 1253–1270.
Busse, Meghan R, Duncan I Simester, and Florian Zettelmeyer, ““The Best Price
 You’ll Ever Get”: The 2005 Employee Discount Pricing Promotions in the U.S. Automobile
 Industry,” Marketing Science, 2010, 29 (2), 268–290.
Chen, Xinlei, George John, Julie M Hays, Arthur V Hill, and Susan E Geurs,
 “Learning from a Service Guarantee Quasi-Experiment,” Marketing Research, 2009, 46
 (5), 584–596.
Chen, Yihsu and Alexander Whalley, “Green Infrastructure: The Effects of Urban Rail
 Transit on Air Quality,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2012, 4 (1).
Dasgupta, Susmita, Benoit Laplante, and Nlandu Mamingi, “Pollution and Capital
 Markets in Developing Countries,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
 2001, 42, 310–335.
Davis, Lucas W, “The Effect of Driving Restrictions on Air Quality in Mexico City,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 2008, 116 (1), 38–81.
   and Matthew E Kahn, “International Trade in Used Vehicles: The Environmental
  Consequences of NAFTA,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2010, 2 (4),
  58–82.
DePaola, Maria, Vincenzo Scoppa, and Mariatiziana Falcone, “The Deterrent Ef-
 fects of the Penalty Points System for Driving Offences: A Regression Discontinuity Ap-
 proach,” Empirical Economics, 2013, 45, 965–985.

                                           27
Gallego, Francisco, Juan-Pablo Montero, and Christian Salas, “The Effect of Trans-
 port Policies on Car Use: Evidence from Latin American Cities,” Journal of Public Eco-
 nomics, 2013, 107, 47–62.

Gelman, Andrew and Guido Imbens, “Why High-Order Polynomials Should Not Be
 Used in Regression Discontinuity Designs,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,
 2017.

Grainger, Corbett and Christopher Costello, “Capitalizing Property Rights Insecurity
 in Natural Resource Assets,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2014,
 67, 224–240.

Hahn, Jinyong, Petra Todd, and Wilbert Van der Klaauw, “Identification and
 Estimation of Treatment Effects with a Regression-Discontinuity Design,” Econometrica,
 2001, 69 (1), 201–209.

Hamilton, James T, “Pollution as News: Media and Stock Market Reactions to the Toxics
 Release Inventory Data,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 1995,
 28, 98–113.

Imbens, Guido W and Thomas Lemieux, “Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide
  to Practice,” Journal of Econometrics, 2008, 142, 615–635.

Ito, Koichiro, “Asymmetric Incentives in Subsidies: Evidence from a Large-Scale Elec-
  tricity Rebate Program,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2015, 7 (3),
  209–237.

Jacob, Robin, Pei Zhu, Marie-Andree Somers, and Howard Bloom, “A Practical
  Guide to Regression Discontinuity,” MDRC Working Paper, 2012.

Konar, Shameek and Mark A. Cohen, “Information As Regulation: The Effect of Com-
 munity Right to Know Laws on Toxic Emissions,” Journal of Environmental Economics
 and Management, 1997, 32, 109–124.

Lang, Corey and Matthew Siler, “Engineering Estimates versus Impact Evaluation of
  Energy Efficiency Projects: Regression Discontinuity Evidence from a Case Study,” Energy
  Policy, 2013, 61, 360–370.

Lee, David S, “Randomized Experiments from Non-Random Selection in U.S. House Elec-
  tions,” Journal of Econometrics, 2008, 142, 675–697.

Lee, Davis S and Thomas Lemieux, “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics,”
  Journal of Economic Literature, 2010, 48, 281–355.

MacDonell, Margaret, Michelle Raymond, David Wyker, Molly Fin-
 ster, Young-Soo Chang, Thomas Raymond, Bianca Temple, Mar-
 cienne Scofield, Dena Vallano, Emily Snyder, and Ron. Williams,
 “Mobile Sensors and Applications for Air Pollutants,”                 Accessed from
 https://cfpub.epa.gov/si/si public record report.cfm?dirEntryId=273979 2014.    U.S.

                                           28
  Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC, EPA/600/R-14/051 (NTIS PB2014
  105955).

McCrary, Justin, “Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discontinuity
 Design: A Density Test,” Journal of Econometrics, 2008, 142, 698–714.

Roberts, Wolfram and Michael J Schlenker, “Nonlinear Temperature Effects Indicate
 Severe Damages to U.S. Crop Yields under Climate Change,” Proceedings of the National
 Academy of Sciences, 2009, 106 (37), 15594–15598.

Rubin, Donald B., “Estimating Causal Effects of Treatments in Randomized and Non-
 randomized Studies,” Journal of Educational Psychology, 1974, 66 (5), 688–701.

Shadish, William R, Thomas D Cook, and Donald T Campbell, Experimental and
  Quasi-Experimental Designs for Generalized Causal Inference, Boston: Houghton Mifflin
  Company, 2002.

Splawa-Neyman, Jerzy, “On the Application of Probability Theory to Agricultural Ex-
  periments. Essay on Principles. Section 9,” Statistical Science, 1923 [1990], 5 (4), 465–472.
  Trans. D. M. Dabrowska and T. P. Speed.




                                              29
Online Appendix: Regression Discontinuity in Time

Catherine Hausman and David S. Rapson

In this Appendix, we provide additional tables and figures.
   Figure A1 shows the air quality data used in the Monte Carlo simulations for a represen-
tative monitor. The true logged ambient ozone concentration (daily maximum, in parts per
million) is shown in grey. The impact of the simulated treatment effect is shown in black,
for the post-period. Table A1 provides summary statistics for the air quality data used in
the Monte Carlo simulations. The data are from Auffhammer and Kellogg (2011).
   As described in the text, we randomly select ten treatment start dates for the Monte
Carlo simulations using air quality data. The dates selected are as follows:

   09   Aug 1993
   15   Jul 1994
   26   Oct 1994
   21   Jan 1995
   05   Oct 1995
   14   Jul 1996
   17   Jul 1997
   15   Aug 1999
   27   Oct 2000
   04   Dec 2002
   Figure A2 shows RDiT plots for the specifications used throughout the paper. All six
panels shows residuals after controls have been removed (grey circles) and a line fitted to
those residuals (black line). Panel A uses a global polynomial approach and Panel B uses
separate polynomials in the pre- and post-periods. Panel C uses a local linear approach
with 30 days of observations on either side of the threshold. Panels D and E use a two-step
augmented local linear approach, where controls are estimated and residuals saved using the
sample as a whole (Panel D) while the treatment effect is estimated with just 30 days of
observations on either side of the threshold (Panel E). In Panel F, observations are collapsed
to monthly averages before the regression is estimated. All regressions include weather and
seasonality controls.

                                             A-1
    The next set of figures and tables examine results under time-varying treatment effects.
The main text shows (Table 3) the average estimated treatment effect when the treatment
sharply decays after one year, for five different empirical specifications. In this Appendix,
we examine how this estimate varies with the length of the treatment. Table A2 is identical
to Table 3, but for a sharp decay of one month, rather than one year. As can be seen here,
whether the estimated treatment effect is too small or too large depends on both the true
treatment length and the specification chosen by the researcher.
    Next, we focus on the global polynomial specification shown in Column 1 of Table 3.
Figure A3 shows the mean estimated treatment effect for different treatment lengths, when
the global polynomial is of order 1. For comparison, it also shows the true immediate effect
of -0.2 and the true long-run effect of 0. The estimated effect is close to the true effect
for a long-lasting treatment (one that lasts the entire post period). For a very short-lived
treatment, the estimated effect is bounded by the short-run and long-run effects. However,
for a range of treatment lengths, the estimated effect is not bounded by the short-run and
long-run effects; that is, it is not a weighted average of the treatment effect across time.
Rather, the estimate is larger (in absolute terms) than either the short-run or long-run
effect.
    Next, Figure A4 shows a similar plot for 9 different polynomial orders. The estimate
depends on the polynomial order, as can be seen in this figure. Finally, Figure A5 shows the
estimate for the BIC-chosen polynomial.
    The assumption that the treatment sharply decays may be unrealistic. We next consider
instead a smooth decay of the treatment effect, which one might expect with, for instance,
adaption behavior in a general equilibrium framework. To approximate this smooth decay,
we use the generalized logistic function to represent an S-shaped decay path. (We do not
use the simpler exponential decay function, because it initially decays sharply, and here we




                                            A-2
aim to demonstrate how the RDiT behaves under smooth decay.) This function is given by:

                                             K −A
                          A+                                                              (1)
                               (1 + Q · exp(−B ∗ (date − M )))1/v

We fix A, the lower asymptote, at 0; K, the upper asymptote, at 1; v at 0.5 and Q at 0.01.
We vary the parameters B and M , which together affect how quickly the treatment decays.
Figure A6 shows four representative combinations of B and M . In simulations, we allow the
B parameter to vary from -0.005 to -0.015, and the M parameter to vary from 0 to 1000.
We only include decay functions for which the true treatment value has decayed by at least
90 percent by the end date, for ease of comparison with the sharp decay parameterization.
This leaves us with a total of 23 parameter combinations.
   Table A3 shows the mean estimated treatment effect for the different parameterizations
of the smooth decay function, when the researcher uses a global polynomial framework with a
BIC-chosen polynomial. The estimate depends on the shape of the decay function, with some
estimates lying between the true short-run and long-run effects, and with other estimates
larger (in absolute value) than either the short-run or long-run effect.
   As another form of time-varying treatment, we next consider a smooth phase-in of the
treatment. Here we assume that the treatment ramps up linearly for a given period, then is
constant for the rest of the post-period. Again, the researcher does not know that the treat-
ment effect varies over time, and she models a standard RDiT with a post-treatment dummy.
Table A4 shows results for a seven-day linear ramp-up. Here, the local linear regression esti-
mates something approximating the short-run effect, while the global polynomial estimates
are closer to the long-run effect, although this may be specific to the parameterization and
data we use.
   Finally, we show additional results relating to the autoregressive processes described in
the main text. Table A5 shows estimated autoregressive parameters for six pollutants in
the U.S. For each pollutant, we obtain daily monitor readings for 2004-2005 from the EPA



                                             A-3
(https://aqs.epa.gov/aqsweb/documents/data mart welcome.html). We obtain temperature
and windspeed data from the same source. For each monitor-pollutant pair, we regress the
daily pollution level on the lagged pollution level and a set of weather and seasonality
controls. These include a cubic function of the daily mean temperature, a cubic function of
windspeed, the interaction of mean temperature and windspeed, day of week effects, month
effects, and a cubic time trend. Standard errors are clustered by sample week. Overall, we
obtain estimates of the AR(1) parameter of 0.3 to 0.5, varying by pollutant.27
    Unfortunately, the EPA data do not include precipitation. To verify that results are
not sensitive to the inclusion of precipitation, we match the air quality data to gridded
daily weather data from Roberts and Schlenker (2009). We limit the number of states used
for this sample as the matching procedure is computationally burdensome. We use the six
states with the greatest number of PM2.5 monitors: California, Florida, North Carolina,
Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Texas. We again include windspeed from the EPA as a control.
Where windspeed is missing, we use a daily state-level average. Controls include a cubic
function of the daily mean temperature, a cubic function of windspeed, a cubic function
of precipitation, the interaction of mean temperature and windspeed, the interaction of
temperature and precipitation, day of week effects, month effects, and a cubic time trend.
Standard errors are clustered by sample week. Results, shown in Table A6, are very similar
to the results presented in the previous table.
    While the main text (Table 4) showed the impact of incorrectly dropping an autoregres-
sive term, Table A7 shows estimation results when the AR(1) term is included. In general,
this performs better (as expected) than dropping the AR(1) term, since both short-run and
long-run effects can be calculated. The local linear (Column 3) gives estimates of the autore-
gressive term that are too small, as is common with short time series, but the augmented
local linear (Column 4) performs better.


  27
     The coefficient in the ozone equation is surprising, given ozone’s short half-life; it is possible that serially
correlated unobservables are driving that estimate.


                                                        A-4
Figure A1: Air Quality Data with and without Simu-
lated Treatment




Note: This figure plots the true air quality data for a representative monitor
(in Louisiana) in grey, and the simulated impact (in black) of a treatment
effect of -0.2.




                                    A-5
                       Figure A2: Representative RDiT Graphs, No Confounders




Note: These figures plot regression discontinuity in time estimates for a single representative monitor, with separate panels
for different empirical specifications. All six panels shows residuals after controls have been removed (grey circles) and a line
fitted to those residuals (black line). Panel A uses a global polynomial approach and Panel B uses separate polynomials in the
pre- and post-periods (for this particular monitor, the BIC-chosen polynomial is of low order and thus appears approximately
horizontal. Across all monitors, the average polynomial chosen is given in Table 2). Panel C uses a local linear approach with
30 days of observations on either side of the threshold. Panels D and E use a two-step augmented local linear approach, where
controls are estimated and residuals saved using the sample as a whole (Panel D) while the treatment effect is estimated with
just 30 days of observations on either side of the threshold (Panel E). In Panel F, observations are collapsed to monthly averages
before the regression is estimated. All regressions include weather and seasonality controls, as described in the text.




                                                              A-6
Figure A3: Mean Estimated Treatment Effect, RDiT
Estimate using Polynomial Order 1, When Treatment
Sharply Decays




Note: This figure plots the mean estimated treatment effect as the true
treatment length varies (across the x-axis). The treatment effect is esti-
mated using an RDiT framework with global polynomial of order 1, and the
researcher is assumed to not know that the true treatment decays after x
days.




Figure A4: Mean Estimated Treatment Effect, RDiT
Estimate using Polynomial Orders 1 through 9, When
Treatment Sharply Decays




Note: This figure plots the mean estimated treatment effect as the true
treatment length varies (across the x-axis). The treatment effect is estimated
using an RDiT framework with global polynomial of varying order (across the
panels), and the researcher is assumed to not know that the true treatment
decays after x days.



                                    A-7
Figure A5: Mean Estimated Treatment Effect, RDiT
Estimate using BIC-Chosen Polynomial Order, When
Treatment Sharply Decays




Note: This figure plots the mean estimated treatment effect as the true
treatment length varies (across the x-axis). The treatment effect is estimated
using an RDiT framework with global polynomial with BIC-chosen order,
and the researcher is assumed to not know that the true treatment decays
after x days.




   Figure A6: Generalized Logistic Decay Functions




Note: This figure plots four logistic decay functions, using four of the com-
binations of parameters B and M for which the true treatment value has
decayed by at least 90 percent by the end date (see text for details).




                                    A-8
                          Table A1: Air Quality Data Summary Statistics

                     Variable                       Obs       Mean        Std. Dev.     Min      Max


                     Ozone                        682,130      0.046        0.019       0.000    0.250
                     Daily Min. Temperature       682,130        51          18          -30       96
                     Daily Max. Temperature       682,130        72           19         -14      121
                     Daily Mean Temperature       682,130        62          18          -21      105
                     Rain                         682,121       0.11        0.37        0.00     18.40
                     Snow                         681,654       0.38        4.19        0.00    336.94

                       Note: This table describes the air quality data used for the Monte Carlo
                       simulations. Observations are by day (t=6,574) and monitoring station
                       (n=108). Coverage is 1989 to 2006 for the U.S., excepting California. Ozone
                       is the daily maximum concentration, in parts per million. Temperature is in
                       degrees Fahrenheit. Precipitation is in inches.




Table A2: Treatment Sharply Decays after One Month, βinitial = −0.2 and βlong−run = 0

                                   BIC-chosen        BIC-chosen                                 Augmented    Pre/Post,
                                     Global           Separate                Local               Local      Monthly
                                   Polynomial        Polynomials              Linear              Linear    Observations


                                                                       A. Air Quality Data

Estimated Beta                        -0.05                -0.05               -0.20               -0.19       <0.01
                                     (0.11)               (0.12)              (0.29)              (0.26)       (0.11)

Observations                          2822                2822                  59                 59           96
                                      (72)                (72)                 (3.5)              (3.5)        (1.0)

Polynomial Order                       4.1             1.7, 1.7                     -               -            -
                                      (2.9)          (0.8), (0.8)


                                                                       B. Simulated Data

Estimated Beta                        -0.02                -0.02               -0.20               -0.20       <0.01
                                     (0.07)               (0.08)              (0.51)              (0.51)       (0.08)

Observations                          2921                2921                  61                 61           96
                                        -                   -                    -                  -            -

Polynomial Order                       1.0             1.0, 1.0                     -               -            -
                                     (0.05)         (0.03), (0.09)


 Note: Each column of this table reports the mean treatment effect coefficient and number of observations across 2,080
 regressions—see Table 2 for details. In contrast to Table 2, the true treatment effect of -0.2 lasts only one month, then
 sharply drops to 0.




                                                          A-9
Table A3: Treatment Smoothly Decays, βinitial =
−0.2 and βlong−run = 0

                         A. Air Quality Data

                                    M parameter

 B parameter       0       200      400        600     800      1000

 -0.005          -0.21     -0.21
                (0.11)    (0.11)

 -0.0075         -0.22     -0.21    -0.21     -0.21
                (0.11)    (0.11)   (0.11)    (0.11)

 -0.01           -0.23     -0.22    -0.21     -0.21    -0.21
                (0.11)    (0.11)   (0.11)    (0.11)   (0.11)

 -0.0125         -0.23     -0.23    -0.21     -0.21    -0.21     -0.20
                (0.12)    (0.11)   (0.11)    (0.11)   (0.11)    (0.11)

 -0.015          -0.22     -0.24    -0.21     -0.20    -0.21     -0.20
                (0.12)    (0.11)   (0.12)    (0.11)   (0.11)    (0.11)

                         B. Simulated Data

                                    M parameter

 B parameter       0       200      400        600     800      1000

 -0.005          -0.23     -0.24
                (0.08)    (0.08)

 -0.0075         -0.19     -0.23    -0.25     -0.25
                (0.08)    (0.08)   (0.08)    (0.08)

 -0.01           -0.16     -0.21    -0.25     -0.26    -0.25
                (0.08)    (0.08)   (0.08)    (0.08)   (0.08)

 -0.0125         -0.13     -0.20    -0.24     -0.26    -0.26     -0.23
                (0.08)    (0.08)   (0.08)    (0.08)   (0.08)    (0.08)

 -0.015          -0.11     -0.19    -0.23     -0.26    -0.26     -0.24
                (0.08)    (0.08)   (0.08)    (0.08)   (0.08)    (0.08)

  Note: Each cell of this table reports the mean treatment effect
  coefficient across 1,080 regressions (Panel A) or 1,000 regressions
  (Panel B). The specification is identical to that of Column 1 in Table
  2: a global polynomial using eight years of data and controlling for
  weather and seasonality. In contrast to Table 2, the true treatment
  effect of -0.2 smoothly decays towards 0, following a generalized
  logistic decay function. The B and M parameters govern the speed
  and shape of this decay; see Figure A6. We only include parameter
  combinations for which the true treatment value has decayed by at
  least 90 percent by the end date, for ease of comparison with the
  sharp decay parameterization.




                                 A-10
               Table A4: Treatment Has 7-Day Linear Ramp-Up, βlong−run = −0.2

                                  BIC-chosen           BIC-chosen                               Augmented    Pre/Post,
                                    Global              Separate                Local             Local      Monthly
                                  Polynomial           Polynomials              Linear            Linear    Observations


                                                                       A. Air Quality Data

Estimated Beta                         -0.20               -0.20                 -0.11             -0.11        -0.19
                                      (0.11)              (0.11)                (0.29)            (0.26)       (0.10)

Observations                          2822                 2822                  59                59           96
                                      (72)                 (72)                 (3.5)             (3.5)        (1.0)

Polynomial Order                       4.0                1.7, 1.6                -                 -            -
                                      (2.9)             (0.8), (0.8)


                                                                        B. Simulated Data

Estimated Beta                         -0.20               -0.20                 -0.12             -0.12        -0.19
                                      (0.07)              (0.08)                (0.51)            (0.51)       (0.08)

Observations                          2921                 2921                  61                61           96
                                        -                    -                    -                 -            -

Polynomial Order                        1.0             1.0, 1.0                  -                 -            -
                                      (0.05)         (0.03), (0.06)


 Note: Each column of this table reports the mean treatment effect coefficient and number of observations across 2,080
 regressions—see Table 2 for details. In contrast to Table 2, the true treatment effect is assumed to ramp-up in a linear
 way, beginning at a known start date. Following the linear phase-in, the treatment is a constant -0.2.




                          Table A5: Estimated Autoregressive Parameters

                                                CO          NO2        Ozone    PM10     PM2.5     SO2


                   Lagged pollution             0.42        0.35        0.41     0.33     0.51      0.30
                                               (0.05)      (0.04)      (0.05)   (0.06)   (0.06)    (0.06)

                   Monitors                     101         148        280        28      29       101
                   Observations per monitor     584         581        573       450     490       562
                   R2                           0.61        0.67       0.71      0.58    0.61      0.40

                    Note: This table reports the mean autoregressive coefficient, the mean standard
                    error of that coefficient, the mean number of observations, and the mean R2 value
                    from 687 individual regressions at the level of a monitor by pollutant, using daily
                    data. Dates are 2004-2005. Controls include a cubic function of the daily mean
                    temperature, a cubic function of windspeed, the interaction of mean tempera-
                    ture and windspeed, day of week effects, month effects, and a cubic time trend.
                    Standard errors are clustered by sample week.




                                                          A-11
                Table A6: Robustness Check: Estimated Autoregressive Pa-
                rameters

                                                 CO       NO2       Ozone    PM10       PM2.5       SO2


                 Lagged pollution                0.42     0.35       0.48     0.29       0.57       0.37
                                                (0.05)   (0.04)     (0.04)   (0.06)     (0.07)     (0.06)

                 Monitors                        82       123       194       24         23          48
                 Observations per monitor       624       647       654      531        499         624
                 R2                             0.62      0.69      0.74     0.52       0.64        0.46

                   Note: This table reports the mean autoregressive coefficient, the mean standard
                   error of that coefficient, the mean number of observations, and the mean R2 value
                   from 494 individual regressions at the level of a monitor by pollutant, using daily
                   data. Dates are 2004-2005. For computational ease, only monitors from six states
                   are included: California, Florida, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Texas
                   (the six states with the greatest number of PM2.5 monitors). Controls include
                   a cubic function of the daily mean temperature, a cubic function of windspeed,
                   a cubic function of precipitation, the interaction of mean temperature and wind-
                   speed, the interaction of temperature and precipitation, day of week effects, month
                   effects, and a cubic time trend. Where windspeed data are missing, a state-level
                   daily average has been used. Standard errors are clustered by sample week.



                                    Table A7: Including AR(1) Term

                                    BIC-chosen           BIC-chosen                              Augmented    Pre/Post,
                                      Global              Separate            Local                Local      Monthly
                                    Polynomial           Polynomials          Linear               Linear    Observations


AR(1)
parameter α

0.1           Estimated beta            -0.20               -0.20               -0.24               -0.22        -0.22
                                       (0.07)              (0.08)              (0.53)              (0.49)       (0.09)
              Estimated alpha            0.10               0.10                 0.04               0.11         -0.03
                                       (0.02)              (0.02)              (0.13)              (0.02)       (0.10)

0.3           Estimated beta            -0.20               -0.20               -0.25               -0.22        -0.28
                                       (0.07)              (0.08)              (0.55)              (0.49)       (0.11)
              Estimated alpha           0.30                0.30                 0.23               0.31         -0.02
                                       (0.02)              (0.02)              (0.13)              (0.02)       (0.10)

0.5           Estimated beta            -0.20               -0.20               -0.26               -0.22        -0.39
                                       (0.07)              (0.08)              (0.58)              (0.49)       (0.15)
              Estimated alpha           0.50                0.50                 0.41               0.51         -0.01
                                       (0.02)              (0.02)              (0.12)              (0.02)       (0.10)

0.7           Estimated beta            -0.20               -0.20               -0.29               -0.22        -0.64
                                       (0.08)              (0.08)              (0.64)              (0.49)       (0.25)
              Estimated alpha           0.70                0.70                 0.59               0.72          0.02
                                       (0.01)              (0.01)              (0.11)              (0.01)       (0.10)

0.9           Estimated beta            -0.21               -0.21               -0.32               -0.22        -1.65
                                       (0.08)              (0.08)              (0.73)              (0.49)       (0.64)
              Estimated alpha           0.90                0.90                 0.76               0.92          0.16
                                       (0.01)              (0.01)              (0.10)              (0.01)       (0.10)

 Note: Each column of this table reports the mean treatment effect coefficient and number of observations across 1,000
 regressions, matching Table 4. In contrast to Table 4, the researcher correctly models the AR(1) process.



                                                         A-12
