                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              SEASONALITY, COST SHOCKS,
                            AND THE PRODUCTION SMOOTHING
                                MODEL OF INVENTORIES




                                  Jeffrey A. Miron

                                 Stephen P. Zeldes




                              Working Paper No. 2360




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 1987




The authors are grateful for helpful comments by Andrew Abel, Olivier Blanchard,
Alan Blinder, John Campbell, Larry Christiano, Angus Deaton, Martin Eichenbaum,
Stanley Fischer, Marvin Goodfriend, Tryphon Kollintzas, Louis Maccini, Trish Mosser,
Chris Sims, Larry Summers, Ken West, members of the Macro Lunch Group at the
University of Pennsylvania, two referees, and seminar participants at workshops
at Michigan, Princeton, Johns Hopkins, Rochester, MacMaster, Northwestern, Econo-
metric Society/NORC, and FRB Minneapolis and Philadelphia; and for excellent research
assistance by Edward Gold. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
programs in Economic Fluctuations and Financial Markets and Monetary Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                        NBER Working Paper #2360
                                                        August 1987


                             Seasonality, Cost Shocks, and the
                         Production Smoothing Model of Inventories


                                         ABSTRACT
        A great deal of research on the empirical behavior of inventories
   examines some variant of the production smoothing model of finished goods
   inventories. The overall assessment of this model that exists in the
   literature is quite negative: there is little evidence that manufacturers
   hold inventories of finished goods in order to smooth production patterns.

        This paper examines whether this negative assessment of the model is due
   to one or both of two features: costs shocks and seasonal fluctuations. The
   reason for considering costs shocks is that if firms are buffetted more by
   cost shocks than demand shocks, production should optimally be more variable
   than sales. The reasons for considering seasonal fluctuations are that
   seasonal fluctuations account for a major portion of the variance in
   production and sales, that seasonal fluctuations are precisely the kinds of
   fluctuations that producers should most easily smooth, and that seasonally
   adjusted data is likely to produce spurious rejections of the production
   smoothing model even when it is correct.

        We integrate cost shocks and seasonal fluctuations into the analysis of
   the production smoothing model in three steps. First, we present a general
  production smoothing model of inventory investment that is consistent with
  both seasonal and non-seasonal fluctuations in production, sales, and
  inventories. The model allows for both observable and unobservable changes in
  marginal costs. Second, we estimate this model using both seasonally adjusted
  and seasonally unadjusted data plus seasonal dummies. The goal here is to
  determine whether the incorrect use of seasonally adjusted data has been
  responsible for the rejections of the production smoothing model reported in
  previous studies. The third part of our approach is to explicitly examine the
  seasonal movements in the data. We test whether the residual from an Euler
  equation is uncorrelated with the seasonal component of contemporaneous
  sales. Even if unobservable seasonal cost shocks make the seasonal variation
  in output greater than that in sales, the timing of the resulting seasonal
  movements in output should not necessarily match that of sales.

       The results of our empirical work provide a strong negative report on the
  production smoothing model, even when it includes cost shocks and seasonal
  fluctuations. At both seasonal and non-seasonal frequencies, there appears to
  be little evidence that firms hold inventories in order to smooth
  production. A striking piece of evidence is that in most industries the
  seasonal in production closely matches the seasonal in shipments, even after
  accounting for the movements in interest rates, input prices, and the weather.
Jeffrey A. Miron                                      Stephen P. Zeldes
Economics Department                                  Department of Finance
University of Michigan                                The Wharton School
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
                                                      University of Pennsylvania
                                                      Philadelphia, PA 19104—6367
 1. Introdctjon

        A great deal of research on the empirical behavior of inventories

 examines some variant of the production smoothing model of finished goods

 inventories. Blinder (1986a) emphasizes that, in the absence of cost shocks,

 the model implies that the variance of production should be less than the

 variance of sales, an inequality that is violated for manufacturing as a whole

 and most 2-digit industries. West (1986) derives a variance bounds test that

 extends this inequality in a number of ways and also finds that the data

 reject the model. Both Blinder and West conclude that there is strong

 evidence against the production smoothing model. Other authors, such as

Blanchard (1983), Eichenbaum (19811), and Christiano and Eichenbaum (1986),

present evidence that is less unfavorable to the model, but they reject it as

well.

     This paper examines the extent to which the negative assessment of the

model is due to two features: cost shocks and seasonal fluctuations. Blinder

(1986a) and West (1986) both note that the presence of cost shocks could

explain the rejections that they report, and Blinder (1986b), Maccini and

Rossana (198)4), Eichenbaum (19811), and Christiano and Eichenbaum (1986) test

the model in the presence of cost shocks, with partial success. The reason

for considering these shocks is simply that if firms are buffetted more by

cost shocks than demand shocks, production should optimally be more variable

than sales.

     Most of the empirical work on the production smoothing model uses data

adjusted by the X-11 seasonal adjustment routine. This includes studies by

Blinder (1986a, 1986b), Eichenbauni (198)4), and Maccini and Rossana (19811).

Blancha.rd (1983), Reagan and Sheehan (1985), and West (1986) begin with the

seasonally unadjusted data and then adjust the data with seasonal dummies.
                                     —2—



Few studies examine whether the seasonal fluctuations themselves are

consistent with the model of inventories. Exceptions are Ward (1978), who

finds evidence that firms alter production rates differently in response to

seasonal versus nonseasonal variations in demand; West (1986), who includes a

version of his variance bounds test based on both the seasonal and non-

seasonal variations in the data; and Ghali (1987), who uses data from the

Portland Cement industry and finds that seasonal adjustment of the data is an

important factor in the rejection of the production smoothing model.2

     There are several reasons to think that using seasonally adjusted data to

test inventory models is problematic. To begin with, seasonal fluctuations

account for a major portion of the variation in production, shipments, and

inventories. Table 1 shows the seasonal, non-seasonal, and total variance of

the logarithmic rate of growth of production and shipments, for six 2-digit

manufacturing industries." For both variables, seasonal variation accounts

for more than half of the total variance in most industries. Any analysis of

production/inventory behavior that excludes seasonality at best explains only

part of the story and fails to exploit much of the variation in the data.




     2lrvine (1981) uses seasonally unadjusted data, with no seasonal dummies,
to examine retail inventory behavior and the cost of capital.

     3Table 1 includes results based on two different measures of
production. See Section 1 for details.

     This table is similar to Table 2 in Blanchard (1983). As he points out,
since the seasonal component is deterministic, it has no variance in the
statistical sense. The numbers reported here for the seasonal variances are
the average squared deviations of the twelve seasonal dununy coefficients from
the sample mean of these coefficients.
                                        -3-


       Seasonal fluctuations are likely to be particularly useful in
                                                                     examining
  the production smoothing model because they are anticipated. Any test of the

 production smoothing model involves a set of maintained hypotheses, one of

 which is the rationality hypothesis. Rejections of the model, therefore, are

 not usually informative as to which aspect of the joint hypothesis has been

 rejected. When a rational expectations model is applied to seasonal

 fluctuations, however, it seems reasonable to take the rationality hypothesis

 as correct, since if anything is correctly anticipated by agents seasonal

 fluctuations ought to be. Applying the production smoothing model to seasonal

 fluctuations may help determine which aspects of the model, if any, fail.

      A final reason to avoid the use of seasonally adjusted data is that,

 since the true model must apply to the seasonally unadjusted data, the use of

 adjusted data is likely to lead to rejection of the model even when it is

 correct.5 This is especially the case with data adjusted by the Census X—11

method because this technique makes the adjusted data a two-sided moving

average of the underlying unadjusted data.6' Therefore, the key implication

of most rational expectations models, that the error term should be

uncorrelated with lagged information, need not hold in the adjusted data even




     5Sunimers (1981) emphasizes this point.

           is not literally a two-sided moving average filter. Rather, it can
be well approximated by such filters. For more on this point, see Cleveland
and Tiao (1976) and Wallis (19714).

     7For example, Miron (1986) finds that the use of X-11 adjusted data is
partially responsible for rejections of consumption Euler equations.
                                     -U-




if it does hold in the unadjusted data.8 If the data are adjusted by some

other method, such as seasonal dummies, then the time series properties of the

adjusted data are not altered as radically as they are with X-11.

     We integrate cost shocks and seasonal fluctuations into the analysis of

the production smoothing model in three steps. First, we present a general

production smoothing model of inventory investment that is consistent with

both seasonal and non-seasonal fluctuations in production, sales, and

inventories. The model allows for both observable and unobservable changes in

marginal costs (cost shocks). The observables include wages, energy prices,

raw materials prices, and interest rates, as well as weather variables

(temperature and precipitation).9 We examine a firm's cost minimization

problem, so our analysis is robust to various assumptions about the

competitiveness of the firm's output market.   A key implication of the model

is that, for any firm that can hold finished goods inventories at finite cost,

the marginal cost of producing an additional unit of output today and holding

it in inventories until next period must equal the expected
                                                              marginal cost of

producing that unit next period. With standard types of auxiliary assumptions

about functional forms and identification, the model leads to an estimable

Euler equation relating the rate of growth of production to the rate of growth

of input prices, the level of inventories, and the interest rate. We estimate

this Euler equation and test the overidentifying restrictions implied by the

model, using data on six 2-digit manufacturing industries.




      8See Sargent (1978).

      9Maccini and Rossana (198U) estimate a different style model of inventory
 accumulation (a general flexible accelerator model) using data on aggregate
 durables and non-durables inventory accumulation in which they include wages,
 energy costs, interest rates, and raw materials prices. They found that only
 raw materials prices had significant effects in their model.
                                       -5—




       The second part of our approach is to perform the exact same estimations

 and tests of the above model using both
                                           seasonally adjusted and unadjusted
 data.1° The goal here is to determine whether the incorrect use of seasonally

 adjusted data is responsible for the rejections of the production
                                                                     smoothing
 model reported in previous studies.

      The third part of our approach is to explicitly examine the seasonal

 movements in the data. Since the predictable seasonal movement in demand is

 exactly the variation that should be most easily smoothed by firms, tests of

 the model at seasonal frequencies are particularly powerful. We therefore

 test whether the residual from the Euler equation is uncorrelated with the

 seasonal component of contemporaneous sales. Even if unobservable seasonal

 cost shocks make the seasonal variation in output greater than that of sales,

 the timing of the resulting seasonal movements in output should not match that

of sales.

     The estimation strategy that we employ involves a number of important

identifying restrictions about the shifts over time in the firm's production

function. We include a number of observable variables that account for the

shifts in technology. There may, however, be additional shifts that are not

accounted for by the measured variables, and these unobserved productivity

shifts will appear in the error term of the equation that we estimate.     In

order to consistently estimate the Euler equation, therefore, we need to

assume that this term is uncorrelated with the variables we use as

instruments. Specifically, we assume that the unobserved productivity shifter

is uncorrelated with lagged values of sales and with the part of current sales

that is predictable based on lagged information, and that the growth of the



     10Constant dollar, seasonally unadjusted inventory data are not available
and are therefore constructed, This is discussed further in Section .
                                                 —6—




unobserved productivity shifter is uncorrelated with lagged growth rates of

input prices, lagged growth rates of output, and lagged interest rates. In

addition, when we examine the seasonal fluctuations in production, we assume

that any seasonal in unobserved productivity is uncorrelated with the seasonal

in sales.

      The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents

the basic production smoothing model that we employ throughout the paper and

derives the first order condition that we estimate. In Section 3 we describe

the identifying assumptions, the resulting testable implications, and the

econometric techniques used to test those implications. In Section )4, we

discuss the data used. Section 5 presents the basic results with seasonally

adjusted and unadjusted data. In Section 6, we examine the seasonal-specific

results. Section 7 concludes the paper.


2. The Model

      Consider a profit maximizing firm. Sales by the firm, the price of the

firm's output, and the firm's capital stock may be exogenously or endogenously

determined. The firm may be a monopolist, a perfect competitor, or something

in between. The firm is, however, assumed to be a competitor in the markets

for inputs. For any pattern of prices, sales, and the capital stock, the firm

chooses its inputs over time so as to minimize costs.

      The firm's intertemporal cost minimization problem is


                                             T
(1)                     Mm
                       {Jt+j}
                                E
                                    t
                                        jz r tt+j
                                        -J
                                                       C   (y
                                                        t+j t+j
                                                                  )




subject   to
                                                    -7-



                         n
                          t+j
                                  Zn .
                                       t+j-1
                                               (i-s' t+j—1
                                                               )+yt+j —x t+j
                         nt-f-i    0



 where       is production in period t, x is sales in period t, and                         is the

 stock of inventories at the end of period t, all measured in terms of the

 output good. The end of the firm's horizon is period T. C is the one period

 nominal cost function of the firm, to be derived shortly. r                       .   is   the
                                                                               t,t+J
 nominal discount factor, defined as the present value at time t of one

                                                     1
 dollar at t+j. Thus, r
                             t,t+j
                                         [      (
                                             s=O 1 + R
                                                               )], rt   1, and
                                                         t+s
           (1 —                   Rt is the pretax cost of capital for
t+s               mt+5+1)R5.
the firm, and mt is the marginal tax rate. Et indicates expectations

conditional on information available at time t.

      The term s is the fraction of inventories lost due to storage costs. In

the case of linear storage costs, s is equal to a constant (call this
                                                                                              s1).
Some researchers have modeled storage costs as being convex in the level of

inventories. For example, convex inventory costs are the key factor driving

Blinder and Fischer's (1981) model of the real business cycle. We capture

these types of costs here by writing s                    s, +

      For any cost minimizing firm that carries inventories between two

periods, the marginal cost of producing an extra unit of output this period




             storage costs come in the form of depreciating inventories, then the
accounting identity definition of output would be t x +                           - nt_i(1        -
S't_l)).
    -      In this paper, we construct output in the standard way: t z
                                                                         xt +
               If, rather than coming in the form of depreciated stocks,
storage costs are actually paid out and these costs are proportional to the
replacement cost of the goods, then our model and our constructed output
measure are consistent with one another. In either of these cases the
equations are correct when the IP measure of output is used. If the costs are
paid out in dollars, in an amount related to the goods stored, our equation is
approximately correct.
                                                 -8-




and holding it in inventories until next period must equal the expected

marginal cost of producing an extra unit of output next period.                  This first-

order condition can be written as


                                                MC     (1 — s         )


(2)                              MCt =E[
                                       t                          t]
                                                     1+

or
                                      MC         (1-s)
(3)                             E [                           ]=1
                                           t     1+

Rational expectations implies


                                MC             (1—s)
                                                          =   1   +
                                MC
                                     t         1+t
where Et[Et+l] = 0   ,
                         i.e.              is orthogonal to all information available at

time t. The marginal storage cost, St, is equal to                        ÷ 2 n.12 The Euler

equation () will not be satisfied if desired inventories are zero. We

discuss this possibility below.

      At this point it is worth pointing out the parallel between the

production/storage problem of a cost minimizing firm and the

consumption/saving problem of a utility maximizing consumer. The firm's

problem is to minimize the expected discounted value of a convex cost

function, subject to an expected pattern of sales and costs of holding

inventories. The consumer's problem is to maximize the expected discounted

value of a concave utility function, subject to an expected pattern of income

and return to holding wealth. Not surprisingly, then, the solution to cost




     121f average storage costs (S't) are equal to s1 + (s2/2)nt, this implies
that marginal storage costs (St) are equal to s1 + s2nt.
                                               —9—




 minimization   yields a first-order condition analogous to the first-order

 condition implied by the stochastic version of the permanent income hypothesis

 (Hall (1978), Mankiw (1981), Hansen and Singleton (1983)), and we can apply

 the methods of that literature to testing the production smoothing model of

 inventories and output. Production, sales, inventories, the interest rate,

 and storage costs are analogous to consumption, income, wealth, the rate of

 time preference, and the return on wealth, respectively.13 In the simplest

 version of this model, the real interest rate, the growth in the capital

stock, and productivity growth are all constant over time. Given the

production function that we employ, these assumptions imply that the expected

growth in output is constant over time--i.e., real output follows a geometric

random walk with drift. This is analogous to Hall's (1978) condition that

consumption follow a random walk with drift.

      To implement the model described above we need to specify the form of the

cost function. We assume a standard Cobb-Douglas production function with m

inputs (q1, I = 1, ..., m).      Let the last Input (q) be the capital stock. In

each period, the firm thus solves the following (constrained) problem:

                                                      m
(5)
                             r
                                   Mm
                                                1.    z w. . q.
                                                     i=1 1    1



                      s.t.                            =
                                  f(q1,.

                                           =




     13The non-negativity condition on inventories mentioned above Is
analogous to a borrowing constraint in the consumption literature. If time
series/cross section data on firms were available, an approach similar to that
of Zeldes (1985) could be applied here to test for the importance of this non-
negativity constraint on inventories.
                                           -10-




where w and q are the price and quantity, respectively, of input 1, and f is

the production function. Note that the production function includes a

productivity measure p that may shift over time in deterministic and/or
                                   rn-i
stochastic waysY Define A              L a1. The one period (constrained) cost
                                    i 1
function from this problem is:



                                                     rn-i .   ar/A              1

                                                                                A        A
                                                                                            1

                                           A     i      (1'          1

(6)           C(y) =             + A .
                                       dl!,      Ill I-:-J           I
                                                                            1           Y
                        Wm



and the marginal cost function MC is:


                                                                           1-A
                                        rn-i .   at/A            1



(7)               MC(y)=q [n(!)
                           i1 i

Equation (7) can be used to calculate the ratio of marginal costs in t and

t+1:

        MC      rn-i              w.        q              y          p
(8) ln( Mci-' E (a./A)-ln( it-4-i)] (l—.&)i( mt+i) (i—A)l( t-I-i)1 ln
           t    1=1           it                            yt          lit




The next step is to derive an expression for the growth rate of output.                              We do

so by taking logs of the Euler equation (a),              taking         a first order Taylor

expansion of ln(i -    St)   around nt =   k   for an arbitrary value of k                      0 and a

second order Taylor expansion of ln(1 +                       around                =   0, substituting in

equation (8), and rearranging. This gives:




     Unlike some previous studies, we do not include costs of adjusting the
level of output. As Maccini and Rossana (1981t) point out, the costs of
adjusting output presuniably arise because of the costs of changing one or more
factors of production. These costs may be important, but we do not attempt to
model them here.
                                                            —11—




           Gyti = [(A/(1-.A))(—ln(1—s1—s2k) — ks2/(1—s1—s2k) —


 (9)                  +         A
                                    A)[ln(1 +       )   -
                                                                   (a./A)Gw.1]   +
                                                                                     Gq1
             S
       +
           1-s1-s2k
                            -   At     +
                                           (1   -   AjGt+l    +      -           -
                                                                                           + t-F11


where for any variable Z, GZt+i                      ln(Zt+i/Zt). We have added and
                  A
subtracted                A)a from the equation, so that the last term in brackets in

equation (9) has mean zero.


       Discussion of the Model

       Equation (9) is the basis of all the estimations performed in this

paper. It says that the growth rate of output is a function of the real

interest rate (where the inflation rate used to calculate the real rate is a

weighted average of the rates of inflation of factor prices), the growth in

the capital stock, the level of inventories, productivity growth, and a

surprise term. The key implication that we test in this paper is that no

other information known at time t should help predict output growth.

       As is well known, an advantage of estimating this Euler equation is that

we avoid solving for firms' closed form decision rule for production. This

allows us to step outside the linear-quadratic framework, and it allows us to

estimate our model that includes stochastic input prices and interest rates.

In addition, the Euler equation procedure yields testable implications for the

growth rate rather than the level of output, so we do not need to assume that

output is stationary around a deterministic trend. Our procedure is valid
                                    —12—



even if there is a unit root in the level of output, a condition that Nelson

and Plosser (1982), for example, find characterizes aggregate output series.15

     In setting up the model we have imposed the constraint that inventories

are non-negative, and we have indicated that the Euler equation is valid in a

given period only if the non-negativity constraint is not binding in that

period. We should point out here a potential problem related to this non-

negativity constraint. Consider a certainty version of our model without the

non-negativity constraint imposed. Assuming that    and 2 are non-negative,

equation (3) implies that when inventories are positive firms want the level

of marginal costs to rise over time. If the marginal cost function is

constant or falling (due to growth in the capital stock), this implies that

output rises over time, i.e., that firms push production towards the future

and run down inventory stocks today. In fact, only if inventories are

negative could there be a steady state with constant marginal costs.   This

indicates that in a model in which the non-negativity condition is imposed, it

will at times bind, and therefore the Euler equation will not be satisfied in

some periods.16

     To partially avoid this problem, we follow Blinder (1982) and allow       to

be negative. This captures the fact that at low but positive levels of

inventories, increases in inventories may lower total costs, i.e. there may be

a convenience yield to holding inventories. With i sufficiently negative,

there is a steady state in the certainty version of the model that has a




     15See Ghysels (1987) for an analysis of trends versus unit roots in
manufacturing inventory and production data.

     iGEven under these assumptions, firms will in general choose to use
inventories in some periods to smooth production, i.e., to build up positive
inventories in the periods in which sales are especially high and run them
down in periods in which sales are low.
                                      —13—



 positive level of inventories.17 Of course, this does still not imply, in the

 certainty or uncertainty version of the model, that inventories never hit the
 constraint. 18,19

      The model that we use allows for seasonal fluctuations in output growth

 in several ways. First, there may be seasonal movements in the observable or

unobservable component of the productivity shifter. Second, there may be

seasonals in the relevant input prices. Of course, it is not entirely

accurate to describe these as determining the seasonal fluctuations in output

growth, since in general equilibrium the seasonals in output growth and input

prices are determined simultaneously. For an individual firm, however, and

even for a 2-digit industry, the degree of simultaneity is likely to be small.

     Rather than assuming that the productivity shifter i   is   totally

unobservable to the econometrician, we allow it to be a function of some

observable seasonal variables and some unobservables. The observable

variables are weather related: functions of current temperature and

precipitation. It seems reasonable a priori that productivity would be

affected by the current local weather. We write              where Z is a

matrix of observable weather variables and r is the unobservable productivity

shifter.




     17This can be seen by using (3), assuming no uncertainty, letting Rt
                                                                            R,
     n, and setting MCt+i = MCt. Rearranging gives n    (-R -         which
will be greater than zero if s1 < - R.
                                                              s1)/s2,

     18For a further discussion of this issue see Schutte (1983). Another
factor in our model that tends to push inventories positive is sales growth,
although this will be reversed to the extent that it is accompanied by growth
in the capital stock.

     191n the industries that we use to estimate the equation, industrywide
inventories are always positive. This does not of course imply that
inventories are always positive for every firm in these industries.
                                     —1 14_




     In the absence of shifts in the cost function (i.e., changes in .i),   the

model presented is a simple production smoothing model. For a given time path

for the capital stock, the derived cost function is convex, inducing firms to

try to spread production evenly over time.2° When productivity is allowed to

vary over time, the result is no longer a pure production smoothing model.

Although our model is consistent with the variance of production exceeding the

variance of sales, the convexity of the cost function remains and we continue

to refer to the model as a type of production smoothing model.

     Blinder (1986a) states that introducing (unobservable) cost shocks into

the analysis makes his variance bounds inequality untestable, because one

could explain an arbitrarily large variance of production relative to sales by

assuming unobservable cost shocks with appropriately large variance. The

approach that we adopt in this paper avoids this problem in two ways. First,

we include measurements of a number of factors that might influence the

marginal cost of production, and account for these in the analysis. Second,

we show that under reasonable identifying assumptions, the model described

above has testable implications even in the presence of unobservable cost

shocks. The most important assumption is that the unobserved component of

productivity is uncorrelated with the component of sales that is predictable

on the basis of information known at the time the firm makes its production

decision. The testable implication is that once a number of cost variables

are accounted for, the remaining movements in output should be uncorrelated

with predictable movements in sales. In other words, even if production moves

around a lot due to cost shocks, these movements should not be related to



     20This smoothing that arises from a convex cost function is different
than the smoothing induced by introducing costs of adjusting output (as in,
for example, Eichenbaum (19814)). For further discussion, see Blanchard
(1983).
                                               —15-



  predictable movements in sales. This will be an especially useful test when

  applied to predictable seasonal movements in sales.


  3. Identification and Testing

        A. The General Approach

        Equation (9), augmented to include the weather variables, can be written
 as:


              Gyti    (A/(1—A))(_ln(1_51_s2k) -                           —
                                                      (ks2/(l-s1-s2lc))

 (10)            +    A
                          A)[mn(1 +    )   -
                                                    (a1/A)Gw.1}   +
                                                                      Gq1
          S
  +
                       (.-!A)(zt   _           +
                                                   (i-)Gn +   (!)[(- +1)        +


 We
      cannot estimate this equation by OLS because the right-hand side variables

 are in general correlated with the expectations error. We therefore use an

 instrumental variables procedure to estimate the equation. To do so, we must

choose instruments that are correlated with the included variables but not

with the error term. Recall that the error term includes two components: the

expectations error and the growth in the unobserved
                                                              productivity shifter. Any
variable that is known at time t will, by rational expectations, be orthogonal

to c1• However, rationality of expectations does not imply that
                                                                Gnti is
orthogonal to time t information-—it is possible that there are predictable



          assume that production decisions for the month are made after
information about demand and other economic variables is revealed, i.e.,
period t output decisions are made contingent on period t economic
variables. An alternative assumption would be that production decisions are
made before demand for the month is known. This creates a stockout motive for
holding inventories (see Kahn, 1986). In Section 5, we also present results
based on the alternative assumption that output must be chosen before demand
for the period is known. For a further discussion of these timing issues, see
Blinder (1986a).
                                       —16—




movements in productivity growth. Note that a reasonable possibility is that
                                               random walk, in which case the
the productivity measure follows a geometric

growth in productivity is i.i.d. and therefore orthogonal to lagged
              22
information
                                               number of studies that estimate
     Garber and King (198k) point out that a

Euler equations assume that there are no shocks in the sector that they are
                                       identification issue. In this paper, we
estimating__effectively ignoring the

allow some measurable shocks to this sector, and we make the following
                                    relationship between the unobserved cost
identifying assumptions about the

shifter and the included instruments.     (1) The unobserved productivity shifter

                                          of sales and with the part of current
(ri) is uncorrelated with lagged values
                                              information. (2) The growth of the
sales that was predictable based on lagged

productivity shifter is uncorrelated with lagged growth rates of input prices,

lagged growth rates of output, and lagged interest rates.
                                                 to be orthogonal to the error
     We thus consider the following variables

 term in the regression: lagged growth in sales, lagged growth in output,

 lagged interest rate, lagged growth in factor prices, and lagged

 inventories. In some sets of results we relax the assumption that the lagged

 growth rate of output is uncorrelated with the growth in the productivity

 shifter. To test the model, we first estimate equation (10) with instrumental
                                       the variables in the above list. Since
 variables, including as instruments

 there are more instruments than right-hand side variables, the equation is

 overidentified. We then test the overidentifying restrictions by regressing

 the estimated residuals on all of the included instruments (including the

                                 variables). The quantity T times the R2 from
 predetermined right-hand side




      22This is the assumption made by Prescott (1986).
                                      —17—



 this regression is distributed x, where T is the number    of   observations and j

 is the number of overidentifying restrictions. One possible alternative

 hypothesis to our null is that firms simply set current output in line with

 current sales. In this case, we would expect the lagged growth rate of sales

 to enter significantly in our test of the overidentifying restrictions.


     B. Seasonality and Identification

      It is possible that there are seasonal movements in productivity that are

not captured by the weather variables. One possible way to capture these

would be to allow the productivity measure to be an arbitrary function of

seasonal dummies. We do this in our first set of results by including

seasonal dummies in the estimation of equation (1O).23 This gives the same

results as first regressing all of the variables on seasonal dummies, and then

using the residuals from these regressions for estimation purposes.

     In order to examine whether the use of X—11 adjusted data has been

responsible for the rejections by others of the production smoothing model, we

compare the tests of the model using seasonally unadjusted data and seasonal

dummies to the tests using X—11 seasonally adjusted data.

     When we include seasonal dummies in equation (10), we lose all power to

test the model at seasonal frequencies, i.e., we cannot test whether the

seasonal movements in the data are consistent with the model. In the latter

part of the paper, therefore, we make the stronger identifying assumption that

seasonal shifts in productivity not captured by weather variables are




     23The fact that we include seasonal dummies does not mean that we assume
purely deterministic seasonality. Since the right hand side variables may
exhibit stochastic seasonality, our model allows for both stochastic and
deterministic seasonality in output growth. We should also note that because
we are working in log first differences, using additive seasonal dummies
allows for multiplicative seasonality in output.
                                    -18-



uncorrelated with the instruments used to estimate equation (1O).2 Under

this assumption, we can exclude seasonal dummies and perform two further tests

that directly use seasonal fluctuations in the data. We test the implication

that once the other factors in the cost function are taken into account, the

remaining movements in output should be uncorrelated with the seasonal

movements in sales. This is a strong implication of the production smoothing

model that has not been tested to date. In addition, we examine whether the

model fits at purely seasonal frequencies. We describe these latter two tests

in Section 6.


J4• The Data

     This section describes the data set that we employ. There are a number

of technical issues to be considered with respect to both the adjusted and

unadjusted data on inventories and production; we discuss these in detail

below. Readers who are not interested in these details can skip to Section 5.

     The equations are estimated using monthly data from May 1967 through

December 1982.2526 Data on inventories and shipments at the 2-digit SIC

level for 20 industries were obtained from the Department of Commerce. We

estimate the equations only on the six industries identified by Belsley (1969)

as being production to stock industries. The inventory data are end of month

inventories of finished goods, adjusted by the Bureau of Economic Analysis




     21in the section below on seasonal results, we discuss the circumstances
under which this assumption might not hold.

     25Most of our data run through December 1981, but we only have weather
data through December 1982.

         month seems like a reasonable planning horizon for a firm, but there
is no obvious reason why it need be so. For a discussion of time aggregation
issues in inventory models, see Christiano and Eichenbauin (1986).
                                       -19—



(BEA) from the book value reported by firms into constant dollars.2728 We

follow West (1983) and adjust the BEA series from "cost" to "market," so that

shipments and inventories are in comparable units. Shipments data are total

monthly figures in constant dollars.

     Two different measures of production are used. The first comes from the

identity that production of finished goods equals sales plus the change in

inventories of finished goods. Commerce Department data for sales and the

change in inventories are used to compute this production measure (which we

call "Yk"). The second measure of production used is the Federal Reserve

Board's index of industrial production (IP), also available at the 2-digit SIC

level.

     In principle, the two production series measure the same variable and

should therefore behave similarly over time. As documented in Miron and

Zeldes (1987), however, the two series are in fact quite different. For the

six industries studied here, the correlations between growth rates of the two

series range from .8 to .k for the seasonally unadjusted data, and from .k to

less than .1 for the seasonally adjusted data. The serial correlation

properties and seasonal movements of the two series are also different. Since

we have not resolved this discrepancy, we present results based on both output

measures.




     2TThis adjustment attempts to take into account whether firms used LIFO
or FIFO accounting. See Hinrichs and Eckman (1981) for a description of how
the constant dollar inventory series are constructed. See Reagan and Sheehan
(1985) for a presentation of the stylized facts of these series at an
aggregate (durables and non-durables) level.

     28There is some disagreement over whether it is appropriate to use
finished goods inventories only (West (1986)) or finished goods plus work in
progress inventories (Blinder (1986a)). We estimate the equations separately
for each definition. See footnote 32 in Section 5.
                                     -20-




     The nominal interest rate is the yield to maturity on Treasury Bills with

one month to maturity as reported on the CRSP tapes. The marginal corporate

tax rate series is the one calculated by Feldstein and Summers (1979). The

input price series are wages, the price of crude materials for further

processing, and energy prices, representing the three largest variable inputs

in the production process. Wages (average hourly earnings) and industrial

production at the 2-digit SIC level, and aggregate measures of energy prices

(the PPI for petroleum and coal products) and raw materials prices are

available from the Citibank Economic Database.

     The capital stock enters our equations as the number of machine days used

per month. Since we did not have access to industry capital stock data, we

model the growth in the capital stock as a constant plus a function of the

growth in the number of non-holiday weekdays in the month. Any remaining

month to month variation in the growth in the capital stock is included in the

error term.

     The weather data include estimates of total monthly precipitation and

average monthly temperature. We construct a different temperature and

precipitation measure for each industry, equal to weighted averages of the

corresponding measures in the different states. The weights are equal to the

historical share of the total shipments of the industry that originated in

each state.29 To capture non-linearities, we also include the weighted

average of squared temperature, squared precipitation, and the cross-product

of temperature and precipitation. Given our functional form assumptions, the

first differences of these variables enter equation (10).




     29The weights change every five years but always correspond to averages
of previous (never future) years.
                                    —21-



Seasonal ity

     Whenever possible, we obtained both seasonally adjusted (SA) and

seasonally unadjusted (NSA) data. The BEA reports real shipments and

inventories data, but these constant dollar series are only available on a SA

basis.3° The Bureau of the Census reports NSA and SA current dollar shipments

series and book value inventories series. As in Reagan and Sheehan (1985) and

West (1986), we estimate the real NSA inventory series by multiplying the real

SA series by the ratio of book value NSA to book value SA, thus putting back

in an estimate of the seasonal. (Another way of thinking of this is that we

deflate the book value NSA series by the ratio of the book value SA to real SA

series.) We estimate real NSA shipments by multiplying the real SA series by

the ratio of nominal NSA shipments to nominal SA shipments. These procedures

assume that there are no seasonal movements in the factors that convert from

book value to current dollar value or in the deflators used to convert the

series from current dollar to constant dollar. An additional adjustment

we considered was to multiply the above series by the ratio of the SA to NSA

PPI series for the finLthed goods, in order to adjust for the seasonal in the

deflators. We found statistically significant evidence of seasonality in the

price indexes in three out of six industries. However, the magnitudes of the

seasonal movements in these prices are much smaller than in the corresponding

quantities. We estimated the specifications in Tables 2 and 5 both with and




     30me reason for this has to do with the technique used to construct the
constant dollar figures. The disaggregated nominal series are first
seasonally adjusted, then deflated and then aggregated.
                                     -22—




without this adjustment and the results were virtually identical to each

other.31 We report only the results without this last adjustment.

    The IP data are available both NSA and SA, and the energy price series,

wage rates, raw materials prices and interest rates are all unadjusted.


5. Basic Results

     In this section, we examine the basic results from estimating equation

(10) and testing the implied overidentifying restrictions. In order to

determine whether the use of X-11 adjusted data has been responsible for

previous rejections of the production smoothing model, we run the same set of

tests with (1) the standard X-11 seasonally adjusted data and (2) seasonally

unadjusted data plus seasonal dummies.

     A summary of the results is presented in Table 2.32 There are four sets

of results, since we carry out the estimation with both unadjusted and

adjusted data, and we do this for both the Y4 and IP measures of output. In

the first line of each set of results, we list the variables that entered

equation (10) at a significance level of 5%. In the second line of each set,

we present the H2 from the regression of the residuals on all the

instruments. Recall that T . H2 is distributed x, where j   is   the number of

overidentifying restrictions. On the same line, we report the marginal

significance level of the test statistic T . R2.   In the last line of each

set, we list the variables that entered this auxiliary test significantly.




          estimated the equation over a shorter sample period for the food,
chemicals, and petroleum industries because seasonally adjusted PPIs were
unavailable for part of the sample period.

     32Most of these estimations were also done using the sum of finished
goods inventories and work in progress inventories as the definition of
inventories. The results were almost identical to those reported in the text.
                                     -23-



     We make the following observations about the results. First, in no case

does the interest rate or the growth rate in energy prices enter equation (10)

significantly. In about one third of the cases, the growth in raw materials

prices enters significantly, but usually with the wrong sign. Wage growth

enters significantly only four times, twice with the wrong sign. Thus, the

signs and statistical significance of the coefficient estimates are not

supportive of the model.

     The second observation we make is that the data reject the

overidentifying restrictions on the model in all cases using the Y4 data, and

in two-thirds using the IP data. For the y1 data, the rejections are about as

3trong using seasonally adjusted as seasonally unadjusted data. For the IF

data, the rejections are not quite as strong overall using the seasonally

unadjusted data. On the whole, there is little evidence that the use of

unadjusted data with seasonal dummies provides better results than using

seasonally adjusted data.

     Finally, note that in approximately half of the cases, at least one of

the five weather variables enters the equation significantly. Even after

including seasonal dummies, the weather has a significant influence on

production    certain industries (tobacco, chemicals, and petroleum).

     Thus fa: e arrive at a negative assessment of the model for two

reasons. First, the overidentifying restrictions are typically rejected.

Second, the signs of the coefficient estimates are not sensible and rarely

significant. Proponents of the model might make the following argument

against these two reasons, respectively. First, the instrument list may

include variables that are correlated with the error term even under the null

hypothesis, thus invalidating the tests of the overidentifying restrictions.

Second, the instruments may not do a very good job of explaining the right
hand side variables. If this is the case, one should not expect the parameter

estimates to be statistically significant, even under the null. We discuss

each of these arguments in turn.

    There are two circumstances in which the instrument list employed,

consisting of lagged values of production, sales, input prices, and

inventories, may be correlated with the error term. First, lagged output

growth may not be a valid instrument, even if other lagged variables are,

because productivity growth might be serially correlated. Since productivity

growth is correlated with output growth, this implies that lagged output

growth will also be correlated with contemporaneous productivity growth (a

component of the error term), making it an invalid instrument.

     Second, if firms do not have complete current period information when

they make their output decisions for period t, then variables dated time t may

not be valid instruments. This could arise because firms do not know the

demand for their own products for the period before choosing output (as in

Kahn (1986) or Christiano (1986)). Alternatively, firms may know the total

demand for their product, but not the aggregate component of demand.   Since we

are using data on firms aggregated to the industry level, this too might

invalidate the use of time t instruments (see Goodfriend (1986)).

     In order to take account of these possibilities, we have estimated

equation (10) using two alternative instrument lists. The first excludes

production from the instrument list and includes extra lags of sales. The

second list excludes all variables dated time t and includes extra lags of the

variables at earlier dates.

     When we employ the first alternative instrument list we reject the

overidentifying restrictions significantly less often than with the list used

in our basic results. In this case, the restrictions are rejected in a
                                          —25—



 majority of cases for the Y4   data,   but never for the IP data. When we employ

 the second alternative instrument list, we never reject the overidentifying

 restrictions. In both cases, however, we almost never find that the input

price variables, the interest rate, or the level of inventories enter

statistically significantly with the correct sign.

     This brings us to the second issue. It is possible that we are not

finding that expected changes in input prices affect the timing of production

because there are no expected changes in input prices. That is, the

instruments that we employ, either in our basic results or alternative

results, may be of such poor quality that they have no explanatory power for

the right hand side variables in equation (10). If this is the case, the

failure of these input prices to explain the pattern of production is not

evidence against our model.

     It is easy to check this possibility by examining directly the

explanatory power of the instruments. For all three instrument lists, we find

the following: there is statistically significant explanatory power in the

instruments about half the time for wages; all the time for interest rates,

energy prices, and all five weather variables; and almost never for raw

materials prices. Thus, with the exception of raw materials prices, the

failure of input prices to explain production in any of our results is valid

evidence against the model.

    To summarize, with our basic instrument list the results provide evidence

against the production smoothing model, even when it is expanded to

incorporate a stochastic interest rate, measurable and unmeasurable cost

shocks, and non-quadratic technology. When two weaker sets of identifying

restrictions are used, there is substantially less statistical evidence

against the model, but there is still no evidence that it describes an
                                     -26-



important aspect of firm behavior. Using seasonally unadjusted data and

seasonal dummies does little better than using X-11 adjusted data.


6. Seasonal-Specific Results

     In this section we examine the extent to which the seasonal fluctuations

in production, shipments and inventories are consistent with the production

smoothing model. The results presented above incorporate seasonal fluctua-

tions into the analysis by using seasonally unadjusted data and including

seasonal dummies and weather variables in the equations. This approach does

not tell us to what extent the seasonal movements in interest rates or input

prices determine the seasonal movements in output growth, nor does it answer

the question of whether the seasonal movements in the data themselves satisfy

the production smoothing model. In order to answer these questions, we cannot

include seasonal dummies in equation (10), and must therefore assume that any

fluctuations (seasonal and nonseasonal) in the productivity measure not

captured by the weather variables are orthogonal to the instruments used.

     Before describing our formal tests, it is useful to consider a set of

stylized facts about the seasonality in production, inventories, and sales.

We saw in Table 1 that the seasonal variation in the data is large relative to

the non-seasonal variation. In Table 3, we present estimates of the ratio of

the variance of production to the variance of sales, and we include estimates

based separately on the seasonal and non-seasonal variation. Following

Blinder (1986a), these numbers are based on detrended levels rather than
                                      -27-



growth rates.33'3 As we have discussed above, if cost shocks are assumed to

be "small," the production smoothing model restricts these ratios to be less

than one. We focus here on the ratio of the seasonal variances. For three of

the six industries, we estimate this ratio to be greater than one.35

      While one could interpret a ratio greater than one as a rejection of the

production smoothing model, there is no reason to expect the above ratio to be

less than one if there are seasonal shifts in the cost function. Even in this

case, however, there is information to be learned from examining the seasonal

movements. Whether or not seasonal shifts in productivity affect the seasonal

pattern of production, there is no reason to expect that seasonal pattern to

match the seasonal pattern of sales. Figures 1-6 show the seasonal patterns

in output and shipments for the six industries we examine and document

behavior potentially problematic for the production smoothing model.36 The




     33Along the lines of Blinder, we use the following procedure to obtain
detrended levels of the data. The log of each series is regressed on a
constant, time, and a dummy variable that is one beginning in October 1973.
The coefficients are estimated by GLS, assuming a second order autoregressive
process for the error term. The antilogs of the fitted values of this
regression are then subtracted from the levels of the raw data to define the
detrended data. We convert the IF measure from an index into a constant
dollar figure by multiplying it by the ratio of average Y14 to average IP (i.e.
we set the average of the two series equal to each other). We apply the
detrending procedure to the resulting IF, as well as ylj and shipments. We
then regress the detrended series on a constant and eleven seasonal dummies.
The seasonal and non-seasonal variances are estimated using the fitted and
residual values of this regression, respectively.

          the last section of his paper, West (1986) describes a variance
bounds test that includes deterministic seasonal variations in the data. He
found that the variance bounds were rejected for each of the three industries
that he examined.

     35We examine these ratios for seasonally adjusted data in Miron and
Zeldes (1987), and find significant differences between the ratios based on IF
and YLt data.

     36The seasonal coefficient plotted for each month is the average
percentage difference in that month from a logarithmic time trend.
                                     -28—



seasonal movements in output and sales are in fact very similar. The

implication of these graphs is that inventories do not appear to be playing

the role of smoothing seasonal fluctuations in sales.

     In the tests we present in this section, we formalize this observation.

First, we test whether the contemporaneous seasonal movement in sales growth

helps predict residual output growth, once the movements in factor prices, the

weather, and lagged inventories are taken into account. To do this, we use

the same procedure as in Section 5, except that seasonal dummies are excluded

from the regression and the instrument list, and the seasonal component of

contemporaneous sales growth is added to the instrument list. It is unusual

when running this type of orthogonality test to include as an instrument a

contemporaneous variable, but since this series is deterministic, it is part

of the lagged information set. Since it is also assumed orthogonal to the

unobservable productivity shifter, it is a valid instrument.37

    The interpretation of this procedure is the following. By excluding

seasonal dummies from the equation, we force the seasonal and non-seasonal

movements in the right-hand side variables to affect output growth via the

same coefficients. Given this restriction, we are then testing whether the

part of output growth not explained by these variables is correlated with the

seasonal component of sales growth. This allows us to compare the seasonals

in sales and output, after taking into account the measured seasonality in

factor costs, the weather, and the level of inventories.

    This test of the production smoothing model using the seasonal

fluctuations does involve one important maintained hypothesis, namely that the

coefficients on the seasonal and non-seasonal components of input prices and



     3Tme series we actually use is, of course, the estimated rather than the
true seasonal in sales growth.
                                       -29—



the weather are the same. In our last set of tests, we relax this assumption

and test whether the seasonal movements in the data, taken by themselves, are

consistent with the model. This is accomplished as follows. The first step

is to construct the seasonal component of each of the relevant variables

(output growth, input prices, weather variables, etc.) by regressing them on

seasonal dummies and calculating the fitted values of these regressions. We

then regress the seasonal component of output growth on the seasonal in input

prices, weather, the level of inventories, and the contemporaneous seasonal

component of sales, and we test the restriction implied by the model that this

last coefficient should be zero.38'3

     The results are summarized in Tables LI and 5. Table 14 presents the same

type of information as Table 2, but it includes the t-statistic on the

seasonal component of contemporaneous sales in the test of the overidentifying

restrictions. Table 5 is also set up similarly to Table 2, but it simply

reports whether the seasonal in sales significantly affects the seasonal in

output growth, after controlling for the seasonal movements in input prices,

the weather, and the level of inventories.

     In both tables, there is striking evidence against the production smooth-

ing model. In Table 14, we reject the overidentifying restrictions in every

instance. In most cases, the seasonal component of sales is significantly

correlated with the movement in output, even after taking account of any




     38Since we found there to be essentially no seasonality in energy prices,
raw materials prices, or interest rates, we excluded these variables.

     39We implement the procedure above by estimating equation (10), with
sales growth included, using seasonal dummies as the only instruments. The
coefficient estimates are numerically identical to those produced by the
procedure described in the text, but this instrumental variables procedure
produces correct standard errors. The resulting t-statistic on sales growth
is reported in Table 5.
                                     -30-



seasonals in input prices, lagged inventories, and the weather. This is true

for five out of six industries using at least one of the output measures, and

for three of the six industries using both output measures.

     When we redo the estimates in Table 14 using the alternative instrument

lists discussed above (leaving out time t variables or lagged output growth)

we again reject the overidentifying restrictions and find that the seasonal in

sales growth is significantly correlated with the residual output growth in

most cases.

     In Table 5 (the seasonal—only results) the seasonal in sales growth is

statistically significant in five out of six cases for the Y24 measure of

output, and in four out of six cases for the IP measure. Variables other than

sales almost never enter significantly.

     These results on the behavior of production and sales at seasonal

frequencies are perhaps the most problematic yet presented for the production

smoothing model. To a large extent, firms appear to be choosing their

seasonal production patterns to match their seasonal sales patterns, rather

than using inventories to smooth production over the year. Moreover, since

the seasonal variation in production and sales growth generally accounts for

more than 50% of the total variation in these variables, this problematic

behavior is a quantitatively important feature of the data.

     A key assumption that we have made here is that the seasonal in the

productivity shifter is uncorrelated with the seasonal in demand. Are there

circumstances under which this assumption would not hold? An example that

comes to mind is the case of an economy-wide seasonal in labor supply, namely

that individuals, all else equal, would rather take vacations in certain

months. This would induce a corresponding seasonal in output. If each

industry's output is an input into another industry, then we might expect to
                                     —31-



see a corresponding seasonal in shipments, leading optimally to the same

seasonal patterns in output and shipments.

     Theoretically, our approach accounts for this by including the wage as a

determinant of desired production. However, if the measured wage differs from

the true shadow cost of utilizing labor, then the residual will include the

seasonal in labor supply and therefore still be correlated with the seasonal

in shipments. This explanation suggests that we should see the same seasonal

movaments in output in all industries. In Figures 1-6, we do see common

seasonal patterns in output across industries, but we also see a fair amount

of seasonal movement that is different across industries.

     It is not clear what conclusion to draw from this discussion. It is

possible that the hypothesis proposed above is the explanation for the

seasonal results. If so, we should ask whether the same type of arguments

could be made about non-seasonal movements, i.e., do we believe that the

failure of the production smoothing model at non-seasonal frequencies is due

to economy—wide changes in desired labor supply that are not captured by

measured wages?


7. Conclusion

     The results presented above show a strong rejection of the production

smoothing model. This is despite the fact that we have extended the standard

model considerably, by allowing for non-quadratic technology, a stochastic

interest rate, convex costs of holding inventories, and measurable and non-

measurable cost shocks, and by including seasonal fluctuations explicitly.

Although previous work has examined many of these features, none has

simultaneously allowed for all of them.

    The rejections of the basic production smoothing model that we report are

robust wth respect to the treatment of seasonal fluctuations. To begin with,
                                     —32-



we reject the model about as strongly when we treat seasonality in the

standard way, by using adjusted data, as when we treat it more explicitly by

specifying the economic sources of the seasonal movements in production and

inventories. Even more surprisingly, our results show that the seasonal

movements in production, inventories and shipments are inconsistent with the

basic model. Specifically, the seasonal component of output growth, even

after adjusting for the seasonality in interest rates, wages, energy prices,

raw materials prices, and the weather, is still highly correlated with the

seasonal component of sales growth, contrary to the prediction of the model.

     We conclude the paper by discussing what we believe to be the

implications of our results for a number of hypotheses that have been offered

for the failure of the production smoothing model. We first discuss those

hypotheses on which our results provide direct evidence and then turn to more

indirect implications.

     Our results provide direct evidence that the limited role given to cost

shocks in previous papers is not the major reason for the rejections of the

model. In this paper we have included a more general set of cost shocks than

in earlier work, and we still find that the data reject production

smoothing. Moreover, we find relatively little evidence that cost shocks play

any role in determining the optimal timing of production. it is possible, of

course, that we have omitted the "key" cost shock, or that one of our

identifying assumptions is invalid. We believe, however, that the set of

costs we have included covers all of the major ones, and we think that the

identifying assumptions we make are minimally restrictive. It seems to us

unlikely, therefore, that the treatment of cost shocks is a major factor in

explaining the poor performance of the model.
                                     -33-



     The second area in which our results provide direct evidence is on

whether the inappropriate use of data seasonally adjusted by X-11 has been

responsible for the failure of the model. As we discussed above, X-11 data

are (approximately) a two-sided moving average of the underlying seasonally

unadjusted data. This means that such data likely violate the crucial

orthogonality conditions that are tested in the kinds of models considered

above, even if the unadjusted data satisfy them. Although it seemed likely to

us on a priori grounds that the use of X-11 adjusted data was a major problem,

our results indicate otherwise. The particular method of treating seasonal

fluctuations does not appear crucial to an evaluation of the model.

     So much for direct implications. We now turn to more indirect

implications, specifically, the implications of our tests using the seasonal

movements in the data. These implications are subject to the critique that

the production smoothing model may fit differently at different frequencies,

in which case we may not be able to learn about the validity of the model at

nonseasonal frequencies from its performance at seasonal frequencies.

However, to the extent that the same model is underlying the different

movements in the data, we can draw the following conclusions.

     To begin with, since seasonal fluctuations are anticipated, it seems

unlikely that. the failure of the model at seasonal frequencies could be due to

any kind of irrationality or disequilibrium. If so, this rules out a large

class of possible explanations of the failure of the model.

     A second issue that is illuminated by our seasonal specific results is

that of costs of changing production. We have omitted costs of changing

production (or, more generally, costs of changing inputs) from our

specification above; the addition of these costs might "help the data fit the

model." We regard this tactic as unsatisfactory, however. The fact that
there are extremely large seasonal changes in the rate of production makes it

seem quite unlikely that there are large costs of adjustment, although it is

true that costs may be lower when they are anticipated.

     Blinder (1986a) suggests that the production smoothing model could be

saved by including persistent demand shocks and small cost shocks. Even if

the non-seasonal movements in sales are very persistent, however, the same is

not true of the seasonal movements. Therefore, our seasonal results suggest

that Blinder's explanation will not suffice to "save" the production smoothing

model.

     Finally, our seasonal specific results allow us to rule out a concern

regarding the choice of appropriate instruments. In our estimation, we assume

that firms know current demand, and therefore time t sales is a valid

instrument. In contrast, others, such as Kahn (1986), assume that firms do

not know the level of current period demand when they choose the current

period level of production. If this assumption is a more appropriate

abstraction, then our general results are inconsistent. When we correct for

this by using only variables dated t -   1   and earlier as instruments, we can no

longer reject the model. However, it is still valid to include the seasonal

component of contemporaneous sales growth, since the seasonal component of

demand would be known even if the overall level were not. Since the results

from this test show a strong rejection of the model, this suggests that the

assumption that firms observe demand before choosing output is not, by itself,

to blame.

     What remains, then, as a possible explanation for the failure of the

production smoothing model? There are two main possibilities: non-convexity

of the cost function, and stockout costs. Giving up convexity of costs is

unappealing because it requires also giving up much of neo-classical theory.
                                     —35—



This does not mean it is not the correct explanation; it simply suggests that

we should turn to it only as a last resort. We end, therefore, by discussing

the role of stockout costs.

     An important maintained assumption above is that firms always hold

positive inventories, which implies that firms do not stock out. Total

inventories for each industry are always positive in our data, but this may

not be the case for each individual firm or product. Kahn (1986) presents a

model in which, because stockouts are costly, firms may not smooth

production.'IO However, there is as yet relatively little direct evidence that

stockout costs are high, or that firms cannot simply hold unfilled orders as a

type of negative inventories. This line of research deserves further

attention, in particular direct empirical testing.


    Department of Economics, University of' Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 148109
                                      and
    Finance Department, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania,
    Philadelphia, PA 191014-6367.




     140Abel (1985) also examines production smoothing in a model with
stockouts,
                                     TABLE 1: SUMMARY STATISTICS,
                             LOG GROWTH RATES OF PRODUCTION AND SHIPMENTS
                                                      Food       Tobacco      Apparel        Chemicals   Petroleum   Rubber
                         Mean:                        0.16%       -0.09%        -0.06%         0.20%       0.16%      0.15%
                        Variance:
     Shipments              Non-seasonal            5.60E-04     5.08E-03      1.74E-03       9.30E-04    5.1OE-04   1.08E-03
                            Seasonal                1.63E-03     1.61E-03      1.36E-02       2.86E-03    3.1OE-04   4.33E-03
                          Total                     2.19E-03     6.69E-03      1.54E-02       3.79E-03    8.20E-04   5.41E-03

                          Seasonal/Total              75%           24%          89%            75%         38%        80%

                        Mean:                         0.13%       -0.17%       -0.04%          0.19%       0.13%      0.15%
                        Variance:
     Production, Y4       Non-seasonal              6.1OE-04     6.03E-03      3.1OE-03       8.OOE-04    9.80E-04   1.60E-03
                           Seasonal                 1.63E-03     5.26E-03      1.16E-02       2.20E-03    2.20E-04   5.13E-03
                          Total                     2.24E-03     1.13E-02      1.47E-02       3.OOE-03    1.20E-03   6.73E-03

                          Seasonal/Total              73%          47%           79%            73%         18%        76%

                        Mean:                        0.22%        -0.17%        0.01%          0.36%       0.11%      0.42%
                        Variance:
     Production, IP        Non-seasonal             1.50E-04     2.47E-03      1.80E-03      2.70E-04     4.50E-04   1.09E-03
                           Seasonal                 8.50E-04     1.70E-02     4.28E-03       4.30E-04     5.1OE-04   3.06E-03
                          Total                     1.OOE-03     1.95E-02     6.08E-03       6.90E-04     9.60E-04   4.14E-03

                          Seasonal/Total              85%          87%           70%           62%          53%        74%

1. The sample period is 1967:5-1982:12.
2. The log growth rates are defined as in Xj   —   in Xf_1. They have not been annualized.
                                   TABLE 2: REGRESSION RESULTS, EQUATION (10)
                                SEASONAL DUMMThS IN EQUATION AND INSTRUMENT LIST
                                             Food            Tobacco           Apparel         Chemicals        Petroleum          Rubber
               What enters (10)             sd, —rrn        tern, —tern2          3d            —sd, tern        —to, —day            3d
               significantly?                                                                 —tern2, —pre     —tem2, —pre2
  Y, NSA       R2, Significance Level       .17, .000        .23, .000         .09, .050        .15, .001         .13, .004        .16, .000
               What is significant       we_5, —we_2          tern_1               -           —y1, x_1,            we_2             to, 3d
               in test of OIR's?                                                             —n_2, n_3, 3d
               What enters (10)                -                rrn,          —n_1, rm             rm            —to, —day            to
               significantly?                              tern, —tern2                                          —pre2, tpr
  Y, SA        R2, Significance Level       .10, .027        .14, .002         .11, .014        .14, .002         .14, .002        .11, .014
              What is significant              -                 -
              in test of OIR's?

              What enters (10)                sd          —3d, w, —pre2       3d, day_i          sd, rm          sd, —pre2           rrn
              significantly?
 IP, NSA      B2, Significance Level       .16, .000         .16, .000        .09, .050         .04, .583         .08, .090       .02, .926
              What is significant        —y_, —w_2          —yj, sd             —Y1                 -                -                -
              in test of OIR's?

              What enters (10)                 -                           —pre2, day_i      tern, —tem2
                                                              —pre2                                               —day_i             rm,
              significantly?                                                                                                    tern, —tem2
 IF, SA       B2, Significance Level       .15, .001         .28, .000        .09, .050         .13, .004        .09, .050        .06, .257
              What is significant       —Y—i, —we_2        —Y—i, —Y—2           —y_            x_1, 2_i              -             —a—i
              in test of OIR's?                          —tem_1, tpr_1




Notes for Table 2:
 1. The sample period is 1967:5-1982:12.
 2. The first line of each set of results lists the variables that entered equation (10) at the 5% significance level. We list seasonal dummies
    if one or more of the eleven dummies entered significantly.
 3. The second line gives the R2 from the regression of the residuals on the instruments, as well as the marginal significance level of
                                                                       j
    this statistic. The quantity T x B2 is distributed x, where is the number of overidentifying restrictions and T is the number of
    observations. In the results presented here, there are 9 such restrictions.
 4. The third line lists the variable that entered the regression of the residuals on the instruments at the 5% significance level.
 5. to = wage growth, sd = seasonal dummies, y = output growth, x = sales growth, day = number of production days, we = en-
    ergy price growth, rm = raw materials price growth, n = inventories, r = interest rate, pre = change in precipitation, pre2 =
    change in precipitation squared, tern = change in temperature, tem2 = change in temperature squared, tpr = change in tempera-
    ture*precipitation.
 6. A (-) before variable indicates that the sign of the coefficient was negative.
 7. A subscript of —1 on a variable means that it is dated I periods earlier than the dependent variable.
                  TABLE 3: VARIANCE OF PRODUCTION DIVIDED BY VARIANCE OF SALES

                                       Food        Tobacco         Apparel        Chemicals         Petroleum             Rubber

                Non-seasonal            1.22          1.84           1.32             1.01              0.91                1.13

                Seasonal                1.71          4.71           0.58             0.72              2.73                0.99
   Y4
               Total                    1.50          2.53           0.80             0.89              0.94                1.09

                Non-seasonal            0.48          0.58           1.20             0.83              0.48                0.95
                                        1.64          6.28           0.21             0.18              7.91                0.61
   IP            Seasonal
               Total                    1.14          1.95           0.50             0.55              0.59                0.86


1. The sample period is 1967:5-1982:12.
                                                                                                                                time and a
2. The estimation procedure is the following. For both shipments and production, the log level is regressed on a constant,
   time trend that is one beginning in October, 1973. The coefficients are estimated by GLS, assuming a second order autoregressive
                                                                                             substracted from the actual data, in levels, to
   process for the error term. The antilogs of the fitted values of this regression are then
   define the detrended data. The seasonal and non-seasonal variances are calculated as the variance of the fitted values and residuals,
   respectively,of a regression of the detrended series on seasonal dummies.                                                          IP.
3. We convert the IP measure from an index to a constant dollar figure by multiplying it by the ratio of average Y to average
                       TABLE 4: REGRESSION RESULTS, EQUATION (10)
        SEASONAL DUMMIES EXCLUDED, SEASONAL COMPONENT OF SALES IN INSTRUMENT LIST

                                                Food           Tobacco       Apparel       Chemicals       Petroleum         Rubber
               What enters (10)            —w, tern, —tern2       —tu         w, tern,     —w, tern,        —w,   —pre2      —w,   tern,
               significantly?                                                 —tern2      —pre, —tern2        —day,        —tem2, —pre
 Y4, NSA       112, Significance   Level      .52, .000         .16, .001    .14, .003       .31, .000       .18, .000       .26, .000
              What is significant          tern_1, —tem2_1      iem_1          xseas      tem_1, xseas         we_2           xseas
              in test of OIR's?             —x_2, —rm_1
                                                xseas
               t-stat on xseas                  3.51              0.51         2.84            4.14            1.87            3.41

              What enters (10)             —w, tern, —tem2        —w          w, rm,       tern, —tem2      —w, —pre2      tern, —tern2
              significantly?                                                tern, —tem2        —pre
IP, NSA       112, Significance Level         .30, .000         .14, .003    .12, .012       .15, .002       .13, .007       .24, .000
              What is significant           —y1, —y—2,         —Y—i, W_2    —Y—i, xseas          -          —y1, X_1,         xseas
              in test of OIR's?             —w_2, xseas                                                       xseas

              t-stat on xseas                   2.86              0.99         2.62            1.82            3.39            3.41

1. The sample period is 1967:5-1982:12.
2. The first line of each set of results lists the variables that entered equation (10) at the 5% significance level.
3. The second line gives the 112 from the regression of the residuals on the instruments, as well as the marginal significance level of
   this statistic. The quantity T x 112 is distributed    x,  where j is the number of overidentifying restrictions and T is the number of
   observations. In the results presented here, there are 10 such restrictions.
4. The third line lists the variable that entered the regression of the residuals on the instruments at the 5% significance level.
5. w wage growth, y = output growth,x = sales growth, day = number of production days, we energy price growth, rm = raw
   materials price growth, n = inventories, r = interest rate, pre = change in precipitation, pre2 = change in precipitation squared,
   tern change in temperature, tern2 = change in temperature squared, tpr = change in temperature*precipitation, xseas seasonal
   component of sales growth (defined as the fitted values from a regression on seasonal dummies).
6. A (-) before variable indicates that the sign of the coefficient was negative.
7. A subscript of —1 on a variable means that it is dated 1 periods earlier than the dependent variable.
                                  TABLE 5: REGRESSION RESULTS, EQUATION (10)
                                          SEASONAL COMPONENTS ONLY

                                           Food          Tobacco         Apparel             Chemicals         Petroleum        Rubber

                                                 z             z                x                    x              -              x
                 What enters (10)          —n,
   Y4            significantly?
                 t-stat on x                9.21              4.91          1.98                11.69              1.10          19.99

                 What enters (10)            x            —pre, x               -                    x              -              S

   IP            significantly?
                 t-stat on x                3.19              3.39          1.14                 2.31               .62           3.97


1. The sample period is 1967:5-1982:12.
2. The coefficients were obtained by estimating equation (10), with sales growth included, using seasonal dummies oniy as instru-
   ments. This gives coefficient estimates numerically identical to the procedure described in the text, but it produces correct
   standard errors. The t-statistic on sales growth reported in the table is from this instrumental variables regression.
3. The first line of each set of results lists the variables that entered equation (10) at the 5% significance level.
4. w — wage growth, sd — seasonal dummies, y = output growth, x = sales growth, day = number of production days, we =
   energy price growth, rm = raw materials price growth, n = inventories, r = interest rate, pre = change in precipitation, pre2
   =   change   in precipitation squared, tern =     change   in temperature,   Letn2   =   change   in temperature squared, tpr = change in
  temperature*precipitation.
4. A (-) before variable indicates that the sign of the coefficient was negative.
                             FIGURE 1


                             FOOD




 0.05




 0.00




—0.05

                                                           Legend
                                                           sal.s
                                                           pi.ct!oi—
—0.10
         JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC




                             FOOD
  0.10



                                          I.,

 0.05




                                                           Legend
                                                            soils
                                                            eP!!: Y.
 —0.10
                                     FIGURE 2

                                    TOBACCO
 O.10-
                                                                  I'
                                                                II I I
                                                            —


                   ,/ '
                                      'I
 0.05-                .'

              I/
                           --
                                I
 O.00-


—0.05-                                     I            I
                                            I          I
                                             I        I


—0.10-
                                                 II
                                                 II


—0.15-



—0.20-                                                                   Legend
                                                                          soles
                                                                             ducflon
—0,25-    I    I          U        V   I
         JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC




                                    TOBACCO
 0.10-

                                                                  f'

 0.05-



                            I'

                                                 V

—0.05-

                                                                         Legend
                                                                         soles


—0.10-
         JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC
                            FIGURE 3


                           APPAREL
 0.15


 0.10


 0.05


 0.00

—0.05


—0.10


—0.15


—0.20
                                                           Legend
                                                           soiss
                                                           pcuct!ori— P
         JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC




                           APPAREL
  0.15


  0.10


 0.05

 0.00


—0.05


 —0.10


 —0.15


                                                           Legend
—0.20                                                       sa'es
                            FIGURE 4


                           CHEMICALS
  0.10




 0.05




—0.05


                                       Legend
                                       sal.s
                                       eroduction: i
—0.10
         JAN FEB MAR APR




                           CHEMICALS
 0.10




 0.05




 0.00




—0.05

                                       Legend

                                        roduchon-
                   5


               19o\$u



                        ',




           /
                                   or   ---

                        oC   otc




0



                   /




0.00



       /



                                    ---

                        oC
                        0
                 _o.0   :0            0.00




            'I




oc                           0c

4O'I4




        -                         -
        -                         -
        -                         -
                                      -36-.



                                   REFERENCES



 Abel, Andrew B. (1985): "Inventories, Stock-Outs and Production Smoothing,"
      Review of Economic Studies, 52, 283-293.

 Belsley, David A. (1969): Industrial Production Behavior: The Order-Stock
      Distinction. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Blanchard, Olivier J. (1983): "The Production and Inventory Behavior of the
     American Automobile Industry," Journal of Political Economy, 91, 365—400.

Blinder, Alan S. (1986a): "Can the Production Smoothing Model of Inventory
     Behavior Be Saved?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101, 431-45)4.

Blinder, Alan S. (1986b): "More on the Speed of Adjustment in Inventory
     Models," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 18, 355-365.

Blinder, Alan S. (1982): Inventories and Sticky Prices: More on the
     Microfoundatjons of Macroeconomics," American Economic Review, 72, 3314-.
     348.

Blinder, Alan S. and Stanley Fischer (1981): "Inventories, Rational
     Expectations, and the Business Cycle," Journal of Monetary Economics, 8,
     277-30)4.

Christiano, Lawrence J. (1986): "Why Does Inventory Investment Fluctuate So
     Much?," manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Christiano, Lawrence J. and Martin Eichenbaum (1986): "Temporal Aggregation
     and Structural Inference in Macroeconomics," manuscript, Carnegie-Mellon
     University.

Cleveland, W. and G. Tiao (1976): "Decomposition of Seasonal Time Series: A
     Model for the Census X-11 Program," Journal of the American Statistical
     Association, 71, 581—587.

Eichenbauin, Martin S. (198)4): "Rational Expectations and the Smoothing
     Properties of Inventories of Finished Goods," Journal of Monetary
     Economics, 14, 71-96.

Feldstein, Martin and Lawrence Summers (1979): "Inflation and the Taxation of
     Capital Income in the Corporate Sector," National Tax Journal, 32, 1445—
     470.

Garber, Peter and Robert King (198)4): "Deep Structural Excavation? A
     Critique of Euler Equation Methods," NBER Technical Working Paper #83-1)4.

Ghali, Moheb (1987): "Seasonality, Aggregation, and Testing of the Production
     Smoothing Hypothesis," American Economic Review, 77, 46)4-1469.

Ghysels, Eric (1987): "Cycles and Seasonals in Inventories: Another Look at
     Non-Stationarity and Induced Seasonality," manuscript, University of
     Montreal.
                                    -37—



Goodfriend, Marvin (1986): "Information-AggregatiOn Bias: The Case of
     Consumption," manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.

Hall, Robert E. (1978): "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent
     Income Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Political Econony,
     86, 971-987.

Hansen, Lars and Kenneth J. Singleton (1983): "Stochastic Consumption, Risk
     Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns," Journal of
     Political Economy, 91, 2i49266.

Hinrichs, John C. and Anthony D. Eckman (1981): "Constant Dollar
     Manufacturing Inventories," Survey of Current Business, 61, 16-23.

Irvine, F. Owen, Jr. (1981): "Retail Inventory Investment and the Cost of
     Capital," American Economic Review, 71, 633-648.

Kahn, James (1986): "Inventories and the Volatility of Production,"
     manuscript, University of Rochester.

Maccini, Louis J. and Robert J. Rossana (1984): "Joint Production, Quasi—
     Fixed Factors of Production, and Investment in Finished Goods
     Inventories," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 16, 218-236.

Mankiw, N. Gregory (1981): "The Permanent Income Hypothesis and the Real
     Interest Rate," Economics Letters, 7, 307-311.

Miron, Jeffrey A. (1986): "Seasonality and the Life Cycle-Permanent Income
     Model of Consumption," Journal of Political Economy, 94, 1258-1279.

Miron, Jeffrey A. and Stephen P. Zeldes (1987): "Production, Sales, and the
     Change in Inventories: An Identity that Doesn't Add Up," Rodney L. White
     Working Paper #20-87, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.

Nelson, Charles R. and Charles I. Plosser (1982): "Trends and Random Walks in
     Macroeconomic Time Series: Some Evidence and Implications," Journal of
     Monetary Economics, 10, 139—162.

Prescott, Edward C. (1986): "Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement,"
     Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series, 25, 11—44.

Reagan, Patricia and Dennis P. Sheehan (1985): "The Stylized Facts about the
     Behavior of Manufacturers' Inventories and Backorders over the Business
     Cycle: 1959—1980," Journal of Monetar Economics, 15, 217—246.

Sargent, Thomas J. (1978): "Rational Expectations, Econometric Exogeneity,
     and Consumption," Journal of Political Economy, 86, 673-700.

Schutte, David P. (1983): "Inventories and Sticky Prices: Note," American
     Economic Review, 73, 815-816.

Summers, Lawrence (1981): "Comment on 'Retail Inventory Behavior and Business
     Fluctuations' by Alan Blinder," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2,
     513—5 17.
                                     -38-



Wallis, Kenneth F. (1974): "Seasonal Adjustment and the Relation between
     Variables," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 69, 13—32.

Ward, Michael P. (1978): "Optimal Production and Inventory Decisions: An
     Analysis of Firm and Industry Behavior," unpublished Ph.D. thesis,
     University of Chicago.

West, Kenneth, D. (1983): "A Note on the Econometric Use of Constant Dollar
     Inventory Series," Economics Letters, 13, 3373141.

West, Kenneth D. (1986): "A Variance Bounds Test of the Linear Quadratic
     Inventory Model," Journal of Political Economy, 9, 374-4O1.

Zeldes, Stephen P. (1985): "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An
     Empirical Investigation," Rodney L. White Center Working Paper #24-85,
     The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.
