                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE ECONOMIC BURDEN OF CHRONIC DISEASES:
      ESTIMATES AND PROJECTIONS FOR CHINA, JAPAN, AND SOUTH KOREA

                                       David E. Bloom
                                        Simiao Chen
                                        Michael Kuhn
                                      Mark E. McGovern
                                         Les Oxley
                                        Klaus Prettner

                                      Working Paper 23601
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23601


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2017




We are grateful to Timothy Halliday and participants at the EWC-KOSTAT Conference on the
Demographic Dividend and Population Aging in Asia and the 2015 Harvard Workshop on the
Macroeconomics of Population Aging for comments and suggestions. Research reported in this
paper was supported by the National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, under
award numbers P30AG024409 and R01AG048037 and by a grant from Carnegie Corporation of
New York. The statements made and views expressed are solely the responsibility of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by David E. Bloom, Simiao Chen, Michael Kuhn, Mark E. McGovern, Les Oxley, and
Klaus Prettner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
The Economic Burden of Chronic Diseases: Estimates and Projections for China, Japan, and
South Korea
David E. Bloom, Simiao Chen, Michael Kuhn, Mark E. McGovern, Les Oxley, and Klaus
Prettner
NBER Working Paper No. 23601
July 2017
JEL No. H51,I15,I18,J24,O11

                                          ABSTRACT

We propose a novel framework to analyse the macroeconomic impact of noncommunicable
diseases. We incorporate measures of disease prevalence into a human capital augmented
production function, which enables us to determine the economic costs of chronic health
conditions in terms of foregone gross domestic product (GDP). Unlike previously adopted
frameworks, this approach allows us to account for i) variations in human capital for workers in
different age groups, ii) mortality and morbidity effects of non-communicable diseases, and iii)
the treatment costs of diseases. We apply our methodology to China, Japan, and South Korea, and
estimate the economic burden of chronic conditions in five domains (cardiovascular diseases,
cancer, respiratory diseases, diabetes, and mental health conditions). Overall, total losses
associated with these non-communicable diseases over the period 2010-2030 are$16 trillion for
China (measured in real USD with the base year 2010), $5.7 trillion for Japan, and$1.5 trillion for
South Korea. Our results also highlight the limits of cost-effectiveness analysis by identifying
some intervention strategies to reduce disease prevalence in China that are cost beneficial and
therefore a rational use of resources, though they are not cost-effective as judged by conventional
thresholds.

David E. Bloom                                              Mark E. McGovern
Harvard T. H. Chan                                          Queen's University Belfast
School of Public Health                                     Queen's Management School
Department of Global Health and Population                  Riddel Hall
665 Huntington Ave.                                         185 Stranmillis Road
Building 1, Suite 1202                                      BT95EE, Belfast
Boston, MA 02115                                            United Kingdom
and NBER                                                    m.mcgovern@qub.ac.uk
dbloom@hsph.harvard.edu
                                                            Les Oxley
Simiao Chen                                                 Department of Economics
Harvard T.H. Chan                                           University of Waikato
School of Public Health                                     Hamilton, New Zealand
665 Huntington Avenue                                       loxley@waikato.ac.nz
Boston, Massachusetts
02115-6021                                                  Klaus Prettner
sic104@mail.harvard.edu                                     University of Hohenheim
                                                            Institute of Economics
Michael Kuhn                                                Schloss Hohenheim 1d
Vienna Institute of Demography                              70593 Stuttgart
Welthandelsplatz 2 / Level 2                                Germany
A-1020, Vienna                                              Germany
Austria                                                     Klaus.prettner@uni-hohenheim.de
Michael.Kuhn@oeaw.ac.at
1    Introduction

Globally, non-communicable diseases (NCDs) result in 65% of all deaths (Lozano et al.,
2011) and 54% of all healthy life years lost as measured by DALYs (disability-adjusted life
years) (Murray et al., 2013). Apart from the enormous burden of pain and suffering that
these conditions impose, the global economic burden of non-communicable diseases has
been estimated to be in the region of $47 trillion during 2010 through 2030 (measured in
real USD with the base year being 2010, or 75% of global GDP in 2010; see Bloom et al.,
2012). Moreover, the prevalence of chronic conditions, specifically non-communicable
diseases such as cardiovascular diseases, cancer, respiratory diseases, diabetes, and mental
health conditions, is likely to rise substantially over the coming decades (Kearney et al.,
2005).

This phenomenon is likely to affect not only developed countries but also low- and middle-
income countries as a result of changes in modifiable risk factors (such as smoking, dietary,
and exercise patterns) and non-modifiable risk factors (such as population ageing). One
important factor that drives chronic disease prevalence worldwide is changing lifestyle
patterns shifting daily living toward more sedentary occupations and less healthy diets.
Urbanization has many economic benefits in terms of returns to agglomeration, specializa-
tion, and efficiency, but it can also negatively affect population health through mechanisms
such as diffusion of risky behaviour and exposure to pollution. For example, an important
difference in risk factor trajectories between low- and middle-income countries and high-
income countries is the divergence in smoking patterns. While cigarette and tobacco con-
sumption has been falling in many high-income countries, smoking has been rising in India
and China. Given that tobacco consumption is the most important risk factor for many
non-communicable diseases, this is likely to raise the prevalence of non-communicable dis-
eases in those countries. Another difference between developed and developing countries
is that the former have been quite successful at minimising the risk of death associated
with communicable diseases, whereas communicable diseases remain a major contributor
to mortality in low-income countries. This implies that low-income countries often face a
double burden of disease.

In developed countries, population ageing is an inexorable consequence of fertility and mor-
tality patterns. Many high-income countries already face rapid demographic change, and
because chronic conditions tend to increase with age, the proportion of their populations
affected by non-communicable diseases will rise. Likewise, many emerging economies are
either already experiencing population ageing or will do so in the near future. Particularly
interesting cases for studying the effects of ageing-related increases in non-communicable
disease prevalence are Japan, because it has the largest share of older people globally, and
China and South Korea because they are experiencing very rapid population ageing. The



                                             2
main goals of this paper are to estimate and project the economic burden of chronic con-
ditions for these three countries until 2030 and to compare the challenges these countries
face in terms of non-communicable disease impact.

Through several pathways, disease burden is expected to affect economic outcomes in
general and economic growth in particular. First, chronic conditions reduce the supply
of labour through mortality, early retirement (Dwyer and Mitchell, 1999; Lindeboom and
Kerkhofs, 2009; Jones et al., 2010), and reduced productivity (López-Casasnovas et al.,
2005; Jäckle and Himmler, 2010). In addition, individuals may alter their employment
behaviour because they anticipate or fear the future onset of illness and negative effects
of health conditions (McGarry, 2004).1 Second, current interventions related to NCDs
(including medical treatment and prevention) require a substantial amount of resources,
part of which could otherwise be used for other productive activities. Therefore, NCDs
reduce the net availability of government funds and impede the accumulation of physi-
cal and human capital by, for example, diverting investment from important areas such
as education and infrastructure. Additionally, reduced productivity together with lower
labour supply leads to a decline in aggregate income and therefore further reduce savings
and investment. Our model addresses these pathways and is summarized in Figure 1.

Overall, the global burden associated with non-communicable diseases can be expected
to grow in magnitude. While a substantial literature describes the micro-level effects of
health conditions such as cancer on economic and overall well-being, less evidence exists
on how chronic conditions interact to affect aggregate outcomes in the population as a
whole. The aggregate view is typically absent from studies of the individual-level effects of
non-communicable diseases because capturing spillover effects and externalities is difficult
where the health status of one person affects the well-being of another individual or group
of individuals.

The economic impact of health conditions in general, and non-communicable diseases in
particular, is of special importance and interest to policymakers. Faced with increases
in the prevalence of chronic conditions, governments and other stakeholders may wish
to enact policies that are effective at reducing disease incidence and its consequences.
Several possible interventions can reduce the prevalence of non-communicable diseases.
For example, a series of “best-buy” investments has been proposed because they are cost-
effective and easy to implement within the constraints of low- and middle-income countries.
These policies include increasing taxes on alcohol and tobacco use, reducing salt intake in
food, and replacing trans fats with polyunsaturated fats (Bloom et al., 2011).

However, establishing whether particular programs are worthy of investment can be diffi-
   1
     For a theoretical analysis of the interrelationship between health and retirement behaviour, see Bloom
et al. (2007, 2014d). Building on this, Prettner and Canning (2014) explore the macroeconomic implica-
tions, and Kuhn et al. (2015) study the interaction between health and retirement behaviour.


                                                    3
           Figure 1: Summary of Pathways from NCDs to Economic Growth




cult without a thorough assessment of the economic benefits of these interventions and a
summary of the potential returns on investment for different policy options. This is par-
ticularly the case for many candidate policies, not just in the health domain, but also in
relation to other sectors such as targeting improvements in infrastructure and education,
or when other health conditions such as communicable diseases remain highly prevalent.
In addition, policymakers and the public may be unaware of the impact of these condi-
tions, particularly on labour markets and on capital accumulation. A thorough assessment
of the economic impact of non-communicable diseases will therefore provide evidence on
which types of policies are viable and establish whether investments in health in general,
and chronic conditions in particular, are likely to provide returns on investment sufficient
to justify their implementation. In sum, accurate estimates of the economic burden of
non-communicable diseases are important for providing a cost-benefit analysis of alterna-
tive interventions and for ranking alternative policy strategies in terms of their return on
investment.

Approaches to estimating the economic effects of health conditions include the cost of


                                             4
illness method, where the direct costs associated with a disease are calculated; the value
of a statistical life (VSL) approach, where costs are inferred from willingness to pay stud-
ies or observed avoidance behaviour for risky occupations or scenarios; econometric esti-
mates taken from cross-country growth regressions; and macroeconomic models (such as
a production function-based approach or a general-equilibrium framework), where output
trajectories for different scenarios are simulated. Each approach has advantages and dis-
advantages. In our paper, we aim to account for the aggregate effects on output when
estimating the full economic impact of non-communicable diseases. Therefore, we adopt a
macroeconomic approach that incorporates disease prevalence into a human capital aug-
mented production function. In this way, we can model the effects of chronic conditions
on aggregate effective labour supply and on capital accumulation in a flexible framework
that can be used to characterize an extensive set of pathways through which health affects
the economy.2

Our main contribution is to modify and extend the model that Abegunde and Stanci-
ole (2006) first used to examine the impact of non-communicable diseases on economic
growth. The original formulation of the basic approach, which was named the EPIC (or
Projecting the Economic Cost of Ill Health) tool, relied on the Solow (1956) framework
and was designed by the World Health Organization (WHO).3 Altogether, we propose
a novel framework that builds upon the WHO EPIC tool, but additionally considers i)
heterogeneous human capital levels of workers in different age groups, ii) that NCDs and
health conditions not only lead to mortality but also to morbidity, and iii) the effect of
treatment costs on capital accumulation.

While our analysis focuses on NCDs, the framework we develop here is quite general and
could easily apply to other health domains, such as communicable diseases, road traffic
accidents, and tobacco control. We focus on chronic conditions for several reasons. First,
the data requirements to implement the model for the four NCDs that are the focus of the
United Nations (cardiovascular diseases, cancer, chronic respiratory diseases, and diabetes)
and mental health conditions are already quite substantial, and extending the model in this
paper to include other health conditions would result in a very lengthy exposition. Second,
the countries we consider (China, Japan, and South Korea) are either middle- or high-
income countries that have made great strides in dealing with communicable diseases.
However, NCDs have been relatively neglected from a public health point of view in
these countries, and unlike communicable diseases, the prevalence of chronic conditions
is expected to rise substantially over the coming decades. Finally, we are interested in
assessing the economic impact of population ageing via changes in the health status of
   2
     See Kuhn and Prettner (2016) for an analysis of the impact of health care on economic growth and
welfare within a Blanchard-Romer style general equilibrium model, in which they take account both of
morbidity and mortality related channels.
   3
     The basic EPIC model has been used to estimate the economic burden of chronic conditions in India,
China, Indonesia, and worldwide (cf. Bloom et al., 2012, 2014a,b, 2015).



                                                  5
the population, and because age is an important non-modifiable risk factor for NCDs, we
believe that focusing on these conditions is desirable. Nevertheless, we hope to extend the
model to other aspects of health in future research.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 compares the four most popular methods
used to assess the economic burden of different diseases and discusses their advantages and
disadvantages. Section 3 proposes a novel framework that builds upon the WHO EPIC
tool but additionally considers heterogeneous human capital levels of workers in different
age groups, the morbidity effect of NCDs, and the effect of treatment costs on capital
accumulation. Section 4 implements the model for China, Japan, and South Korea and
presents the results for these three countries. Section 5 summarizes and draws conclusions.



2        Comparison of methods to assess the economic burden of
         diseases

This section describes the main approaches used to quantify the economic impact of health
conditions, focusing on the advantages and disadvantages of each framework. We start
with the cost of illness (COI) approach, which is a simple and easy-to-understand method
that summarizes the burden of a certain disease over a particular time period in a single
number. This number is defined as the sum of all personal medical care costs (e.g., inpa-
tient and outpatient hospital costs); personal non-medical care costs (e.g., transportation
and relocation expenses); non-personal costs (e.g., for research activities); and loss of in-
come due to absenteeism, early retirement, or premature death. Altogether, the medical
costs, the non-medical costs, and the research costs are referred to as direct costs, while
the loss of income is referred to as an indirect cost.4 The advantage of this method is that
the outcome is easily interpreted as the monetary value of the resources that could be
saved by avoiding a particular disease. The main drawbacks are that no economic adjust-
ment mechanisms are considered (e.g., the substitution of labour lost due to an illness by
capital or other workers) and that COI studies disregard the effect of diseases on physical
capital and human capital accumulation (for a general debate on the usefulness of the COI
approach see Currie et al., 2000; Rice, 2000; World Health Organization, 2009).

An alternative way to estimate the costs of health conditions is to reconstruct a person’s
implicit valuation of his/her own life, the value of a statistical life, by estimating a person’s
willingness to accept premia for risky occupations via wage regressions, or by estimating a
person’s willingness to pay for the reduction of risks via hedonic price regressions (Viscusi
and Aldy, 2003). The monetary value that a person assigns to his/her own life can be
inferred from the parameter estimates in these regressions. The main advantage of this
    4
        Most studies of the costs of NCDs rely on this approach (as an example, see Beaulieu et al., 2009).


                                                       6
approach is that it also delivers a single number that, if multiplied by the number of cases,
can be interpreted as the total statistical value of the loss due to an illness. While the COI
approach focuses more on the objective costs of an illness, the VSL approach also implicitly
covers the costs of pain and suffering via the revealed preferences of the consumers/workers
who are studied. Prominent studies by Murphy and Topel (2006) and Lakdawalla et al.
(2010) apply the VSL methodology to calculate the value of advances against cardiac
disease and cancer. The main drawback is that the VSL approach yields an estimate of
the statistical loss due to an illness that strongly depends on the age and the income level of
workers. Consequently, the estimates vary widely among different countries. Furthermore,
economic adjustment mechanisms are again not taken into consideration.5

Another method to assess the economic costs of an illness is to estimate a cross-country
growth regression in the vein of Barro (1991) and Islam (1995), in which the main re-
gressors of interest contain the prevalence of the illness under consideration. From the
parameter estimate associated with the prevalence of an illness, its impact on growth can
be inferred directly (see Suhrcke and Urban, 2010, for estimates of the negative growth
effect of cardiovascular diseases). The advantage of this approach is that, when the regres-
sion is appropriately specified, the estimated growth effect is readily apparent from the
final result, which already incorporates economic adjustment mechanisms. Consequently,
this method overcomes one of the crucial shortcomings of the COI and VSL approaches.
However, growth regressions are very data intensive, requiring a wide range of precisely
measured control variables for all countries in the sample (see Durlauf et al., 2005; Eber-
hardt and Teal, 2011; Sala-i Martin et al., 2004; Sala-i Martin, 1997, for discussions).
Furthermore, the result is an average of the growth effect over all countries included in
the regression, which does not account for specific country characteristics and potential
heterogeneity in the impact of chronic conditions across countries. Additionally, this ap-
proach only allows for an assessment of severe diseases that affect many people (such
as cardiovascular diseases). Detecting a significant growth effect for less severe diseases
that do not affect many people is difficult given the small sample sizes that typically con-
front growth regressions (cf. Durlauf et al., 2005). Finally, attempts to deal with reverse
causality and omitted variable bias are contentious in the literature (Weil, 2014).

Abegunde and Stanciole (2006) and the WHO first proposed the EPIC framework, which
simulates a Solow (1956) growth model that considers the adverse effects of diseases on
physical capital accumulation and on labour supply. Bloom et al. (2012, 2014a,b, 2015)
have applied this framework to several developed and less developed countries. While the
EPIC approach accounts for the fact that physical capital or other workers can replace
lost labour and therefore allows for economic adjustment mechanisms, it only considers
mortality and not morbidity. Furthermore, it does not accurately account for the cost of
   5
     See Frankovic et al. (2016) for a theoretical analysis of how the VSL responds to exogenous medical
progress in general equilibrium.



                                                   7
treatments and for the fact that different age groups of workers have, in general, different
productivity levels because of their different schooling intensity and experience patterns.
This is, however, important because of the relative concentration of chronic conditions
among older age groups.

Our contribution focuses on these three shortcomings of the EPIC model and proposes
a novel framework that builds upon the Lucas (1988) production function. In so doing,
we explicitly allow different age groups of workers to have different education levels and
different levels of experience, and we address the lack of a morbidity mechanism by in-
corporating information on disease morbidity, as measured by DALYs reported by the
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (2013). Furthermore, we account for the
treatment costs of diseases.

The production function-based framework we use also has some limitations. First, it is not
a general equilibrium model in the sense that all decisions are microfounded. For example,
individuals who live longer because the prevalence of a disease is reduced might invest more
in education or they might save more. While implementing a general equilibrium structure
would be highly complex and would require other restrictive assumptions to be tractable,
disregarding the mentioned general equilibrium repercussions implies that our estimates
of the economic burden of NCDs are conservative. Another issue with the production
function-based framework is that we consider the impact of health on growth, but do not
model a channel linking growth to health.6 Incorporating a channel reflecting an effect
of economic growth on health would be arbitrary in the absence of good evidence on the
causal pathways of interest and would introduce additional complexity into the model.
Nevertheless, abstracting from a feedback effect of economic growth on health clearly
implies that the economic burden of NCDs that we calculate is likely to be a lower bound
for the true costs.



3       The model

We aim to quantify the economic burden of a particular disease, which requires us to
compare economic performance between two scenarios: a status quo scenario, in which
GDP is projected to grow based on current estimates and projections of disease prevalence,
and a counterfactual scenario, in which the disease prevalence is eliminated from the
beginning of the time period. We define the overall economic impact of the relevant
    6
     The nature of the relationship between health and growth and the potential for reverse causality has
been debated extensively in both the macroeconomics and microeconomics literature (see, for example,
Acemoglu and Johnson, 2007, 2014; Aghion et al., 2011; Bloom et al., 2004, 2014c; Cervellati and Sunde,
2011; Cutler et al., 2006; Pritchett and Summers, 1996; Weil, 2007, 2014). While health and income
are typically highly correlated, the precise nature of the relationship remains controversial because of the
difficulties associated with identifying the causal effects of interest.


                                                     8
disease as the cumulative difference between status quo GDP and counterfactual GDP in
each year (summed over the time period of interest). This framework is very flexible and
allows us to examine alternative scenarios in which GDP is calculated for a designated
percentage reduction in the prevalence of a specific disease. This allows us to analyse the
impact of a particular policy intervention, with the cost of the intervention factored into
a corresponding decrease in capital accumulation.



3.1    Human capital, physical capital, and aggregate output


Consider an economy populated by individuals of different age a in which time t ∈ [0, ∞]
                                                                                      (a)
evolves discretely. Individuals of age group a are endowed with ht                          units of human
                        (a)
capital and supply     `t     units of labour from age 15 up to their retirement at age R, i.e., for
a ∈ [15, R]. Children below the age of 15 and retirees above the age of R do not work. At
the aggregate level are two production factors: physical capital (Kt ) and human capital
(Ht ). Human capital is defined as the aggregate age-specific effective labour supply

                                                R
                                                        (a) (a)    (a)
                                                X
                                         Ht =          ht `t N t ,                                          (1)
                                                a=15

          (a)
where Nt        denotes the number of individuals belonging to age group a. Note that aggre-
gate human capital is greater if more individuals of working age live in the economy (i.e.,
              (a)
Nt = R
      P
        a=15 Nt   is larger), if those individuals are endowed with more human capital
                                                                                        (a)
because they are either better educated or have more experience (i.e., ht                     is higher for at
                                                                                             (a)
least one a), and if individuals in the economy supply more labour (i.e.,                   `t     is higher for
at least one a).

Aggregate output Yt is used for three purposes: to pay treatment costs T Cj,t 7 for disease
j ∈ I, where I is the set of diseases; to consume the quantity Ct ; and to save. As a
consequence, physical capital (K) accumulates according to
                                                           X
                 Kt+1 = (1 − δ)Kt + Yt − Ct −                    T Cj,t = (1 − δ)Kt + st Yt ,               (2)
                                                           j∈I


where δ is the rate of depreciation and st refers to the savings rate. From Equation (2) it
follows that the savings rate is defined as
                                                           P
                                                 Ct +       j∈I   T Cj,t
                                      st = 1 −                             .
                                                           Yt
   7
     These costs refer to the costs of ongoing treatment and of the intervention methods for the specific
disease. In general, these costs are best characterized by the direct costs of healthcare including hospital-
ization, medication, etc.




                                                       9
Building upon Lucas (1988), aggregate output is given by the production function

                                                   R
                                                                         !1−α
                                                           (a) (a) (a)
                                                   X
                                  Yt =   At Ktα           ht `t N t             ,                    (3)
                                                   a=15

where At is the technological level of the economy that evolves exogenously and α is
the elasticity of final output with respect to physical capital. The aggregate production
function takes into account that output is not only produced with physical capital and
raw labour as in the Solow (1956) framework on which the original EPIC model relies, but
with effective labour of which human capital is a central determinant.

We follow Mincer (1974) and construct average human capital of the cohort aged a ac-
cording to an exponential function of education and work experience:
                   h                                                                            i
        (a)               (a)              (a)             (a)
       ht     = exp η1 (yst,prim ) + η2 (yst,sec ) + η3 (yst,tert ) + η4 (a − 15) − η5 (a − 15)2 ,   (4)

where η1 is the semi-elasticity of human capital with respect to years of primary education
                     (a)
as given by yst,prim , η2 is the semi-elasticity of human capital with respect to years of
                                             (a)
secondary education as given by yst,sec , η3 is the semi-elasticity of human capital with
                                                                    (a)
respect to years of tertiary education as given by yst,tert , and η4 and η5 are the semi-
elasticities of human capital with respect to the experience of the workforce (a−15) and the
experience of the workforce squared (a − 15)2 , respectively. The values for the parameters
η1 , η2 , and η3 are taken from the studies by Hall and Jones (1999) and Psacharopoulos
(1994), while the values for η4 and η5 are taken from Heckman et al. (2006).8

Non-communicable diseases exert influence on the economy via three pathways: i) via
physical capital accumulation in the sense that savings finance part of the treatment
costs, reducing physical capital accumulation; ii) via effective labour supply in two ways:
first, disease-induced mortality reduces the population and hence the number of workers,
and second, the associated morbidity reduces individual productivity and increases absen-
teeism; and via the average human capital level because NCDs disproportionately affect
more experienced age groups.



3.2         Impact on physical capital accumulation


In the counterfactual scenario, we assume that a certain disease i ∈ I is eliminated, so the
treatment costs for disease i in Equation (2) are set to zero. Moreover, we define ICi,t to
be the cost for the intervention that helps eliminate this disease, whereas T Ci,t refers to
   8
    Note that another pathway exists, whereby a bad health condition affects human capital that we do
not account for by our specification: absenteeism due to bad health might lead to faster depreciation of
human capital because it sits idle.



                                                      10
the treatment costs that would have been incurred without the elimination of the disease.
The accumulation of physical capital can then be written as
                                                                      X
                        K̄t+1 = Ȳt − C̄t + (1 − δ)K̄t −                        T Cj,t − ICi,t ,         (5)
                                                                     j∈I,j6=i


where an overbar indicates that the corresponding variable refers to the counterfactual
scenario. Because the disease is assumed to be eliminated with a cost ICi,t , the resources
that were devoted to its treatment can now be used for savings or for consumption. Notice
that this creates an income effect that, in reality, could affect the division of households’
income between savings, and consumption. For tractability, we assume that, in the coun-
terfactual scenario, aggregate investment consists of two parts: a fixed share st of total
output and an additional part from (T Ci,t − ICi,t ) that would otherwise have been used
to pay for the treatment of disease i (after netting out the intervention cost):
                                          X
                     I¯t = Ȳt − C̄t −              T Cj,t = st Ȳt + χ(T Ci,t − ICi,t ).
                                         j∈I,j6=i


In this expression, χ is the fraction of the treatment cost that is diverted to savings and
we have the counterfactual savings rate

                                             st Ȳt + χ(T Ci,t − ICi,t )
                                     s̄t =                               .                               (6)
                                                         Ȳt

As a result, the savings rate could increase if the treatment cost outweighed the interven-
tion cost.



3.3   Impact on labour supply


The evolution of labour supply in the status quo scenario is given by
                                                                      h           i
                     (a)      (a) (a)                          (a)          (a−1)   (a−1)
                   Lt      = Nt `t           with          Nt        = 1 − σt−1 Nt−1 ,                   (7)

        (a)
where σt      is the overall mortality rate of age group a. Denote the mortality rate of people
                                                    (a)                 (a)
in age group a due to the disease i by σi,t and let σ−i,t be the overall mortality rate due
to causes other than disease i. Then we simply have

                                          (a)                  (a)              (a)
                                 (1 − σt ) = (1 − σi,t )(1 − σ−i,t ).

Now we consider the mortality effect of disease i. In general, it reduces labour supply by
                               (a)                  (a)
reducing the population Nt           (through σi,t ). In the counterfactual case, where the disease
is eliminated from time t = 0 onward, the evolution of labour supply is defined similarly
                                                                                        (a)        (a)
to Equation (7), but with a different overall mortality rate (σ−i,t instead of σt ). For


                                                          11
simplicity, we assume that the number of births is the same in both cases at each point in
time t. In general, this is a good approximation because most NCDs affect older adults
who contribute little to overall fertility.

                                                                                                                        (a)
In the counterfactual scenario, the size of the cohort aged a at time t (N̄t ) evolves
according to
                            h           i
                     (a)          (a−1)    (a−1)                         (a)           (a)               (0)      (0)
                 N̄t       = 1 − σ−i,t−1 N̄t−1 ,                     N̄0       = N0 ,            N̄t           = Nt .

More specifically, if a > t, then this cohort was born before the elimination of disease i
such that
                        h           ih          i
                 (a)          (a−1)       (a−2)    (a−2)
               N̄t     = 1 − σ−i,t−1 1 − σ−i,t−2 N̄t−2 . . .
                           t−1 h                        i                 t−1 h              i
                                         (a−1−τ )             (a−t)                 (a−1−τ )   (a−t)
                           Y                                              Y
                       =           1−   σ−i,t−1−τ           N̄0         =      1 − σ−i,t−1−τ N0      .
                           τ =0                                            τ =0

Notice that
                                                    (t−1) h                       i
                                        (a)                          (a−1−τ )           (a−t)
                                                    Y
                                      Nt        =            1 − σt−1−τ               N0         .
                                                    τ =0

Hence, we have
                                                              (t−1) h                        i
                                        (a)          (a)                       (a−1−τ )
                                                              Y
                                      N̄t       =   Nt /                1 − σi,t−1−τ             .
                                                              τ =0

If a ≤ t, then this cohort was born after the elimination of disease i such that
                            h           ih          i
                     (a)          (a−1)       (a−2)    (a−2)
                N̄t        = 1 − σ−i,t−1 1 − σ−i,t−2 N̄t−2 . . .
                               a−1
                               Yh                   i       a−1
                                                            Yh                i
                                           (a−1−τ )   (0)            (a−1−τ )   (0)
                           =          1 − σ−i,t−1−τ N̄t−a =     1 − σ−i,t−1−τ Nt−a .
                               τ =0                                        τ =0

Notice that
                                                    (a−1) h                        i
                                       (a)                              (a−1−τ )           (0)
                                                     Y
                                      Nt        =             1 − σt−1−τ               Nt−a .
                                                     τ =0

Hence, we have
                                                              (a−1) h                        i
                                        (a)           (a)                       (a−1−τ )
                                                              Y
                                      N̄t       = Nt /                  1 − σi,t−1−τ             .
                                                              τ =0

In sum, we arrive at the following equation:

                                                           min{t,a}−1 h                              i
                                    (a)          (a)                                  (a−1−τ )
                                                              Y
                                  N̄t       =   Nt /                       1 − σi,t−1−τ                  ,                    (8)
                                                              τ =0

which accounts for the fact that the loss of labour due to mortality accumulates over the
years.


                                                                12
The morbidity effect of the disease does not change the population size, but can affect the
labour participation rate because people with an illness typically reduce their labour supply
either by reducing working hours or by leaving the work force. Unlike the mortality effect,
tracing the accumulation of morbidity effects over time is complicated because people
affected by morbidity can be cured and hence increase their labour supply again in later
time periods. To capture this fact, we assume that, in each year, an ill person has a
probability (1 − pi ) of recovering from the disease. We assume that this probability stays
constant over time and that it is independent of the number of years the person lived with
the disease. The value of pi can then be easily inferred as the average duration of the
disease through
                                                        1
                                  pi = 1 −                           .
                                             duration of the disease

Because the impact of morbidity is hard to estimate directly, we first define

                     (a)       loss of labour due to morbidity in age group a
                    ξi     =                                                  .                              (9)
                               loss of labour due to mortality in age group a

Next, we assume that the following holds in any given year for age group a:

                                                               (a)
                                              (a)        Y LDi
                                             ξi     =          (a)
                                                                     ,                                      (10)
                                                          Y LLi

            (a)                                                                     (a)
where Y LDi       represents the years lived with disease i and Y LLi                     represents the years of
                                              (a)
life lost due to disease i. Notice that      ξi     can be calculated from the corresponding DALY
data reported by the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (2013).

                                                                      (a)
Now consider a cohort aged a at time t, and let mi                          be the rate of people leaving the
labour force due to morbidity of disease i. Then, if (10) is fulfilled, it is easy to see that

                                                  (a)      (a) (a)
                                             mi         = ξi σi,t .

Unlike labour supply, which can be derived recursively according to Equation (7), the
evolution of the labour participation rate is more complicated. People of different ages
have different labour participation rates, so a recursive framework cannot be adopted. For
tractability, we assume that the labour participation rate for people who are not affected
                                                              (a)
by disease i is exogenously given. Specifically, we define `ˆt to be the labour participation
rate of people without the disease. Because the morbidity effect drives workers out of the
                                                                                         (a)
labour force, the status quo labour participation rate is expected to be smaller than `ˆt .
Notice that the difference comes from two sources: newly affected people who leave the
labour force and people who left the labour force due to disease i years ago and have not
yet recovered. To fix the distortion caused by discretisation, we assume that i) at the
                                                  (a)
beginning of year t, the labour force `t                is calculated, and ii) at the end of each year,



                                                         13
morbidity effects are factored into the population.

                                                                                                              (a)
Now we restrict our attention to the cohort aged a at time t. Notice that `t is deter-
                                                                  (a)
mined by i) the labour participation rate of “healthy” people (`ˆt ) and ii) the fraction
of “healthy” people at the beginning of year t (F (a) ). Here, “healthy” means that the
person has not left the workforce due to morbidity, while the labour participation rate of
the “unhealthy” simply equals zero.

Proposition 1. For the cohort aged a at time t, the fraction of “healthy” people at the
beginning of year t can be approximated by

                                                      a−1
                                                      Yh                                 i
                                                                              (a−1−τ )
                                        F (a) ≈               1 − pτi mi                     .
                                                      τ =0



Proof. The case for a = 1 is trivial. We therefore prove the proposition by induction.
Suppose that
                                                      n−1
                                                      Yh                                 i
                                            (n)                             (n−1−τ )
                                        F         ≈           1−       pτi mi                .
                                                      τ =0

Then consider age n + 1, where, with probability p, those who are sick at the beginning of
age n, (1 − F (n) ), will still be sick, whereas the others return to the labour force. Then,
                                                             (n)
the disease will again claim a fraction mi                         of the total “healthy” population each year.
              (n)
Given that   mi     for n = 1, . . . is small, we have
                             h                 i
                                                      (n)
                    F (n+1) = 1 − p(1 − F (n) ) (1 − mi )
                                                      n−1
                                                                                             !
                                                      Yh                        (n−1−τ )
                                                                                           i
                                                                                                    (n)
                           ≈       1 − p{1 −                  1−           pτi mi           } (1 − mi )
                                                                                                                    (11)
                                                       τ =0
                                 n                                
                                                        (n−τ )
                                 Y
                           ≈             1 − pτi mi                    .
                                 τ =0

In this case, we assume that morbidity only affects the proportion of people in the labour
force and that it is completely independent of the mortality process.


                                                                                           (a)          (a)
Now we can write the approximate relationship between `t                                         and `ˆt as

                                                                   a−1
                                      (a)          (a)             Yh                               i
                           (a)                                                           (a−1−τ )
                          `t     ≈ `ˆt F (a) = `ˆt                            1 − pτi mi                .           (12)
                                                                   τ =0

Although the closed-form solution can be obtained using induction, we prefer to use this
approximation for two reasons: first, the complexity is greatly reduced without sacrificing
much in the way of accuracy, and second, this approximation provides a very intuitive
interpretation and is directly comparable to Equation (8).


                                                               14
                                                                                         (a)
The next step is to generate the labour participation rate of the counterfactual case (`¯t )
                                    (a)                      (a)                  (a)
from that of the status quo case (` ). Notice that here `¯ is different from `ˆ . The
                                                        t                                           t                         t
former represents the labour participation rate of the counterfactual case in which the
disease is eliminated from t = 0 onward; the latter is the labour participation rate of
“healthy” people. If a ≤ t, the cohort was born after the elimination of disease i and
                (a)   (a)
hence we have `¯t = `ˆt (everyone is “healthy” in this cohort). If a > t, then the cohort
was born before the elimination of the disease. In this case, some members of the cohort
may have contracted the disease before t = 0 and not recovered yet. Knowing this, we
have the following:
                                                        (a)    (a)
                                                      `¯t = `ˆt ,                t ≥ a,                                                (13)
                                                      a−1
                                                (a)   Yh                               i
                                        (a)                                (a−1−τ )
                                      `¯t ≈ `ˆt              1 − pτi mi                    ,            t < a.                         (14)
                                                      τ =t

Combining (12), (13), and (14), we get

                min{t,a}−1 h                                  i              min{t,a}−1 h                                        i
   (a)  (a)                                        (a−1−τ )            (a)                                   (a−1−τ ) (a−1−τ )
                      Y                                                           Y
 `¯t ≈ `t /                            1−     pτi mi              =   `t /                         1 − pτi σi,t−1−τ ξi               . (15)
                      τ =0                                                        τ =0

From Equation (15), we see that a larger pi leads to a lower participation rate, i.e., the
morbidity effect is more likely to accumulate over the years if the disease is hard to cure.
The intuition behind Equation (15) is the following: the different exposure to the disease
                                                                                                                                 (a)
drives the difference between the labour participation rate of the status quo (`t ) and
                           (a)
the counterfactual case (`¯ ). For a ≤ t, the cohort in the counterfactual case avoided
                                          t
exposure to the disease completely in the previous a years. For a > t, the cohort only
avoided exposure to the disease in the most recent t years.

Overall, the loss of labour supply in age group a at time t can be calculated as
                                                                                                   
      (a)       (a)             (a)      (a) (a)
                                                                                              1    
  ∆Lt       = L̄t     − Lt            = `t Nt                 h                i h             i − 1
                                                  Qmin{t,a}−1 1 − pτ m(a−1−τ ) 1 − σ (a−1−τ )      
                                                             τ =0                      i       i                    i,t−1−τ
                                min{t,a}−1                   h                  i
               (a)        (a)                    (a−1−τ )              (a−1−τ )
                                      X
            ≈ `t N t                            σi,t−1−τ      1 + pτi ξi          .                                                    (16)
                                      τ =0

                                                                                                                      (a)            (a)
The approximation in Equation (16) results from the observation that σi,t and ξi                                                           are
                                                                                                            (a)
typically small numbers. Defining the term in curly brackets as                                            Mi,t   it follows that

                                                              (a)          (a)   (a)
                                                        ∆Lt         = Lt Mi,t .                                                        (17)

                    (a)
Intuitively, Mi,t can be interpreted as the cumulative labour supply impact of disease i
on the cohort aged a at time t.




                                                                      15
By plugging (17) into (1), the loss of human capital due to disease i at time t can be
written in percentage terms as
                                             PR      (a) (a) (a)    (a)
                                ∆Ht            a=15 ht `t Nt Mi,t
                                    =                   (a) (a) (a)
                                                                        .                       (18)
                                 Ht            PR
                                                 a=15 ht `t Nt

Equation (18) implies that the human capital loss is related to the country’s demographic
structure. Even if the mortality and morbidity effects of a disease were similar in two
                                               (a)
countries for each age group (similar Mi,t for both countries), the aggregate human capital
                                                                          (a) (a)   (a)
loss could still vary vastly due to the different weights (ht `t Nt ) on each age group.

Now, instead of completely eliminating the disease, suppose that the intervention only
reduces the disease prevalence by a certain percentage, say ρ. The previous discussion still
holds true, and we can obtain the loss of labour by replacing (σi,t , mi,t ) with (ρσi,t , ρmi,t )
in (16). Denoting the loss of labour for age group a at time t in case of a reduction in the
                                 (a)
disease prevalence by ρ as ∆Lt (ρ), it is easy to show that

                                             min{t,a}−1                  h                  i
                     (a)        (a)    (a)                    (a−1−τ )             (a−1−τ )
                                                X
                  ∆Lt (ρ) ≈ `t Nt                           ρσi,t−1−τ     1 + pτi ξi
                                                τ =0                                            (19)
                                  (a) (a)
                            ≈   ρLt Mi,t ,

         (a)
where Mi,t is defined in (17), and the approximation is valid when σi,t and mi,t are small.
Equation (19) shows that the cumulative loss of labour is approximately linear with respect
to disease prevalence averted (ρ) given that the mortality and morbidity of the disease are
small.

Our approach has the following advantages over the standard EPIC tool: first, we can
account for morbidity by adjusting the labour participation rate by disease based on the
data of the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (2013); second, we can infer the
impact of a disease on physical capital accumulation by obtaining χ and T Ci,t directly from
the data; and third, human capital accumulation is considered by employing a Mincerian
specification that allows for distinctions among primary, secondary, and tertiary education
and allows for the consideration of experience.



4    Results

We present direct estimates for five conditions for which the necessary mortality data
are available in EPIC (ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, diabetes, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and breast cancer). The results are then scaled
up using Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (2013) data on DALYs to reflect

                                                       16
the four NCDs that are the focus of the United Nations (cardiovascular diseases, cancer,
chronic respiratory diseases, and diabetes), plus mental health conditions. The scaling
is implemented by calculating the proportion of DALYs in a particular domain (e.g.,
cancer) that the relevant disease accounts for in EPIC (breast cancer in this instance).
If breast cancer accounts for 10% of the total DALYs lost to cancer, the scaling factor
applied to our results for breast cancer to obtain a result for all cancers is 0.1. Scaling
factors are calculated for each country. Similarly, we use WHO data on mental illness
DALYs to include estimates of economic losses from mental health conditions. The mental
health scaling factor is calculated by obtaining the ratio of DALYs accounted for by the
four NCD domains to the DALYs accounted for by mental health conditions. Obtaining
comprehensive information on the treatment costs associated with each disease is difficult.
As Table A1 shows, we calculated treatment costs from various sources. For the missing
data, we adjusted for cross-country differences using data on health expenditures per capita
from the World Bank database and adjusted to account for inflation. In addition, for each
country we assumed a fixed annual growth rate of the per capita treatment costs to adjust
for rising medical costs. The annual growth rate of the per capita health expenditure from
2005 to 2014 approximates this number, which is 13.4% for China, 4.6% for Japan, and
7.8% for South Korea. The treatment cost estimates in 2010 are listed in Table A2 in the
Appendix. The GDP projections for the status quo scenario are taken from the World
Bank’s Global Economic Prospects (2017).

Table 1 describes other data sources, while we show disease-specific estimates (ischemic
heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
and breast cancer, before scaling) for each % of disease prevalence averted for each country
in Figure 2 (China), Figure 3 (Japan), and Figure 4 (South Korea). Table 2 shows disease-
specific burden as well as scaled estimates of the total disease burden (100% of mortality
averted for cardiovascular diseases, cancer, chronic respiratory diseases, diabetes, and
mental health conditions) for the period 2010-2030.

                      Table 1: Parameter Values and Data Sources

 Parameter                       Value                                                 Source
 α                                1/3                                       e.g., Jones (1995)
 δ                          0.04-0.05                           e.g., Grossmann et al. (2013)
 s            Depends on the country                                      World Bank (2015)
 η1                             0.134          Psacharopoulos (1994), Hall and Jones (1999)
 η2                             0.101          Psacharopoulos (1994), Hall and Jones (1999)
 η3                             0.068          Psacharopoulos (1994), Hall and Jones (1999)
 η4                        0.09-0.132                                  Heckman et al. (2006)
 η5                -0.0023 to -0.0013                                  Heckman et al. (2006)
 ξi           Depends on the country      Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (2013)
 χi           Depends on the country                    Calculated through other parameters




                                            17
Figure 2: Differential GDP Associated with Averted Disease Prevalence for China (in
billions of 2010 USD)
                                 2000
  Constant 2010 USD (billions)
                                 1500
                                 1000
                                 500
                                 0




                                        0                 50                     100
                                               % Prevalence Avoided
                                            Breast_Cancer             COPD
                                            Cerebrovascular           Diabetes
                                            Ischemic



Figures 2-4 display, by disease, the estimated economic cost savings for a given percentage
of prevalence averted. For example, the estimate at 10% compares the cumulative differ-
ence in GDP in that country between the status quo scenario with disease prevalence as
predicted and the counterfactual scenario, where disease prevalence is reduced by 10%.
Results are shown in billions of real USD with a base year of 2010 and are cumulative over
the period of interest (2010-2030). These estimates indicate that the most costly condi-
tion varies by country, although breast cancer is generally the least costly. For example, in
China the most costly condition is cerebrovascular disease, and in Japan and South Korea
it is diabetes. Interestingly, COPD is expected to cost China 1.7 trillion USD over the
two decades. This is roughly 10.4% of China’s total NCD loss, compared with only 3.1%
in Japan and 5.1% in South Korea. The high prevalence of COPD in China is related to
its air pollution and the large fraction of its population that smokes. Overall, the ranking
of the impact of the other non-communicable diseases varies among the three countries.

We observe that the cost estimates increase roughly linearly with disease prevalence
averted. This linearity is not surprising because (19) is a good approximation of the
loss in labour supply given that the mortality related to each disease is small. Another
feature apparent from these figures is that the burden of non-communicable diseases is
much lower in South Korea than in the other two countries.



                                                          18
Figure 3: Differential GDP Associated with Averted Disease Prevalence for Japan (in
billions of 2010 USD)
                                 600
  Constant 2010 USD (billions)
                                 400
                                 200
                                 0




                                       0                             50                               100
                                                          % Prevalence Avoided
                                                       Breast_Cancer              COPD
                                                       Cerebrovascular            Diabetes
                                                       Ischemic



The final row of Table 2 shows the estimates of the total impact of non-communicable
diseases in the five domains (cardiovascular diseases, cancer, chronic respiratory diseases,
diabetes, and mental health conditions), after the estimates for the individual diseases
have been scaled. Estimates are again given in real USD with a base year of 2010 for the
period 2010-2030. The results indicate that the total economic costs of chronic conditions
are 16 trillion USD in China, 5.7 trillion USD in Japan, and 1.5 trillion USD in South
Korea.
Table 2: Estimates of Total Disease Burden 2010-2030 (100% of Prevalence Averted) in
2010 USD (Billions)

                                  Disease                                      China    Japan   South Korea
                                  Ischemic Heart Disease                       1,140     534        119
                                  Cerebrovascular Disease                      1,728     555        145
                                  Diabetes                                     1,333     667        280
                                  COPD                                         1,681     177         77
                                  Breast Cancer                                 213       77         12
                                  Total (Including Mental Health Conditions)   16,190   5,707      1,511


As previous estimates using the production function-based approach have not included
the treatment cost mechanism, we investigate the contribution of this pathway to our
estimates of the total disease burden. Table A3 in the Appendix shows model estimates in

                                                                     19
Figure 4: Differential GDP Associated with Averted Disease Prevalence for South Korea
(in billions of 2010 USD)
                                 300
  Constant 2010 USD (billions)
                                 200
                                 100
                                 0




                                       0                 50                     100
                                              % Prevalence Avoided
                                           Breast_Cancer             COPD
                                           Cerebrovascular           Diabetes
                                           Ischemic



which we exclude treatment costs, and we use these results to establish the contribution
of treatment costs to the overall total in Figure 5. For China, treatment costs account for
64% of the costs of NCDs, while the corresponding figure is 33% for Japan and 37% for
South Korea. The relatively higher contribution of treatment costs in China can partly
be explained by its large gross savings rate (around 50% according to the World Bank),
compared with that of Japan (22%) and that of South Korea (35%). In our model, χ in
Equation (6) is approximated by the savings rate. A higher savings rate means that a
larger proportion of resources used in treatment could otherwise be used as investment
in physical capital. This leads to a larger output loss for countries with a higher savings
rate.

Our calculations highlight the importance of incorporating the treatment cost mechanism
as an additional pathway into the model for estimating the economic impact of chronic
conditions. Differences in the relative contribution of this pathway are likely due to het-
erogeneity in the prevalence of different conditions and country-specific factors relating to
health care systems.

One question that our analysis raises is whether considering the total costs associated
with NCDs as measured by reducing their prevalence to zero is reasonable. To get an
estimate of the total economic burden of certain conditions, this is indeed what we would


                                                         20
like to know. However, when assessing the impact of realistic reductions in prevalence
that health policies can achieve, considering a scenario in which a particular disease is
eliminated is not reasonable. Chronic conditions may persist even under an ideal health
care system, and even technological advances might not be sufficient to reduce prevalence
to zero. Therefore, we also consider the costs associated with NCDs in a scenario where
we calculate the reduction in mortality for each disease such that the corresponding case
fatality rate reaches the minimum among OECD countries. For example, for China we
estimate how much COPD mortality would have to be reduced to ensure that China had
the same COPD-related case fatality rate (the proportion of reported cases of a specific
disease that are fatal within a specified time frame) as the OECD country with the lowest
COPD-related case fatality rate. The rationale for this analysis is that such a reduction is
a realistic target because another country has already achieved it. More specifically, the
lowest case fatality rates for ischemic heart disease, COPD, and cerebrovascular diseases
are set to those in Slovenia, Estonia, and Slovakia, respectively. For breast cancer and
diabetes the lowest levels are set to those in Cyprus and Iceland.9 The estimates are shown
in Table 3 and, while lower than those presented in Table 2, indicate that reasonable targets
for reductions in the prevalence of chronic conditions are likely to have substantial payoffs
in terms of reducing the costs associated with NCDs.

                                                    Figure 5: % Contribution of Treatment Costs to Total Estimate

                                                          64
                                               60
  Contribution of Treatment Costs to Estimate (%)
                              40




                                                                                                        37
                                                                                 33
             20            0




                                                        China                  Japan               South Korea



Finally, Table 4 provides the estimate of the total disease burden for different measures of
  9
   Estimated case fatality rates were calculated by the authors based on 2015 disease incidence and
mortality rates from Global Burden of Disease Study (2015).


                                                                                 21
Table 3: Estimated Economic Burdens Assuming the Case Fatality Rates of the Countries
with the Lowest Case Fatality Rates among OECD Countries

                                           Ischemic      Cerebrovascular                        Breast
Country                                                                      Diabetes   COPD             Total Cost
                                         Heart Disease       Disease                            Cancer
            Mortality Reduction (%)
                                             29%              18%              29%      59%      44%
China       Under the Assumption                                                                           6,301
            Burden of Excess Mortality
                                             328              302              383      977       94
            Billions (2010 USD)
            Mortality Reduction (%)
                                             52%              33%              37%      50%      14%
Japan       Under the Assumption                                                                           1,667
            Burden of Excess Mortality
                                             274              181              249       88       11
            Billions (2010 USD)
            Mortality Reduction (%)
South                                        36%              27%              66%      36%      10%
            Under the Assumption                                                                            502
Korea
            Burden of Excess Mortality
                                              42               39              184       28       1
            Billions (2010 USD)



economic performance. The total disease burden of NCDs (100% reduction), if measured
as a percentage of aggregate GDP in 2010, is largest in China with 265%, followed by
South Korea with 139%, and Japan with 100%. This measure, albeit straightforward, is
biased in that it leads to a larger proportional burden for countries with a higher growth
potential. Thus, the result is partly explained by the fact that China is expected to enjoy
a much higher GDP growth rate than Japan and South Korea. The per capita figures10
show that Japan has the highest NCD burden with a per capita loss of $44,562 (constant
USD with the base year 2010), compared with only $12,099 in China and $30,560 in South
Korea. Because Japan has the highest per capita GDP and health expenditure, the cost
of each unit of mortality and morbidity is higher for the Japanese. The third measure in
Table 4 shows that the NCD burdens of the three countries are actually relatively similar
if adjusted for the income level (or GDP per capita) and for the growth potential. The
NCD burden is equivalent to an annual tax of 7.17% on the economy in China, whereas
the number is 4.46% for Japan and 5.24% for South Korea.

        Table 4: Total Disease Burden for Different Measures of Economic Performance

                                                                           Per Capita Loss     % of Total GDP
                                      Country      % of 2010 GDP
                                                                             (2010 USD)        During 2010-2030
 Estimates Associated with           China                265%                  12,099              7.17%
      100% Reduction                 Japan                100%                  44,562              4.46%
     of Disease Burden            South Korea             139%                  30,560              5.24%
 Estimates Associated with           China                103%                   4,709              2.79%
 Lowest Case Fatality Rate           Japan                 29%                  13,016              1.30%
  among OECD Countries            South Korea             46%                   10,158              1.74%


While our model can be used to estimate the economic burden of non-communicable dis-
eases and to assess the reduction in the burden from implementing a specific intervention,
it is unrealistic to assume a certain percentage of mortality reduction is costless. By com-
  10
       The per capita loss is calculated based on the population size as of 2010.


                                                         22
paring the total savings and total intervention costs, policymakers would be able to make
better-informed decisions on which intervention is the most cost-beneficial. We adopted
the intervention cost data for China from a recent study (Wang et al., 2014) and take
ischemic heart disease as an example to compare different treatments and their costs for
this disease.

Table 5 lists interventions that reduce the mortality rate of ischemic heart diseases. Strat-
egy A1 uses four oral drugs (aspirin, beta-blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme in-
hibitors, and statins) in patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI). Strategy A2
uses clopidogrel in patients with AMI. Strategy B uses unfractionated heparin in patients
with non-ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI). Strategy C1 uses pri-
mary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) in tertiary hospitals and thrombolysis
with streptokinase in secondary hospitals in patients with ST-segment-elevation myocar-
dial infarction (STEMI). Strategy C2 uses primary PCI in all patients with STEMI, and
strategy C3 uses primary PCI in high-risk patients with NSTEMI in tertiary hospitals.

     Table 5: Intervention Cost and Mortality Reduction for Different Interventions

                                                       Per Capita Intervention Cost
             Intervention      Mortality Reduction
                                                               (2010 USD)
             Strategy   A1             1.3%                         0.040
             Strategy   A2             0.4%                         0.073
             Strategy   B              0.3%                         0.007
             Strategy   C1             4.9%                         0.436
             Strategy   C2             7.2%                         0.762
             Strategy   C3             0.4%                         0.097

Table 6 shows the total savings and total intervention cost from 2010-2030 for each inter-
vention in Table 5. Five of the six interventions are cost-beneficial. Specifically, strategy
B has the highest benefit-cost ratio, followed by strategies A1, C1, C2, and A2. Imple-
menting strategy C3 is not cost-beneficial.

Table 6: Estimates of Total Savings and Total Intervention Cost for Different Interventions
in 2010 USD (Billions)

 Intervention    Mortality reduction   Total Savings   Total Intervention Cost   Benefit-Cost Ratio
 Strategy   A1          1.3%              13.95                1.15                    12.13
 Strategy   A2          0.4%              3.05                 2.09                     1.46
 Strategy   B           0.3%               3.27                0.19                    17.21
 Strategy   C1          4.9%              46.83                12.40                    3.78
 Strategy   C2          7.2%              66.36                21.66                    3.06
 Strategy   C3          0.4%               2.56                 2.77                    0.92


In Table 7 we compare the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) from (Wang et al.,
2014) with the benefit-cost ratios that we calculated. The thresholds recommended by
WHO-CHOICE were used to assess the degree of cost-effectiveness. An intervention is

                                                  23
    Table 7: Comparison between Cost-Benefit Analysis and Cost-Effectiveness Analysis

            Intervention    Benefit-Cost Ratio     ICER (Cost per QALY Gained)
            Strategy   A1         12.13                        $3,100
            Strategy   A2          1.46                       $17,600
            Strategy   B          17.21                        $2,800
            Strategy   C1          3.78                        $9,000
            Strategy   C2          3.05                       $10,700
            Strategy   C3          0.92                       $23,400


deemed highly cost-effective if ICER is less than the nation’s GDP per capita, is deemed
moderately cost-effective if ICER is between 1 and 3 times GDP per capita, and is deemed
not cost-effective if ICER is larger than 3 times GDP per capita. The GDP per capita of
China in 2013 (adjusted by inflation) was $5,721 according to the World Bank.

From Table 7, we can conclude that the interventions rank the same for the cost benefit
analysis and for the cost-effectiveness analysis, while the cutoff levels differ. Strategies
A1 and B are highly cost-effective, C1 and C2 are moderately cost-effective, while A2
and C3 are not cost-effective. In our study, by contrast, all strategies except C3 are
cost-beneficial. This is because our calculation is different from cost-effectiveness analysis.
We not only take into account the health outcome, but also the economic impact. For
example, the saved treatment cost from one intervention can be used to invest in physical
capital accumulation. Overall, strategy B has the highest benefit-cost ratio, followed by
strategy A1. This means that implementing strategies A1 and B would save much more
money for China from 2010-2030 than they cost. While strategy A2 is less cost-beneficial
than these two, the monetary value saved from this intervention is still higher than the
total intervention cost. Finally, note that our results actually represent a lower bound of
the benefits because the utility value that individuals assign to a longer and healthier life
is not quantified and because general equilibrium repercussions and a feedback effect from
income growth on health are not considered.



5     Conclusions

We implement a macroeconomic production function-based approach to assess the eco-
nomic burden of non-communicable diseases. The advantage of this approach over alter-
natives is that we can account for economic adjustment mechanisms and spillover effects
on labour markets and for heterogeneous human capital accumulation associated with in-
creases in disease prevalence. Using a human capital augmented production function as
proposed by Lucas (1988), we incorporate morbidity and mortality effects into the model
and account for treatment costs. We apply our approach to calculate the economic impact
of non-communicable diseases for China, Japan, and South Korea, three countries facing

                                              24
rapid population ageing. Our results indicate that chronic conditions are likely to be very
costly in terms of lost output, with estimates of the total burden over the time period
2010-2030 on the order of 16, 5.7, and 1.5 trillion 2010 USD for China, Japan, and South
Korea, respectively. Though the losses differ significantly at both aggregate and per capita
levels, the NCD burdens of the three countries are actually quite similar after adjusting for
the growth potential and the income level. In this case the figures are 7.17%, 4.46%, and
5.24% of total GDP for China, Japan, and South Korea, respectively, during 2010-2030.
We also applied a cost-benefit analysis to a set of intervention strategies in China and
showed that the total savings from all interventions are high and five of six strategies are
cost-beneficial. This result implies that a broader range of interventions can be recom-
mended to policymakers from an economic perspective than from a pure cost-effectiveness
perspective.

Cross-country heterogeneity exists in the ranking of disease importance, which likely re-
flects differential exposure to risk factors, smoking patterns, and environmental pollution.
A more detailed analysis of these differences is an important topic for future research.
The main conclusion of the paper is that the economic burden associated with non-
communicable diseases in East Asia, as elsewhere, is substantial. Efforts to tackle the
spread of chronic conditions and their associated risk factors now are likely to have sub-
stantial pay-offs in the future.

This model is flexible and could also be used to explore the impact of other factors im-
pinging on health such as communicable diseases and road-traffic accidents. In addition,
our approach is also relevant for modelling the impact of other health domains, such as
communicable diseases. In this paper we have stayed within the production function-based
framework, which has the advantages of i) providing a tractable and parsimonious method
for analysing the economic burden of chronic conditions and ii) leading to a conservative
estimate of the economic burden of diseases. This framework lays the ground for the
development of a micro-founded computable general equilibrium model in future research.



References

D. Abegunde and A. Stanciole. An estimation of the economic impact of chronic noncom-
  municable diseases in selected countries. WHO Working Paper, Department of Chronic
  Diseases and Health Promotion, Geneva, 2006.

D. Acemoglu and S. Johnson. Disease and development: The effect of life expectancy on
  economic growth. Journal of Political Economy, 115(6):925–985, 2007.

D. Acemoglu and S. Johnson. Disease and development: a reply to Bloom, Canning, and
  Fink. The Journal of Political Economy, 122(6): 1367-1375, 2014.



                                             25
P. Aghion, P. Howitt, and F. Murtin. The relationship between health and growth: when
  Lucas meets Nelson-Phelps. Review of Economics and Institutions, 2(1):1–24, 2011.

R. J. Barro. Economic growth in a cross section of countries. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 106(2):407–443, 1991.

N. Beaulieu, D. E. Bloom, L. R. Bloom, and R. Stein. Breakaway: The global burden of
  cancer challenges and opportunities. The Economist Intelligence Unit, London: Live-
  strong, 2009.

D. E. Bloom, E. Cafiero, E. Jan-Llopis, S. Abrahams-Gessel, L. R. Bloom, S. Fathima,
  A. B. Feigl, T. Gaziano, A. Hamandi, and M. Mowafi. The global economic burden of
  noncommunicable diseases. Technical report, Program on the Global Demography of
  Aging, Geneva, Switzerland, 2012.

D. E. Bloom, E. T. Cafiero-Fonseca, M. E. McGovern, and K. Prettner. China and India’s
  descent into chronic disease: Killing themselves slowly. Milken Institute Review, 2nd
  Quarter:24–33, 2014a.

D. E. Bloom, E. T. Cafiero-Fonseca, M. E. McGovern, K. Prettner, A. Stanciole, J. Weiss,
  S. Bakkila, and L. Rosenberg. The macroeconomic impact of non-communicable dis-
  eases in China and India: Estimates, projections, and comparisons. The Journal of the
  Economics of Ageing, 4:100–111, December 2014b.

D. E. Bloom, D. Canning, and G. Fink. Disease and development revisited. The Journal
  of Political Economy, 122(6):1355–1366, 2014c.

D. E. Bloom, D. Canning, R. K. Mansfield, and M. Moore. Demographic change, social
  security systems, and savings. Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(1):92–114, 2007.

D. E. Bloom, D. Canning, and M. Moore. Optimal retirement with increasing longevity.
  Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 116(3):838–858, 2014d.

D. E. Bloom, D. Canning, and J. Sevilla. The effect of health on economic growth: A
  production function approach. World Development, 32(1):1–13, 2004.

D. E. Bloom, S. Chen, M. E. McGovern, K. Prettner, V. Candeias, A. Bernaert, and
  S. Cristin. Economics of non-communicable diseases in Indonesia. Technical report,
  World Economic Forum, Indonesia, Jakarta, 2015.

D. E. Bloom, D. Chisholm, E. Jan-Llopis, K. Prettner, A. Stein, and A. Feigl. From
  burden to “best buys”: Reducing the economic impact of non-communicable disease in
  low-and middle-income countries. Technical report, WHO executive summary, Geneva,
  Switzerland, 2011.

H.-S. Chang, H.-J. Kim, C.-M. Nam, S.-J. Lim, Y.-H. Jang, S. Kim, and H.-Y. Kang.
  The socioeconomic burden of coronary heart disease in Korea. Journal of Preventive
  Medicine and Public Health, 45(5):291–300, 2012.

M. Cervellati and U. Sunde. Life expectancy and economic growth: the role of the demo-
 graphic transition. Journal of Economic Growth, 16(2):99–133, 2011.

G. Currie, K. D. Kerfoot, C. Donaldson, and C. Macarthur. Are cost of injury studies
  useful? Injury Prevention, 6(3):175–176, 2000.


                                          26
D. Cutler, A. Deaton, and A. Lleras-Muney. The determinants of mortality. Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 20(3):1, 2006.

S. N. Durlauf, P. A. Johnson, and J. R. Temple. Growth econometrics. In Handbook of
  Economic Growth, volume 1, pages 555–677. North Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands,
  2005.

D. S. Dwyer and O. S. Mitchell. Health problems as determinants of retirement: Are
  self-rated measures endogenous? Journal of Health Economics, 18(2):173–193, 1999.

M. Eberhardt and F. Teal. Econometrics for grumblers: A new look at the literature on
 cross country growth empirics. Journal of Economic Surveys, 25(1):109–155, 2011.

I. Frankovic, M. Kuhn, and S. Wrzaczek. Medical care within an OLG economy with real-
   istic demography. No. 02/2016. ECON WPS-Vienna University of Technology Working
   Papers in Economic Theory and Policy, 2016

Global Burden of Disease Study 2015. Global burden of disease study 2015 (GBD 2015)
  results. Seattle, United States: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME),
  2016.

V. Grossmann, T. Steger, and T. Trimborn. Dynamically optimal R&D subsidization.
  Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 37(3):516–534, 2013.

R. E. Hall and C. I. Jones. Why do some countries produce so much more output per
  worker than others? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1):83–116, 1999.

J. J. Heckman, L. J. Lochner, and P. E. Todd. Earnings functions, rates of return and
   treatment effects: The Mincer equation and beyond. In Handbook of the Economics of
   Education, volume 1, pages 307–458. North Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2006.

International Diabetes Federation.   IDF diabetes atlas – 7th edition, 2015.      URL:
  http://www.diabetesatlas.org

Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. India global burden of disease study 2010
  (GBD 2010) results 1990-2010. Technical report, Institute for Health Metrics and Eval-
  uation, Seattle, 2013.

N. Islam. Growth empirics: A panel data approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110
  (4):1127–1170, 1995.

R. Jäckle and O. Himmler. Health and wages: Panel data estimates considering selection
  and endogeneity. Journal of Human Resources, 45(2):364–406, 2010.

A. M. Jones, N. Rice, and J. Roberts. Sick of work or too sick to work? Evidence on
  self-reported health shocks and early retirement from the BHPS. Economic Modelling,
  27(4):866–880, 2010.

C. I. Jones. R&D-based models of economic growth. Journal of Political Economy, 103
  (4):759–784, 1995.

P. M. Kearney, M. Whelton, K. Reynolds, P. Muntner, P. K. Whelton, and J. He. Global
  burden of hypertension: Analysis of worldwide data. The Lancet, 365(9455):217–223,
  2005. ISSN 0140-6736.


                                          27
S.-G. Kim, M.-I. Hahm, K.-S. Choi, N.-Y. Seung, H.-R. Shin, and E.-C. Park. The
  economic burden of cancer in Korea in 2002. European Journal of Cancer Care, 17(2):
  136–144, 2008.

M. Kuhn and K. Prettner. Growth and welfare effects of health care in knowledge-based
 economies. Journal of Health Economics, 46(A):100–119, 2016.

M. Kuhn, S. Wrzaczek, G. Feichtinger, and A. Prskawetz. Optimal choice of health and
 retirement in a life-cycle model. Journal of Economic Theory, 158(A):186–212, 2015.

D. N. Lakdawalla, E. C. Sun, A. B. Jena, C. M. Reyes, D. P. Goldman, and T. J. Philipson.
  An economic evaluation of the war on cancer. Journal of Health Economics, 29(3):333–
  346, 2010.

S. Lim, H. Kim, C. Nam, H. Chang, Y.-H. Jang, S. Kim, and H.-Y. Kang. Socioeconomic
   costs of stroke in Korea: Estimated from the Korea national health insurance claims
   database. J Prev Med Public Health, 42(4):251–260, 2009.

M. Lindeboom and M. Kerkhofs. Health and work of the elderly: Subjective health
 measures, reporting errors and endogeneity in the relationship between health and work.
 Journal of Applied Econometrics, 24(6):1024–1046, 2009.

G. López-Casasnovas, B. Rivera, and L. Currais. Health and economic growth: Findings
  and policy implications. MIT Press, Cambridge, 2005.

R. Lozano, H. Wang, K. J. Foreman, J. K. Rajaratnam, M. Naghavi, J. R. Marcus,
  L. Dwyer-Lindgren, K. T. Lofgren, D. Phillips, and C. Atkinson. Progress towards
  millennium development goals 4 and 5 on maternal and child mortality: An updated
  systematic analysis. The Lancet, 378(9797):1139–1165, 2011.

R. E. Lucas. On the mechanics of economic development. Journal of Monetary Economics,
  22(1):3–42, 1988.

K. McGarry. Health and retirement: Do changes in health affect retirement expectations?
  Journal of Human Resources, 39(3):624–648, 2004.

J. A. Mincer. Schooling and earnings. In Schooling, Experience, and Earnings, pages
  41–63. NBER, New York, 1974.

K. M. Murphy and R. H. Topel. The value of health and longevity. Journal of Political
  Economy, 114(5):871–904, 2006.

C. J. Murray, T. Vos, R. Lozano, M. Naghavi, A. D. Flaxman, C. Michaud, M. Ezzati,
  K. Shibuya, J. A. Salomon, and S. Abdalla. Disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) for
  291 diseases and injuries in 21 regions, 1990–2010: A systematic analysis for the global
  burden of disease study 2010. The Lancet, 380(9859):2197–2223, 2013.

S. Nishimura and C. Zaher. Cost impact of COPD in Japan: Opportunities and challenges?
   Respirology, 9(4):466–473, 2004.

K. Prettner and D. Canning. Increasing life expectancy and optimal retirement in general
  equilibrium. Economic Theory, 56(1):191–217, 2014.

L. Pritchett and L. H. Summers. Wealthier is healthier. Journal of Human Resources, 34
  (1):841–868, 1996.

                                           28
G. Psacharopoulos. Returns to investment in education: A global update. World Devel-
  opment, 22(9):1325–1343, 1994.

D. P. Rice. Cost of illness studies: What is good about them? Injury Prevention, 6(3):
  177–179, 2000.

X. Sala-i Martin. I just ran two million regressions. American Economic Review, 87(2):
  178–183, 1997.

X. Sala-i Martin, G. Doppelhofer, and R. I. Miller. Determinants of long-term growth:
  A Bayesian averaging of classical estimates (BACE) approach. American Economic
  Review, 94(4):813, 2004.

R. M. Solow. A contribution to the theory of economic growth. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 70(1):65–94, 1956.

M. Suhrcke and D. Urban. Are cardiovascular diseases bad for economic growth? Health
 Economics, 19(12):1478–1496, 2010.

W. K. Viscusi and J. E. Aldy. The value of a statistical life: A critical review of market
 estimates throughout the world. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 27(1):5–76, 2003.

M. Wang, A. E. Moran, J. Liu, P. G. Coxson, P. A. Heidenreich, D. Gu, J. He, L. Goldman
 and D. Zhao. Cost-effectiveness of optimal use of acute myocardial infarction treatments
 and impact on coronary heart disease mortality in China. Circulation: Cardiovascular
 Quality and Outcomes, 7(1):78–85, 2014.

D. N. Weil. Accounting for the effect of health on economic growth. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 122(3):1265–1306, 2007.

D. N. Weil. Health and economic growth. In The Handbook of Economic Growth, volume 2.
  North Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2014.

World Bank. World development indicators, 2015.           http://data.worldbank.org/
 indicatorID-57.

World Bank. Global economic prospects, January 2017 weak investment in uncertain
 times. Washington, DC: World Bank, 2017.

World Health Organization. WHO guide to identifying the economic consequences of
 disease and injury. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2009




                                           29
Appendix: Additional results

                     Table A1: Data Sources of Treatment Costs

                 Disease                     Treatment Cost Source
          Ischemic Heart Disease               Chang et al. (2012)
          Cerebrovascular Disease               Lim et al. (2009)
                 Diabetes           International Diabetes Federation (2015)
                  COPD                    Nishimura and Zaher (2004)
              Breast Cancer                     Kim et al. (2008)


          Table A2: Estimates of Treatment Cost per Country (2010 USD)

  Country             Disease           Treatment Cost per Capita (in 2010 USD)
  China       Ischemic Heart Disease                     $13.29
  Japan       Ischemic Heart Disease                     $69.39
  Korea       Ischemic Heart Disease                     $29.23
  China       Cerebrovascular Disease                    $12.97
  Japan       Cerebrovascular Disease                    $67.76
  Korea       Cerebrovascular Disease                    $28.54
  China              Diabetes                            $11.62
  Japan              Diabetes                            $242.96
  Korea              Diabetes                            $154.45
  China               COPD                               $13.32
  Japan               COPD                               $69.94
  Korea               COPD                                $26.74
  China           Breast Cancer                           $2.78
  Japan           Breast Cancer                          $15.68
  Korea           Breast Cancer                           $4.91

     Table A3: Estimates Excluding Treatment Costs in 2010 USD (Billions)

      Disease                                         China   Japan    Korea
      Ischemic Heart Disease                           388      428      90
      Cerebrovascular Disease                          993      452     117
      Diabetes                                         268      243     128
      COPD                                             926       74      51
      Breast Cancer                                     55       53       7
      Total (Including Mental Health Conditions)      5,781    3,775    943




                                         30
