                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE CAPITAL STRUCTURE OF NATIONS

                                        Patrick Bolton
                                        Haizhou Huang

                                      Working Paper 23612
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23612


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2017




We thank the referees and Alex Edmans (the editor) for their detailed and very helpful comments.
We are grateful to Yi Huang, Ye Li, Ailsa Roell, Tano Santos, Jose Scheinkman, Neng Wang and
to seminar participants at the Graduate Institute Geneva, LSE, NYU, and PBoC for their
comments. We thank Jieyun Wu and Wei Xiong for excellent research assistance. The views
expressed in the paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of
CICC. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Patrick Bolton and Haizhou Huang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Capital Structure of Nations
Patrick Bolton and Haizhou Huang
NBER Working Paper No. 23612
July 2017
JEL No. E5,E62,F3,F4,G3

                                           ABSTRACT

When a nation can finance its investments via foreign-currency denominated debt or domestic-
currency claims, what is the optimal capital structure of the nation? Building on the functions of
fiat money as both medium of exchange, and store of value like corporate equity, our model
connects monetary economics, fiscal theory and international finance under a unified corporate
finance perspective. With frictionless capital markets both a Modigliani-Miller theorem for
nations and the classical quantity theory of money hold. With capital market frictions, a nation's
optimal capital structure trades off inflation dilution costs and expected default costs on foreign-
currency debt. Our framing focuses on the process by which new money claims enter the
economy and the potential wealth redistribution costs of inflation.


Patrick Bolton
Columbia Business School
804 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pb2208@columbia.edu

Haizhou Huang
China International Capital Corp. (CICC)
haizhou.huang@cicc.com.cn
1     Introduction

When a nation can …nance its investments via foreign-currency denominated debt

or domestic-currency claims, what is the optimal capital structure of the nation?
Can corporate …nance theory shed light on this …nancing question for nations? The
choice of capital structure for a …rm is sometimes narrowly formulated as a choice of

optimal leverage. How high should the ratio of debt to total assets be? For nations
this question is typically formulated as a debt sustainability problem. What is a
reasonable range for the debt-to-GDP ratio? However, even such a narrow framing
around corporate leverage cannot entirely avoid addressing the issue of when and

how much a …rm should rely on equity versus debt …nancing for its investments.
This is where an analogy between the …nancial structure of a corporation and the
…nancial structure of a nation becomes problematic. For, what is the analog of

corporate equity for a nation?
    The idea we put forward in this paper is that the …at money of a nation and
other …at claims may be seen as a close equivalent to the common stock of a
corporation. At the simplest level, shares in a company just as units of …at money,

entitle the owner to a pro rata share of output. For a company, the output is pro…ts
net of interest expenses and taxes. For a nation, the output is real production of
goods and services net of any foreign debt obligations. The goal of this paper is to

formally model this analogy and thereby inform the determination of the optimal
capital structure of nations.
    In …nance textbooks corporate equity is de…ned as simply a …nancial claim enti-
tling the holder to a pro rata share of residual cash-‡ows. Voting rights attached to

common stock and the corporate control dimension of common stock instruments
are typically ignored in both textbooks and most corporate …nance models (see e.g.
the survey by Harris and Raviv, 1991). The parallel of equity with …at money is
most compelling under such a stylized representation of equity, especially in a static


                                          2
model. Abstracting from control considerations of corporations is convenient as it
allows us to also abstract from political considerations for nations. Still, there re-
main important di¤erences, which mainly have to do with the fact that …at money
is not only a store of value but also a medium of exchange. That is, individuals

store value by holding money balances from one period to the next and they ob-
tain output by trading money for goods. The additional function of …at money as
medium of exchange is a key feature of our model.

   Particularly relevant for nations is the pecking order theory of corporate …nancing
of Myers and Majluf (1984) and Myers (1984), which pits the (informational) dilu-
tion cost advantages of debt against …nancial distress costs or debt-overhang costs
(Myers, 1977). According to this theory, nations, like corporations, should fund

their investments and other expenditures …rst with internal funds (or tax revenues),
then with debt, and …nally with equity.
   The analog of dilution costs of equity for the owners of a …rm is in‡ation costs

for the holders of …at money. If a company issues new shares to new shareholders
at a price below their true value, then the value of the shares held by existing
shareholders is diluted. Similarly, when a nation issues more money to new holders
while adding less real output than the purchasing power of money, then existing

holders of money are also diluted in proportion to the transfer of value. Hence,
as in Myers and Majluf (1984) the optimal …nancial structure of a nation can be
understood as pitting the in‡ation costs of money issuance against the default and

debt-overhang costs of debt.
   The basic model we consider has three periods. In period zero the nation under-
takes investments, which improve the production technology. We consider …nancing
of these investments either through (foreign-currency) debt or through …at money

issuance. The nation is run by a representative risk-neutral agent, who maximizes
the utility of consumers’ life-time consumption. This representative agent thus
issues claims in period zero to …nance investments against period-two output. Pro-


                                          3
duction takes place in period one and requires a real consumption good as an input.
This real good is purchased from a representative consumer with …at money held
by the representative …rm. Thus, money in our model plays the dual role of means
of exchange and store of value. Realized output in period two is stochastic and

is sold to the representative consumer (after subtracting any foreign-currency debt
obligations) against money saved by the representative consumer from period one
to period two.

   We begin our analysis by considering a frictionless economy, and show that an
analog of the Modigliani-Miller irrelevance theorem can be established for nations.
In an ideal frictionless economy it does not matter how the nation funds its invest-
ments. It obtains the same …nal expected utility for the representative consumer

by …nancing its investments by printing money or by issuing debt. In addition, un-
der frictionless capital markets the classical quantity theory of money also holds.
The Modigliani-Miller irrelevance theorem for nations combines in our reduced form

framework the ideas of Ricardian Equivalence (Barro, 1974) and the Fiscal theory
of the price level (Leeper, 1991, Sims, 1995, 2001, Woodford, 1995 and Cochrane,
2005).
   As in all corporate …nance theories, capital structure for the nation only matters

in the presence of friction. We introduce two types of frictions. First, if the na-
tion relies on foreign-currency …nancing, we introduce a classic willingness to repay
problem. If realized output in period two is too low relative to the nation’s debt

burden, then the nation prefers to default on its debt obligations even if it incurs
a deadweight output loss as a result of the default. Second, if the nation relies on
equity …nancing (printing money), it may incur equity dilution or in‡ation costs.
We model these costs by introducing di¤erences of beliefs between international

investors, who o¤er investment goods in exchange for money, and domestic resi-
dents regarding the nation’s future monetary policy. The more the nation relies on
printing money, the more investors worry about future in‡ation. When investors


                                         4
have an exaggerated fear of in‡ation they will undervalue the nation’s currency and
thus impose a funding cost on domestic residents. The representative consumer of
the nation then trades o¤ the dilution costs of money against the expected default
cost of debt to determine an optimal capital structure of the nation.

   Our theory of the capital structure of nations makes an explicit comparison
between the bene…ts of printing money (what money buys) and the costs (higher
in‡ation). Thus, if the bene…ts of printing money are substantial (for example,

…nancing a valuable investment or avoiding a buildup of unsustainable debts) then
they may justify paying some in‡ation costs. As Myers and Majluf (1984) makes
clear, it may be optimal for a …rm (or a nation) to issue new equity to fund a new
valuable investment even at the cost of diluting ownership, and even if the new

equity o¤ering results in a stock price drop.
   The classic quantity theory of money is a benchmark model in monetary eco-
nomics. We contribute to this theory by describing more explicitly the process by

which …at money enters the economy. The stock of …at money is not increased by
dropping money from a helicopter (as is often assumed in textbook treatments),
but by purchasing real goods and securities with the newly printed money. A key
determinant of the e¤ects of an increase in the money base on the price level then is

the size of the increase in output resulting from the real investment that is …nanced
with the new money issue.
   By focusing on what money buys, our theory also emphasizes the tight link

between the costs of in‡ation and redistribution of wealth. In our model there is
no cost of in‡ation without redistribution. The cost of in‡ation (if there is any) is
the transfer of wealth (if there is one) from existing holders of money to the new
holders of money. As is the case in Myers and Majluf (1984), where a new equity

issue involves no dilution of existing shareholders if it is a rights issue, if a nation
issues new money to all existing holders of money in proportion to their holdings
then there is no cost of in‡ation.


                                           5
    After analyzing the optimal capital structure and characterizing di¤erent equi-
libria, we extend our analysis to the debt overhang problem, when the nation’s
initial debt is so large that it distorts the nation’s e¢ cient investment decision. We
then proceed to analyze to what extent monetary policy and debt monetization, as

well as foreign-exchange reserve management, can help deal with the debt overhang
problem. Finally, we relate some key model predictions to empirical observations
and conclude.

    Related Literature. An analogy between corporate equity and …at money has
…rst been made in the context of the …scal theory of the price level (Sims 2001, and
Cochrane 2005).1 But the implications of this analogy for the optimal …nancing
of government expenditures are not systematically explored in this literature. Sims

(2001) contrasts domestic-currency debt …nancing with dollarized debt …nancing
and argues that full dollarization is ine¢ cient, as it amounts to giving up a valuable
option to in‡ate the debt.

    Although our basic model borrows several elements of the pecking-order theory
of Myers (1984), one important di¤erence in our modeling of the costs of equity is
that we do not impose rational expectations on investors and domestic residents. In-
stead, we follow Hong, Scheinkman and Xiong (2006), Dittmar and Thakor (2007),

and the ‘market-driven’corporate …nance literature (Baker, 2009) by allowing for a
more realistic, behavioral perspective on expectation formation, with di¤erences of
opinion between foreign investors and domestic consumers, as in Scheinkman and

Xiong (2003).2
    There is clearly a link between our analysis and the international …nance liter-
ature on sovereign debt, especially the literature around the notion of the ‘original
   1 Cochrane  (2005) identi…es the connection when he writes: “The …scal theory of the price
level recognizes that nominal debt, including the monetary base, is a residual claim to govern-
ment primary surpluses, just as Microsoft stock is a residual claim to Microsoft’s earnings.”
[Cochrane, 2005 page 502]
   2 Malmendier and Nagel (2014) …nd evidence that individual in‡ation expectations are

far from rational and are heavily in‡uenced by individuals’ personal past experiences with
in‡ation.



                                              6
sin’. This is a term introduced by Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panniza (2003) to
refer to the observation that until recently most emerging market countries would
only issue foreign-currency denominated debt. They argue that it was impossible
for most of these countries to borrow from international investors in the form of

domestic-currency debt, as they had not established a credible monetary policy to
control in‡ation. Relatedly, Eaton and Gersovitz (1981) and Bulow and Rogo¤
(1989) have argued that it could also be di¢ cult for these countries to raise funds

by issuing foreign-currency debt, as they had a limited ability to commit to repay.
   Besides the limited commitment problem that constrains sovereign borrowing,
another widely examined problem in the international …nance literature following
Calvo (1988) is self-ful…lling debt crises, which expose sovereigns who borrow in the

form of foreign-currency debt to substantial …nancial risk (see Chang and Velasco,
2000, Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo, 2001, Cole and Kehoe, 2000, Jeanne and
Wyplosz, 2001, Jeanne and Zettelmeyer, 2002, and Jeanne, 2009).

   The more recent studies on self-ful…lling debt crises extend the framework to
include both domestic and foreign-currency debt. The central question addressed in
these studies is whether the risk of self-ful…lling debt crises can be reduced or entirely
avoided if the debt is denominated in domestic currency (see Araujo, Leon and

Santos, 2013, Aguiar, Amador, Farhi and Gopinath, 2013, Jeanne and Wang, 2013,
Corsetti and Dedola, 2014, Bacchetta, Perrazi and van Wincoop, 2015, Nue
                                                                       no and
Thomas, 2015, and Reis, 2017). To the extent that the monetization of domestic-

currency debt can mitigate the risk of self-ful…lling debt crises, albeit at the cost
of higher in‡ation, these studies explore a related tradeo¤ to ours: The bene…t of
domestic-currency debt is a lower risk of default but this comes at the expense of a
higher cost of in‡ation.

   Although the general tradeo¤ in these studies is similar to ours, the conception
of in‡ation costs is entirely di¤erent. Taking a corporate …nance perspective, we
associate in‡ation costs with dilution costs. The cost of in‡ation is a wealth re-


                                            7
distribution cost from domestic residents to foreign investors. The above studies
on credibility and self-ful…lling debt crises, however, introduce in‡ation costs exoge-
nously, or tie the cost of in‡ation to a loss in future monetary credibility. The higher
is current in‡ation, the higher is expected future in‡ation. This, in turn, results in

higher nominal debt yields, and thereby in higher future debt servicing costs, which
invite further future monetization and therefore higher future in‡ation, etc. Our
model can also accommodate concerns over monetary credibility and thereby allow

for unsustainable domestic-currency debt. However, to focus on the more novel no-
tion of dilution costs we downplay credibility issues for most of our analysis. Note
also that our corporate …nance perspective allows us to delink a monetary expansion
(a new equity issue) with a mechanical increase in the price level. The monetary

expansion may not necessarily result in an increase in the price level if it is used to
fund a positive NPV investment.
   Another related international …nance literature is that on sovereign debt over-

hang (Sachs, 1984, and Krugman, 1988, who build on the corporate …nance ideas
of Myers, 1977). Our analysis of debt overhang relates in particular to the literature
on sovereign debt sustainability and the question of what is a reasonable range for
a sustainable debt-to-GDP ratio (see, e.g., Huang and Xie, 2008). We address this

issue from the perspective of the capital structure of nations and suggest a com-
bination of policy tools, including monetary policy, debt monetization, and foreign
exchange reserves management, to deal with sovereign debt overhang issues.

   In policy discussions and scholarly writings on sovereign-debt restructuring, the
analogy with corporate debt is taken for granted (see Bolton, 2003, and Panniza,
Sturzenegger, and Zettelmeyer, 2009). The latest, prolonged, Greek debt crisis, and
the dramatic legal battles over Argentina’s sovereign-debt restructuring following the

2012 ruling of the US Southern District Court in New York, have injected new life
in the idea of creating a sovereign-debt restructuring scheme for nations akin to
corporate bankruptcy.


                                           8
    Our paper also contributes to the growing literature on foreign exchange re-
serves, which distinguishes between two explanations for the recent build-up of
reserves: beggar-thy-neighbor policies (Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber, 2004)
and precautionary savings (Jeanne, 2007). We emphasize foreign exchange reserves

management as a tool of monetary policy for an open economy, developed or de-
veloping countries alike.
    Finally, our paper is also related to the macroeconomics of public …nance, and

sheds new light on the …scal theory of the price level and the relationship between
…scal constraints and monetization.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 develops the
basic model. Section 3 establishes the Modigliani-Miller theorem for nations and

the quantity theory of money. Section 4 introduces the basic frictions of willing-
ness to in‡ate and willingness to repay and derives the optimal capital structure of
nations. Section 5 extends the analysis to debt overhang. Section 6 considers debt

monetization and the interaction of …scal and monetary policy. Section 7 analyzes
a nation’s foreign exchange reserves management. Section 8 discusses empirical
predictions of the basic theory, and section 9 concludes. Proofs are presented in the
appendix.


2     Model

We consider a nation with an open economy, operating over three periods. In the
initial period (date 0) the nation can undertake an investment of size k > 0, which
improves its productivity. In the intermediate period (date 1) the nation allocates its
initial endowment of goods w between consumption c1 and inputs for production.

In the …nal period (date 2) output is realized and consumed.
    We begin by describing the economy at dates 1 and 2, assuming that no invest-
ment has been undertaken at date 0. We can think of these two dates as represent-



                                          9
ing a short time window of the life-cycle of an in…nitely lived nation. The economy
comprises a continuum of identical consumers and …rms operating in perfectly com-
petitive markets. Consumers are assumed to be risk-neutral and to maximize total
life-time consumption. Consumers require a minimum subsistence consumption in

each period, which we normalize to equal 0, so that we must have ct             0, t = 1; 2.
Their utility function is:
                                  U (c1 ; c2 ) = c1 + c2 ,                              (1)

where         1, so that consumers have a preference for late rather than early con-
sumption. Consumers’ initial endowment of goods at date 1 is w > 0. They can
store their initial endowment or sell it to …rms. Storage, however, results in some

depreciation: if the endowment w is stored from period 1 to period 2 it depreciates
to dw, where d < 1. For most of our analysis we can set d =                 without loss of
generality.
   The representative competitive …rm uses the consumption good as an input into

production. Its production function is given by

                                          y        f (x);

with f 0 > 0, f 00 < 0, where      is a productivity shock with p.d.f. h( ) and c.d.f.

H( ) on the support [    L; H ]   (with       L   > 0), and x denotes the quantity of input
used by the …rm in production. Firms’initial endowment of …at money is m > 0.
They purchase consumers’ initial endowment of inputs using cash at date 1, and

consumers use the saved cash to purchase …rms’output at date 2.
   Firms are owned by entrepreneurs, whose objective is to maximize date 2 output,
as their date 2 consumption is a fraction              2 (0; 1) of …nal output. To minimize
the number of parameters to keep track of, we let f (x) = (1                  )F (x) denote

the …nal output to be brought to the market, net of the entrepreneur’s consumption
(that is, output gross of entrepreneurial consumption is F (x)). Let m2 denote the
representative …rm’s holdings of cash at the end of period 2, then the continuation


                                                  10
value for the …rm is given by V (m2 ), which is strictly increasing in m2 . The value
V (m2 ) can be thought of as the present discounted value of future entrepreneurial
consumption streams.
   To be able to consume, entrepreneurs must be able to produce. And to be able

to produce they must be able to purchase inputs. They can only do this against …at
money. If m2 represents the expected money holdings of the representative …rm,
then the value of money holdings mi for an individual …rm i is given by V^ (mi ; m2 ).

This value is clearly increasing in mi , @ V^ (mi ; m2 )=@mi > 0, as …rm i is then able
to purchase more inputs in the subsequent iteration. In equilibrium all …rms end
up holding the same amount of money m2 and we have V^ (mi ; m2 )              V (m2 ).
Moreover, we have V 0 (m2 )       @ V^ (mi ; m2 )=@mi > 0. This is a simple way of

solving the Hahn (1965, 1982) problem that in a …nal period money has no value.
   In the situation where this economy functions with no investment and no bor-
rowing, the central planner ’s intertemporal optimization problem is to solve:


                              max[ (w      x) + f (x)]


where   = E( ).
   We shall make the following assumption throughout our analysis:

   Assumption A1: xf 0 (x)       f (x) for all x   w.
   Under this assumption it is optimal to set x = w, and period 1 is entirely a
production period, while period 2 is a consumption period.
   To set this outcome up as a competitive equilibrium we need …rms to optimally

give up all their cash m for the whole consumer endowment w in period 1, and we
need consumers to optimally purchase the entire period 2 output of …rms f (w). If
we let the price of goods in period 1 be p1 = m=w and the price of goods in period

2 be p2 ( ) = m=[ f (w)], then the value of money in period 2 is:

                                     1      f (w)
                                          =       :
                                   p2 ( )    m


                                          11
   We can verify that the representative consumer cannot do better than sell her
entire endowment for a price p1 in period 1, and that the representative …rm cannot
do better than sell its entire production for a price p2 ( ) in period 2 under assumption
A1.

   Indeed, consider the possibility that the representative consumer only sells x < w
of her endowment in period 1 and consumes the remainder, c1 = w              x. Then her
expected life-time payo¤ is given by:

                                1                               f (w)x
             (w      x) + E          p1 x = (w          x) +           < f (w);
                              p2 ( )                              w

where the inequality follows immediately from assumption A1.
   Similarly, suppose that the representative …rm holds on to some of its cash in

period 1 and only purchases x < w of inputs. It can then expect to produce and
sell no more than f (x) of output in period 2. Its total stock of cash at the end of
period 2 is then:

                              (m      p1 x) + E[ f (x)p2 ( )]:

   For any x        w, the …rm can at the margin either hold p1 in money or purchase

one more unit of input and sell the incremental expected output f 0 (x) at expected
price E[p2 ( )]. It is optimal for the …rm to use up all its money holdings m to
purchase inputs if

                          E[ p2 ( )]f 0 (x)    p1 , for all x    w.

Or, substituting for p2 ( ) and p1 , if

                                        m                m
                                 E[          ]f 0 (x)      ,
                                       f (x)             w

which is satis…ed for all x    w under assumption A1.

   Thus, the equilibrium in this simple economy reduces to the representative …rm
purchasing all the inputs for m in period 1 and the representative consumer pur-
chasing all the …rms’output for m in period 2.


                                              12
     The classical quantity theory of money holds in this simple situation of no in-
vestment, because a doubling of the stock of money m in the economy doubles
the price of goods in period 1 and halves the value of money in period 2. We will
show next that the classical quantity theory of money holds under more general

conditions under which a Modigliani-Miller theorem for nations also holds.


3      The Modigliani-Miller Theorem for Nations

In this section we derive the …rst key theorem of our model, an analog of the
Modigliani-Miller irrelevance theorem for nations. We will show that the classical

quantity theory of money is a corollary of this irrelevance theorem, which combines
in a reduced form framework the ideas of Ricardian equivalence and of the …scal
theory of the price level.
     Consider the situation where the nation can make investments at date 0, which

will enhance the representative …rm’s total output at date 2: By investing k > 0
at date 0, …rm output in period 2 is increased by a factor Q(k), where we assume
that Q(0) = 1, Q0 > 0 and Q00 < 0. To make the problem interesting, we assume

that the investment is a positive net present value investment:

                                   [Q(k)     1] f (w) > k:

     The nation raises k from international capital markets at a world price normalized

to 1. In other words, following a standard assumption in analyses of open economies,
we …x the world interest rate to zero, which amounts to setting the world price of
capital to 1.3 The nation can pay for this capital by either printing money              0m   in
period 0 or by promising to repay k out of period 2 output.

     We let Q(k)f (w) =       (k; w) to simplify notation, and suppress the dependence
of    on k and w, whenever there is no ambiguity that               represents output when
the nation has an endowment w and has undertaken the investment k in period 0.
   3 One consequence of setting the world interest rate to zero is that Friedman’s (1969) theory

for the optimal money supply then results in an indeterminate rule for changes in m.


                                              13
   We shall assume for now that the nation can issue default-free foreign-currency
debt. Speci…cally, we assume:
   Assumption A2:         L   > k.
   It is then feasible for the nation to always meet its foreign-currency debt oblig-

ations. We shall also assume that the nation can commit not to default and not to
print more money after the increase in the money base of                 0 m.

   Theorem 1 (Modigliani-Miller Theorem for Nations): When there are no fric-

tions in international capital markets it is equivalent to …nance the investment k
with either a domestic-currency debt or money issue, a foreign-currency debt issue,
or any combination of foreign and domestic debt and money …nancing.
   Proof: See the appendix.

   When there are no frictions in capital markets, it is equivalent to …nance the
investment with a domestic-currency issue          0 m,        or with a foreign-currency denom-
inated debt issue.

   Note that when the Modigliani-Miller irrelevance theorem for nations holds, and
the nation …nances its investment k entirely with money issuance                0m   we have that:

                                                   k
                                      0   =                :
                                                       k

In other words, the increase in money supply at date 0 is given by the ratio of
investment k, and             k, the total expected output net of investment. This
expression for   0   suggests a simple rule for money supply akin to the monetarist

prescription that the growth in the supply of money should be proportional to the
growth in real output. The monetarist theory for money growth, however, does not
say what the constant of proportionality should be, partly because it is silent on
how money enters the real economy. Our analysis above proposes one way in which

money can enter the economy, namely through purchases of capital goods and that
the constant of proportionality is then given by the ratio above.
   Upon closer examination, it also becomes apparent that the Modigliani-Miller


                                              14
irrelevance theorem for nations implies that the classical quantity theory of money
must also hold. Since p2 and E[p2 ] are linear functions of m, and since                 0   is
independent of m, a doubling of the stock of money m in the economy doubles the
price of goods in period 1, or halves the value of money in period 2, and requires

the nation to print 2 0 m in period 0.4
    Corollary 1: When there are no frictions in capital markets, the classical quantity
theory of money holds.

    A stock split just like a change in currency denomination should have neu-
tral e¤ects in a frictionless economic environment. A stock split could a¤ect the
market capitalization of a company in practice by improving secondary market liq-
uidity. Similar e¤ects can also be found for national economies following the re-

denomination of the national currency.
    Note also that since goods are invested productively in period 1, the value
of money rises over time. The optimal quantity of money in periods 1 and 2 is

indeterminate (assuming no transactions costs in printing money) given that the
world interest rate is normalized to equal zero.
    In sum, the Modigliani-Miller irrelevance theorem for nations implies that the
quantity theory of money holds. As the proof highlights, it also combines in reduced

form Ricardian Equivalence, in the sense that the issuance of government debt does
not create any value per se in frictionless capital markets.


4     Optimal Capital Structure for Nations

In this section we enrich the model by introducing two frictions in international
capital markets and derive the optimal capital structure for an open economy facing

these frictions. For most of our analysis we consider the situation where the nation
   4 In our model the link between the Modigliani-Miller theorem for nations and the classical

quantity theory of money rests on the fact that money serves both as a store of value and a
medium of exchange. This goes beyond the simple analogy between …at money and equity in
terms of equivalent stores of value, and highlights the key additional role money plays as a
medium of exchange.


                                             15
is able to raise …nancing to fund the investment k, and therefore generates expected
output     in period 2.
   A …rst imperfection that is commonly mentioned in the international …nance
literature is the sovereign’s limited willingness to repay debts owed to international

investors. As a result of the sovereign’s limited commitment to repay debt oblig-
ations, the nation’s cost of issuing debt claims to foreign investors is higher and
its ability to raise funds via international debt issues is constrained. As Eaton and

Gersovitz (1981) and Bulow and Rogo¤ (1989) emphasize, a sovereign will repay
only if the cost of default is higher than the cost of servicing the debt.
   The second friction we introduce is what we refer to as a nation’s willingness to
in‡ate problem. Just as a nation cannot commit to honor its debts, it cannot pledge

to limit in‡ation. Investors may therefore be concerned about the risk of debasement
of the currency and require compensation for holding claims denominated in the
domestic currency. This imperfection is also commonly mentioned in general terms

in the international …nance literature. It is the premise of the notion of original sin
of Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panniza (2003). Equally, Jeanne (2003) along with
others invokes the lack of an emerging market nation’s monetary credibility as a
key reason why private sector lending in emerging markets is in the form of foreign-

currency debt. However, the particular manifestation of this problem we capture
below is more closely related to the corporate …nance notion of dilution costs. If
international investors’perceived risk of currency debasement is excessive, then the

nation may incur a dilution cost by issuing undervalued domestic-currency claims
to these investors. In its choice of mode of …nancing the nation then trades o¤ the
costs of debt stemming from the willingness to repay problem against the costs of
dilution caused by an exaggerated perceived risk of money debasement.

   We consider …rst the case where the nation funds k by printing money (or issu-
ing domestic-currency debt), and second the case where the nation issues foreign-
currency debt to …nance k.


                                          16
4.1    Equity Financing and In‡ation costs

Foreign investors will demand more or less money depending on how in‡ation prone
the nation is. Following Myers and Majluf (1984), we assume that in period 0 it is

not known for sure whether the future government in period 2 will be a monetary-
dove or a monetary-hawk. A monetary-dove government will expand the money
supply in period 2 by   1 (1   +   0 )m   to fund domestic residents’consumption. This
future expansion in the money base is a pure transfer to domestic residents that

results in a higher nominal price level. In contrast, a monetary-hawk government
will not expand the money supply in period 2 at all, so that         1   = 0.
   Myers and Majluf (1984) assume that investors have rational expectations. Later

analyses of …rm equity issuance (e.g. Hong, Scheinkman and Xiong, 2006, and
Dittmar and Thakor, 2007) depart from this assumption and instead assume that
investors’beliefs are not fully rational. Investors may have di¤erent beliefs and may
bet against each other. There is mounting evidence of the existence of di¤erences of

opinion among investors and of …rms’equity issuance decisions being in‡uenced by
episodes of equity-market buoyancy (see Baker, 2009). Although our analysis could
be carried out under the assumption of rational expectations, we shall allow for

the possibility that investors’beliefs about in‡ation risk may di¤er. Speci…cally, we
assume that domestic residents’and foreign investors’beliefs about future in‡ation
risk may di¤er. This is to be expected given that domestic residents are likely to be
much more familiar with local politics than foreign investors, and the latter are likely

better equipped to identify global trends than local residents. The assumption of
di¤erences of beliefs is not only more realistic, but also allows for a more tractable
analysis.
   Thus, suppose that domestic residents expect to have a monetary-dove govern-

ment in period 2 with probability         2 (0; 1) but that international investors’beliefs
do not generally coincide with those of domestic residents. Let ( 0 ) 2 (0; 1) denote



                                              17
the conditional probability that international investors assign to a monetary-dove
government in period 1. When the nation increases its money supply                             0   > 0 at
date 0, international investors put more weight on the possibility that they may
                                                                                 0
face a monetary-dove government. We therefore assume that                                0. However,

domestic and international investors’ conditional beliefs ( 0 ) may be imperfectly
revised in response to the …nancing choices of the government in period 0. We
assume for simplicity and without much loss of generality that domestic residents’

beliefs are unresponsive to changes in money supply.5 For much of our analysis we
shall restrict attention to the situation where (0) =                <     and ( 0 ) >                  for a
su¢ ciently large     0.

   Unresponsive investor beliefs. We begin our analysis by considering the sim-

plest possible setup, the special case where neither international investors’nor do-
                                                                                           0        0
mestic residents’beliefs are responsive to changes in the money supply:                        =            = 0.
In this special case it is straightforward to derive the costs or bene…ts from mon-

etary …nancing from the perspective of domestic residents. Basically, when                                  >
domestic residents incur an abnormal cost of monetary …nancing, given that inter-
national investors demand a higher compensation for in‡ation risk than is warranted
from domestic residents’ perspective. And vice versa, when                   <          domestic resi-

dents perceive a bene…t from monetary …nancing obtained at the expense of overly
optimistic international investors. The following lemma states domestic residents’
expected loss in purchasing power from monetary …nancing of the investment k.

   Lemma 1: When                > , domestic residents perceive a loss in expected pur-
chasing power from …nancing the investment k with a money issue of:

                                         (     ) 1k
                                                     :
                                        1 + (1   ) 1

   Proof: See the appendix.
   Note that if       1    = 0 domestic residents’ perceived loss in purchasing power is
  5 All                                                                                                 0
          our qualitative results hold if we assume instead that (   0)   6= (   0 ),   and that                0.



                                               18
simply 0. And when          is close to 1 the perceived loss in purchasing power reaches
its highest level at (1         ) 1 k. It is this perceived loss in purchasing power that
domestic residents pit against the costs of debt …nancing in their choice of …nancial
structure for the nation.

4.2      Debt Financing and Deadweight Costs of Default

Consider next the situation where the nation funds k by borrowing in foreign-
currency denominated debt. That is, the nation promises to repay D in output
in period 2 to foreign investors against an investment of k in period 0. The nation
may default on its debt if it is in its interest ex post. When the nation defaults, it will

su¤er a deadweight output loss due to, say, (unmodeled) trade sanctions and other
economic disruptions. Suppose that this cost is a percentage loss in …nal output
  > 0, so that after default the nation can only produce and consume (1               )   .

Then the nation will choose to default on its debt obligation D if and only if

                                            D < (1         )     ;


or D >         . Let   D   2[   L; H ]   denote the cuto¤

                                                      D
                                             D   =


at which the nation defaults, and led D be the promised debt repayment such that
the nation is just able to raise k to fund its investment:


                                     Pr(         D )D     = k:


Then the expected deadweight cost of foreign-currency denominated debt …nancing

is given by:
                                Pr( <      D )E[      j   <    D]    :

We summarize the above discussion in the following lemma.



                                                 19
    Lemma 2: When the nation …nances its investment k by issuing foreign-
currency debt D it incurs expected deadweight default costs


                               Pr( <         D )E[      j   <    D]     ;


where
                                                        k
                                     D   =                         .
                                             Pr(            D)

    Proof: See the discussion above.
    Although the nation can raise debt at fair terms, doing so involves a deadweight
cost of default as the nation cannot be sure that it will be able, or willing, to repay its

debts in the future. Note that the nation’s default decision is independent of whether
the government is a monetary-dove or monetary-hawk, since the representative
resident obtains the same real output in both cases. An expansion in the money

supply of    1m   in this situation involves no in‡ation costs, as there is no redistribution
of wealth from domestic residents to foreign investors as a result of the monetary
expansion. In other words, such an increase in money supply is equivalent to a
rights issue, preserving the per-capita output share each resident can buy.

4.3     Debt versus Equity Financing

When expected deadweight costs of default are large the nation may prefer to fund

its investment by issuing domestic-currency liabilities that can always be monetized,
even if it thereby incurs in‡ation costs. To compare in‡ation and default costs
in the most tractable way we specialize the model to the case where                          can take

only two values,      2f    L; H g   and denote by              the probability that   H   is realized:
                                                                            6
Pr( =       H)   =   2 (0; 1); we let            H   + (1          )   L.
   6 As in Bolton and Jeanne (2007), we can obtain closed-form solutions under the assumption

that is uniformly distributed on the interval [ L ; H ]. The algebra is then more involved
and less transparent, as the expected default cost is then given by the following expression:
                         "                   1#
                                                                2
                                  2     4k 2      H        k    L
                           H      H                                  :
                                                   4       2      2




                                                   20
   Consider …rst the decision for the nation whether to …nance the investment k
with either 100% foreign-currency debt or 100% equity. Then, comparing expected
costs of default with expected in‡ation costs we obtain the following condition for
the optimality of equity …nancing.

   Theorem 2 (Optimal Financing ): Equity is the only feasible source of …nancing
when     H     < k. When      H          k equity …nancing is always better than debt
…nancing when     > . When               and


                                  H            k>   L       ;                                (2)


equity …nancing dominates debt …nancing if:

                            (     ) 1k
                                        < (1            )   L    :                           (3)
                           1 + (1   ) 1



   Proof: See the appendix.

   Some simple comparative statics observations follow from condition (3) in The-
orem 2, which we summarize in the following corollaries.
   Corollary 2: a) Countries that have an undeserved reputation for being monetary-
doves – that is, countries for which (          ) is large and       1   is large – are better o¤

…nancing investments through foreign-currency denominated debt; b) countries that
face larger deadweight costs of default , or high investment return                  , are better
o¤ …nancing their investments by printing money or by issuing domestic-currency

claims; c) the lower is the productivity   L   in a crisis, the less the nation has to lose
from a default; the higher is the probability of a good state, , the more likely it is
that the nation will be able to service its foreign debt.
   One reason why a nation may have a high deadweight cost of default                     is that

it may su¤er a banking crisis as a result of the default on its sovereign debt. The
collapse of the banking system, which is inevitable if banks hold a signi…cant fraction
of the sovereign debt issued by the nation, would result in a serious contraction in


                                           21
output. Such a loss in output can be captured in reduced form in our model with
the parameter . It then follows from Corollary 2 that countries that are concerned
about such a possible banking collapse will limit their foreign-currency debt issuance.
Note also that when        L   is low the issuance of risky debt may be attractive for

the issuing nation to achieve some consumption smoothing by, in e¤ect, issuing a
state contingent claim at relatively low deadweight default cost. Risky debt in this
situation implements similar allocations as GDP-indexed debt.

   When      <      , the nation may not only strictly prefer to fund itself entirely
through money issuance, but also want to issue even more ‘equity’than it needs to
fund its investment outlays, and build foreign exchange reserves. We return to a
discussion of foreign exchange reserves in section 7.

4.4    The Optimal Debt-Equity Ratio

Henceforth we will focus on the most interesting case where             >    and ask what
is then the optimal mix of …nance for the investment k. How much should the
nation rely on foreign-currency denominated debt, and how much should it rely on
the issuance of domestic-currency liabilities?

   Unresponsive beliefs. We begin by considering the special case where beliefs
                       0        0
are unresponsive:          =        = 0. Given that     >       , it is strictly optimal for
the nation to issue as much default-free foreign-currency debt as possible. The
maximum amount of default-free foreign-currency debt that the nation can issue is

given by DL =    L     . Whether the nation should issue more foreign-currency debt
and take the risk of defaulting on its debt depends on the expected deadweight costs
of default relative to the dilution costs incurred when the nation issues domestic-

currency debt. The next proposition characterizes the optimal debt-equity ratio for
situations where condition (2) holds.
   Proposition 1: When               >   and condition (2) holds, it is optimal to issue
a combination of safe foreign-currency debt DL =            L       and domestic-currency


                                             22
liabilities [(1 +   0 )(k                 L    )    1]m, where

                                                    (k          L         )(1 + 1 )
                         0   =                                                                               ;                (4)
                                         [1 + (1     ) 1]                (k    L    )(1 +               1)


if
                                     (        )(k      L        )    1
                                                                           (1          )    L   :                             (5)
                                           1 + (1       )   1

Otherwise, it is optimal to …nance the investment entirely with a foreign-currency
debt issue of DH = k= .
     Proof: See the appendix.
     The nation may not always be able to entirely …nance its investment with risky

foreign-currency debt. This is the case when k >                                   H        . When the latter condition
holds the nation cannot avoid incurring some dilution costs. The condition under
which the nation then prefers safe over risky foreign-currency debt is modi…ed as

follows.
     Proposition 2: When                       >      and k >              H       , it is optimal to issue a com-
bination of safe foreign-currency debt DL =                                    L        and domestic-currency debt
[(1 +   0 )(k       L        )           1]m, where     0   is given by (4) if

                                     (        )(k      L        )    1
                                                                           (1          )    L   :                             (6)
                                           1 + (1       )   1


Otherwise, it is optimal to …nance the investment with a foreign-currency debt issue

of DH =     H           and domestic-currency debt [(1 +                           0 )(k        H                )   1]m, where

                                                    (k          H         )(1 +        1)
                        0   =                                                                                    ;            (7)
                                     [1 + (1         ) 1]            (k            H        )(1 +       1)


if
                                 (           )(k       H        )    1
                                                                            (1          )   H       :                         (8)
                                           1 + (1      )    1

     Proof: See the appendix.
     Comparing conditions (5) and (8) we observe that a nation’s decision to avoid
the risk of default by issuing no more than DL in foreign-currency debt depends not


                                                                23
only on the probability of default (1       ) when issuing DH = minfk= ;      H    g, or
on the unit cost of dilution (        ), but also on the nation’s foreign-currency debt
capacity,   H     . When the nation has a limited debt capacity, so that k >      H    ,
it cannot avoid incurring dilution costs, in which case it has a stronger preference

to avoid default by limiting its reliance on foreign-currency debt.
   Responsive beliefs: The nation’s ability to fund itself with domestic-currency
debt depends on the credibility of its monetary policy. This observation is the

leitmotif of much of the international …nance literature. The monetary credibil-
ity problem associated with domestic-currency debt can be captured in our model
through responsive investor beliefs. Accordingly, suppose now that ( 0 ) has the
following a¢ ne function speci…cation:


                                      ( 0) =     +   0,



with    > 0. This speci…cation captures in a simple way the idea that the more

domestic-currency liabilities    0m   the nation issues to foreign investors in period 0
the more investors believe that the nation will have a monetary-dove government
in period 1. Investors have reasons to believe that a more monetary pro‡igate
government in period 0 is more likely to be followed by a monetary-dove government

in period 1, since the more domestic-currency liabilities are in the hands of foreign
investors the greater is the incentive for the nation to dilute their claims by printing
more money in period 1. But, to the extent that investors anticipate the risk of a

future monetary expansion in period 1 the cost of domestic-currency debt …nancing
will be borne by the nation. This all the more so if investors’beliefs are excessively
responsive to a monetary expansion in period 0. The next proposition establishes
that if the sensitivity of beliefs to a monetary expansion is su¢ ciently high then it

is optimal for the nation to …nance its investment through foreign-currency debt.
   Proposition 3: When foreign investors have responsive beliefs ( 0 ) = +            0

such that        and condition (2) holds, it is optimal to issue risky foreign-currency


                                            24
debt D = k= when            b, where b is given by:

                    ( +b 0             )(k          L        )   1
                                                                     = (1             )   L    :
                      1 + (1                   b 0)      1


     Proof: See the appendix.
     In Proposition 3 we have assumed that foreign investors’beliefs are responsive
but domestic residents’beliefs are unresponsive. The e¤ect of a monetary expansion
in period 0 is then to widen the di¤erences in beliefs between foreign and domestic

investors. In other words, the e¤ect of a monetary expansion is to increase the
perceived dilution costs for domestic residents. But, what if domestic residents’
and foreign investors’beliefs are equally responsive, so that:


                          ( 0) =       +        0   and ( 0 ) =                  +        0,



with     > ? In this case, it is straightforward to observe that di¤erences in beliefs
remain constant

                                      ( 0)          ( 0) =                   ,

so that Proposition 1 essentially applies with (                             ) replaced by (            ).

     There is one important di¤erence, however, with the situation of unresponsive
beliefs. Namely that domestic-currency debt …nancing may not be feasible if beliefs
are too responsive. To see this, suppose that beliefs are so responsive that ( 0 ) = 1

for a su¢ ciently high   0 m.   It may then no longer be possible for the nation to …nance
(k     L    ) with domestic-currency debt. Indeed, setting ( 0 ) = 1, this requires
that the nation be able to issue su¢ cient domestic-currency claims                                0m   to foreign
investors to be able to raise (k           L        ):

                                         1
                                 E[           ] 0m           k           L
                                      p^2 ( )

where,
                                                m(1 +            0 )(1   +       1)
                            E[^
                              p2 ( )] =                                               ,
                                                    (                L    )


                                                    25
or, substituting for p^2 ( ):

                                              0
                           (         L   )             (k   L   )(1 +   1 ).
                                             1+   0

But, if   1   is too large this condition cannot be satis…ed. We summarize this discus-
sion in the proposition below.
    Proposition 4: When foreign investors have responsive beliefs such that ( 0 ) =

1 for a …nite     0;   it is not possible to issue su¢ cient domestic-currency liabilities to
fund k        L    ; when      1   is su¢ ciently large.
    Proof: See the discussion above.
    Proposition 4 is, in essence, the original sin observation of Eichengreen, Haus-

mann and Panniza (2003). When a nation faces a major monetary credibility prob-
lem it may not be able to use domestic-currency liabilities to …nance its investments
even if expected costs of in‡ation are lower than expected default costs. The

international …nance literature on the currency composition of sovereign debt com-
mingles credibility ideas with in‡ation cost ideas (see e.g. Aguiar, Amador, Farhi
and Gopinath, 2013). However, as our analysis above illustrates, these are separate
economic forces. In‡ation costs are linked to dilution costs and wealth transfers

from domestic residents to foreign investors. Credibility issues are linked to …nan-
cial constraints and the nation’s ability to maintain the real value of its monetary
claims, whether they are held by foreign investors or domestic residents.


5     Debt Overhang

Suppose the nation is already indebted at time t = 0 and has an outstanding stock
of foreign-currency denominated debt of D0 , under what conditions is it worthwhile
to invest in k? Consider in turn equity and debt …nancing.

    Equity Financing. When the inherited stock of debt D0 is low enough that it
is always in the nation’s interest to fully repay it, then under equity …nancing the
choice whether to invest in k or not is una¤ected by the presence of the debt D0 .


                                                      26
To see this, observe that the expected payo¤ under no investment is:


                                            (0; w)       D0 :

And under equity …nanced investment the expected payo¤ is:


                                   [1        ( )]          D0 ;


where
                                        0                  1              k
                            ( )=                (1                  )=        .
                                   1+       0         1+        1

The nation thus prefers an equity-…nanced investment to no investment if and only

if:
                            [1     ( )]         (k; w)              (0; w);

a condition that is independent of D0 .
      However, when D0 is so large that the nation may default in the crisis state, the
legacy debt D0 may overhang the nation’s investment decision as the next lemma

establishes.
      Lemma 3 (Debt Overhang ): Suppose that                        H    (0; w) > D0 >     L   (0; w),
and that D0         L   (k; w). Then D0 is so large that the nation may prefer not to

invest in k for some parameter values.
      Proof: See the appendix.
      Note that the situation where D0 >              H    (0; w) is not interesting. It would
mean that the nation inherits such a large stock of debt that it would default no

matter what.


      Debt Financing. Suppose …rst that D0 <                        L    (0; w), so that the expected
payo¤ under no investment is:


                                            (0; w)       D0 .




                                                 27
If the nation adds D1 to its inherited debt to fund the investment, so that (D1 +
D0 ) >       L   (k; w), then its expected payo¤ becomes:

                      [   H       (k; w)      D1        D0 ] + (1          )(1               )    L    (k; w);

where D1 = k= . The nation thus prefers a debt-…nanced investment to no invest-
ment if and only if:

                                   k
         [   H   (k; w)                    D0 ] + (1          )(1      )   L        (k; w)                (0; w)   D0

or, rearranging:

                   [ (k; w)                 (0; w)]       k       (1       )[       L        (k; w)       D0 ]

Given that        L       (k; w) >           L    (0; w) > D0 , an amount of safe inherited debt D0

such that
                                                                                k
                                              D0 >         L    (k; w)

can potentially overhang a debt-…nanced investment.
   In contrast to equity …nancing, for which there is no debt overhang problem as
long as inherited debt D0 is ‘safe’, under debt …nancing any inherited ‘safe’ debt

that is su¢ ciently high to force the nation into risky debt territory when it funds
its investment via additional debt D1 can result in a debt overhang problem. By
adding new debt D1 to old debt D0 , the nation incurs an expected deadweight cost
of default that acts like a tax on investment. More generally, every time the nation

is in a situation where an increase in indebtedness raises the risk of default, it may
face a debt overhang problem if it funds its investments via debt.
   Suppose next that D0 >                         L    (0; w). The nation then prefers a debt-…nanced

investment to no investment if and only if:

                                              k
                   [      H       (k; w)               D0 ] + (1        )(1              )    L       (k; w)

                              [   H    (0; w)         D0 ] + (1        )(1           )   L        (0; w)


                                                               28
or, rearranging:


                   [   H   + (1   )(1   )   L ][   (k; w)   (0; w)]   k.


Note that in this case there is no debt overhang as the condition above is indepen-
dent of the size of D0 .
   We summarize the above discussion in the following proposition.
   Proposition 5: Under a debt-…nanced investment there is no debt overhang if

inherited debt is risky, while under an equity-…nanced investment there is no debt
overhang if and only if inherited debt is safe.
   Proof: See the discussion above.
   This result is not entirely robust. If there is a positive recovery value of debt

after default then whether inherited debt D0 overhangs the nation’s investment
decision is less clear, as all the nation’s foreign-currency denominated debt is pari
passu. Adding new debt D1 to the debt stock D0 will then involve diluting the

holders of the inherited debt and thus could result in a transfer to the nation. This
transfer is a form of subsidy, which could encourage the nation to invest even if the
net present value of the investment is negative.
   When inherited debt is risky, one might expect that a nation would go out of

its way to reduce its indebtedness in an e¤ort to avoid any deadweight costs of
default. But, this turns out not to be in domestic residents’best interests, as the
main bene…ciaries in any reduction in the risk of default are the holders of the

inherited debt. When inherited debt is risky, it could actually be in the interest of
domestic residents to increase the nation’s indebtedness and risk of default in order
to fund valuable investments. Indeed, the main losers from such an increase in the
nation’s indebtedness are the holders of the existing debt. Thus, debt overhang

considerations in a sovereign debt context can give rise to debt dynamics where
debt begets debt, to use an expression coined by Admati, DeMarzo, Hellwig and
P‡eiderer (2016).


                                            29
6      Monetary Policy and Debt Monetization

In this section we extend the model to distinguish …scal and monetary policy. We

introduce a monetary authority that runs monetary policy separately from a …scal
authority. However, the two policies are interlinked through both debt monetization
and the price level.

    Thus, suppose that the representative agent delegates …scal and monetary policy
to two separate government agencies, an independent central bank charged with the
conduct of monetary policy and a treasury department charged with …scal policy. To
keep the analysis simple, we shall assume that the …scal authorities incur exogenously

…xed public good expenditures, g, at time 0 that are …nanced by issuing debt b.
This debt is repaid later through a combination of tax revenues and monetization
of the debt by the central bank. Again for simplicity we will set the maximum tax

rate   > 0 exogenously, and we assume that taxes must be paid in …at money.
    The …scal authorities can issue debt in either domestic or foreign currency. We
show that if the debt is in domestic currency the government can always avoid a
costly default by monetizing the debt. Avoiding default is not always possible if

the debt is in foreign currency. However, even when the debt is in foreign currency,
default can sometimes be avoided through monetization.
    We begin by considering the case of domestic-currency debt …nancing of …scal

de…cits. The timing is now as follows: In period 0 the …scal authorities issue
domestic-currency debt promises b to be repaid in period 2 in order to raise g units
of endowment from the representative consumer towards public good expenditures.
The representative consumer is willing to give up g units of endowment against a

domestic-currency debt claim b as long as:

                                        b
                                  E              g;                               (9)
                                      p2 ( )

and against a foreign-currency debt claim bf as long as bf q(bf )     g, where q(bf )


                                         30
denotes the probability that the government does not default on its debt obligations
in period 2.7
      In period 1 the consumer then holds (w           g) units of endowment and trades
                                                                  m
these against …rms’ money holdings at price p1 =                 w g.    Period 2 begins with

the realization of the productivity state        2f    L; H g     and real output f (w     g).
The …scal authorities move …rst by taxing household nominal wealth at rate rate
0 <             , and raising nominal tax revenues          m           m.8 The tax proceeds

go towards servicing the government’s debt obligations b. The central bank can
also monetize part of the debt b by printing money              2m   and making this quantity
available to the …scal authorities towards the repayment of the debt. Thus, given a
tax rate     and monetization      2 m,   the …scal authorities’budget constraint is given

by:
                                          m+    2m     b.

The consumer’s budget constraint, in turn, is:

                           (1       )m + b      p2 ( ) f (w       g),

as long as there is no default. That is, consumers start period 2 with their after-
tax money holdings (1           )m plus the debt claims b they get repaid by the …scal

authorities, so that the total nominal income consumers have to spend is (1            )m+b
and the total amount they must spend in purchasing …rms’output is p2 ( ) f (w g).
      There is no point for the …scal authorities to run a surplus (net of debt repay-
ments) in period 2. We shall therefore assume that the …scal authorities will always

set         so as to exactly balance their budget. More precisely, when m                b the
tax rate     is set so that m = b. When m < b,              2   is set so that

                                          m+    2m   = b.                                (10)
   7 We assume for simplicity that when the government defaults debt-holders get no debt

recovery at all.
   8 Alternatively we could let the …scal authorites tax nominal income p ( ) f (w  g). The
                                                                         2
analysis of this formulation of the model is somewhat more involved but the results on debt
monetization are unchanged.


                                               31
    Equilibrium prices p2 ( ) in period 2 are then obtained from the following con-
sumer budget equation:

              (1        )m + m +     2m    = (1 +       2 )m   = p2 ( ) f (w   g);

so that, as expected, the equilibrium price level is given by:

                                               (1 + 2 )m
                                    p2 ( ) =             .
                                                f (w g)

Note that any debt monetization        2m   > 0 results in an increase in the price level9 .
    If the government issues domestic-currency debt b in period 0 that is bounded
above, there exists a …nite     2   given by the government budget equation (10), so

that it is always possible to avoid a costly default ex post by monetizing the debt.
The debt claim b issued in period 0 such that

                                              1
                                      bE           =g
                                            p2 ( )

in turn is bounded above as long as f (w            g) > g. To see this, observe that after

substituting for p2 ( ) and substituting for        2   in (10), we have:

                           1      b f (w g)    b f (w g)
                   bE           =            =           = g.
                         p2 ( )    (1 + 2 )m   m(1   )+b

For f (w g) > g, it is always possible to …nd a …nite b to support the last equation.
    Unlike for domestic-currency debt, when the government issues foreign-currency

debt, it may not always be possible to avoid a costly default. To see this, suppose
that the government issues foreign-currency debt in period 0, and, by contradiction,
that this debt is believed to be default-free. The representative consumer is then

indi¤erent between holding on to g units of endowment or trading them against
the debt claim bf if bf = g. The government’s budget constraint in period 2 now
becomes:
                                    m+      2m      p2 ( )g.                            (11)
   9 As under the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level, government debt is repaid in period 2
through a combination of a primary …scal surplus and an increase in the price level caused by
the partial monetization of the debt b.


                                               32
    The …scal authorities are always solvent without monetization if for all :


                                        m        p2 ( )g,

where
                                                    m
                                    p2 ( ) =             .
                                                 f (w g)
Substituting for p2 ( ) this condition reduces to:


                                        f (w      g)      g.

In other words, the …scal authorities can dispense with monetization only if maximum

real tax revenues are always greater than or equal to the real liabilities bf = g for
all .
    Suppose now that       L f (w      g) < g, then the …scal authorities cannot always

avoid default through monetization of the foreign-currency denominated debt g.
    Theorem 3: Suppose that


                              L f (w    g) < g <         H f (w      g);


 then the government can avoid default in state                L   through monetization if and
only if

                                       L f (w        g) > g.

    Proof: See the appendix.
    The condition,   L f (w    g) > g is intuitive. As long as the country’s real output

is greater than the government’s real (foreign-currency) liabilities it is always possible
to monetize this debt, essentially by purchasing all the real output that is necessary
to service the real liabilities. But when       L f (w    g)       g the government is insolvent

in real terms and is therefore forced into a default in state               L.   The reason why
monetization of foreign-currency debt is not always possible is well understood:
monetization while providing the …scal authorities with extra liquidity also results in


                                                33
depreciation of the domestic currency, thereby increasing debt liabilities in domestic
currency. When the increase in debt liabilities is larger than the increase in liquidity,
foreign-currency debt monetization is not possible. Still, when


                             L f (w      g) < g <    L f (w   g)

debt monetization is critical to avoid default, and can be an e¤ective response to

avoid a costly default when     L f (w     g)    g. In other words, debt monetization
should not just be seen as an appropriate response when the government issues
domestic-currency debt. It can also be an e¤ective response to an adverse output
shock (albeit to a limited extent) when the government has issued foreign-currency

debt, provided of course that the size of the debt relative to GDP is not so large
that the country is insolvent in real terms.


7      Foreign-exchange reserves management

In this section we return to the general model with responsive beliefs, where:

                                      ( 0) =     +    0,


with   > 0. As we have shown, most of our analysis on the choice of …nancing of

investment extends straightforwardly to this more general setup. However, another
facet of the nation’s optimal …nancial policy that we have not yet discussed is the
nation’s optimal foreign exchange reserve management. Just as the stock of …at

money can be changed via purchases of investment goods, it can also be changed
through trades in the foreign exchange market. By building or drawing down foreign
exchange reserves an open economy can sterilize shocks to the supply of the global
reserve currency. If there is an increase in the supply of the global reserve currency,

which could result in higher in‡ation or an exchange rate appreciation, this can be
o¤set by increasing foreign exchange reserves. And vice versa if there is a decrease
in the supply of foreign money.


                                            34
   We can capture in a simple way how the nation should manage its foreign-
exchange reserves in response to international monetary conditions. Although we
do not explicitly model the supply of foreign money, foreign investors’ beliefs can
be interpreted as re‡ecting more or less tight international monetary conditions.

Thus, we can interpret international monetary conditions to be relatively loose in
situations where (0) < , and relatively tight in situations where (0) > .
   Consider the nation’s decision at time 0             to increase or decrease its foreign-

currency reserves by intervening in foreign currency markets through currency swaps,
before it faces the decision of how to …nance the investment k. Suppose to begin
with that international monetary conditions are relatively loose, so that              (0) =
  < . It is then optimal for the nation to accumulate foreign-currency reserves by

increasing its money supply   0.   More precisely, the following proposition about the
nation’s reserve management holds.
   Proposition 6:      Suppose that         (0) =       <     . Then, it is optimal to build

foreign-currency reserves of R by issuing        R   of domestic currency, where   R   and R
are respectively given by:

                                        R   =           ;

and
                                                     1 + (1       )   1
                         R=                                               :
                                     +                  1+    1




   Proof: See the appendix.

   An immediate corollary of Proposition 6 is:
   Corollary 3: Suppose that         > . It is then optimal for the nation to draw
down foreign-currency reserves by at least R and shrink the money base by                 D,

where   D   and R are given by:


                                    D   =             < 0;



                                                35
and
                                           1 + (1       )   1
                       R=                                       < 0:
                                  +           1+    1




   In other words, the nation then repurchases some of its domestic-currency lia-
bilities by drawing down its foreign-currency reserves.

   In sum, the nation’s reserve management can be understood like a corporation’s
decision to issue additional shares or buy back equity. When the corporation’s stock
is overvalued it is time to issue more shares and when it is undervalued it is time to
buy back shares. As the ‘market-driven’corporate …nance literature (Baker, 2009)

has emphasized corporate capital structures and liquidity bu¤ers can be explained
to a signi…cant extent by corporations’decisions to time equity markets in this way.
Similarly, our analysis suggests that developing and developed countries’alike can

bene…t by actively managing their foreign exchange reserves to time international
monetary conditions.
   Foreign-currency reserves R can be used to directly cover investment outlays k.
But, more interestingly, they can also allow the nation to become more creditworthy,

enhancing its debt capacity. A critical condition for enhancing a nation’s debt
capacity by relying on foreign-currency reserves however is that these reserves be
placed in escrow at an o¤shore custodian bank, as for example Venezuela has done

to …nance its Petrolera Zuata oil-…eld project (see Esty and Millet, 1998). When
this is the case, the nation stands to lose all reserves placed in escrow in the event
of default on its debts. By placing foreign-currency reserves in escrow, the nation
is then able to increase its safe debt capacity as follows.

   Lemma 4: Suppose that the nation places its entire foreign-currency reserves
R in escrow, then it is able to issue an amount of safe foreign-currency denominated
debt

                                  DL =    L    + R:



                                          36
    The nation will refrain from defaulting on any foreign-currency debt obligation
D in the event of a bad productivity shock        L   as long as:


                               L   +R      D      L (1      )

The right-hand side of this incentive constraint is the output the nation’s residents
would be able to consume following a default. Note that default now involves not

only a lower output but also the loss of foreign-currency reserves. By pledging its
foreign-currency reserves a nation is thus able to expand its debt capacity and relax
its …nancial constraints.


8     Model Predictions and Empirical Observations

Our main comparative statics predictions follow from condition (3) in Theorem 2
and Corollaries 2 and 3. A …rst prediction is that countries which are in the fortunate
situation where international investors believe the central bank to be more hawkish

than domestic residents (           ) will not fund themselves with foreign-currency
denominated debt. These countries are able to fund their investments by issuing
domestic-currency liabilities, which from the perspective of domestic residents are
overvalued. We relate this basic prediction with some stylized macroeconomic regu-

larities of four countries that have had virtually no foreign-currency debt outstanding
for the past quarter century.
    Financing through domestic-currency liabilities: The U.S., U.K., China

and Japan compared.         A basic premise of the ‘original sin’view of international
…nance is that only advanced countries can issue domestic-currency debt. However,
the recent evidence suggests that reliance on domestic-currency debt is by no means
con…ned to advanced economies.10 If economic development is not the determining

factor to explain the currency composition of a nation, what other considerations
  1 0 Du and Schreger (2015) study the currency composition of sovereign debt of 13 emerging

market countries and …nd that over the past decade the share of domestic-currency debt for
these countries has increased from 15 to 60 percent on average.


                                            37
bear on the capital structure of a nation? By comparing the capital structures
of four major economies, three advanced ones and one developing economy, the
U.S., the U.K., Japan and China from 1993 to 2013, we shall illustrate how other
stylized macroeconomic facts common to these economies are consistent with our

broad theoretical predictions, namely that these countries almost exclusively relied
on domestic-currency liabilities because they were not expected to be facing any
signi…cant costs of in‡ation and were taking advantage of favorable international

investor beliefs concerning their monetary stance.
   The ratio of foreign-currency debt to GDP in the U.S., the U.K., Japan and
China was negligible throughout this period for all four countries: respectively no
larger than 0:05%, 1:1%, 0:14%, and 0:5% (see Figure 1). These four countries also

look very similar in terms of their ratios of M 2+ Domestic-currency Debt-to-GDP
ratios, as Figure 2 illustrates. The M 2+ Domestic-currency Debt measure of the
money stock is closest in our view to the m, that is m(1+   0)   and m(1+   0 )(1+ 1 ),

variable in the model. This ratio has increased from 120% in 1993 to 180% in 2014
for the U.S., from under 100% in 1993 to nearly 250% in 2014 for the U.K., from
215% in 1993 to 300% in 2014 for Japan, and from 100% in 1993 to nearly 210%
in 2014 for China. Remarkably, despite what appear to be large increases in the

money stock to GDP ratio in these countries, there has been subdued in‡ation over
this twenty-year period in each of these countries, as Figure 3 shows. Except for the
…nancial crisis of 2008-2009, the in‡ation rate in the U.S. from 1993 to 2014 has

hovered around 2% and never exceeded 4%. The in‡ation experience of the U.K. is
very similar, with in‡ation peaking at just under 4:5% in 2011. As for Japan, its rate
of in‡ation has, if anything, been in de‡ation territory over this period, hovering
around 0%, with the very recent exception of a peak in‡ation of 2:7% in 2014.

Finally, China’s in‡ation rate over this period has come down from a peak of 24%
in 1994 to hover around 3% over the remainder of this period, with another peak
at 5:8% in 2008. China was able to bring down its high in‡ation rate in 1995 and


                                         38
did contract its M 2+ Domestic-currency Debt in 1994 and 1995. This was a key
step to rea¢ rm its reputation as a low-in‡ation emerging-market nation, and thus
preserve its ability to …nance its high rate of growth and investment with domestic
currency at favorable terms.

     The four countries’macroeconomic experience, however, di¤ers signi…cantly in
two respects. First, and most obviously the rate of GDP growth, which was around
3% in the U.S. and U.K. (with the exception of the …nancial crisis when it dropped to

respectively   2:8% and    4:3% in the U.S. and U.K. and thereafter averaged around
2%), and around 1:5% for Japan (with a drop in 2009 to          5:5%). In contrast,
China’s GDP growth over this period started at a peak of 14% in 1993, continued
at an average rate of 10% to reach a trough of 7:3% in 2014 (and, remarkably,

with a growth rate of 9:2% in 2009). Second, China’s foreign-currency reserves
were at 3:3% of GDP in 1993 and ended at just under 40% in 2014. Similarly,
Japan’s foreign-currency reserves to GDP ratio shot up from 7:3% in 2000 to 26%

in 2014. Meanwhile, the U.S. foreign-currency reserves never exceeded 0:35% over
this period and the U.K.’s reserves peaked at just under 1% in 2003.
     Part of the change in foreign-currency reserves re‡ects the fact that China and
Japan ran large current account surpluses (and the U.S. and U.K. large current

account de…cits). As Figure 4 highlights, China’s current account over this period
was in surplus, rising from 1:3% of GDP in 1994 to a peak of 10:5% in 2007
and then declining back to a surplus of 2:1% in 2014. Similarly, Japan’s current

account surplus was 3% of GDP in 1993, peaked at 5:1% in 2007 and subsequently
declined to 0:5% in 2014. In contrast, the current accounts of the U.S. and the
U.K. are almost mirror images of those of China and Japan, with the U.S. running
a de…cit during this entire period, starting with   1:7% of GDP in 1994, peaking

at    5:8% in 2006 and declining back to      2:4% in 2014 (the U.K. had a de…cit
of    0:35% in 1994,      3:7% in 2008, and    5:5% in 2014). While contributing
substantially to the accumulation of foreign-currency reserves (roughly around 2/3),


                                         39
these current account surpluses alone cannot entirely explain the sharp increase in
reserves in China. Indeed, China’s experience resembles in many ways the …nancing
patterns of a growth …rm, which keeps its leverage low so as to preserve its …nancing
capacity to pursue future investment opportunities, and which regularly returns to

equity markets to raise new funds for investment. In contrast, the U.S., and U.K.
experience resembles more the …nancing pattern of a mature, blue-chip, company
that times the equity market to raise new funding on the cheap.

    Foreign-currency debt overhang and default risk: the example of Ar-
gentina. If there is one nation that comes to mind as an example for the ‘original
sin’ view it is Argentina. The fear of in‡ation led Argentina to adopt a currency
board, which, in e¤ect, institutionalized reliance on foreign-currency debt. As can

be seen in Figure 5, Panel A, Argentina had a ratio of foreign-currency debt to
GDP of just under 10% in 1993. This ratio steadily increased and peaked at 70% in
2002, the year in which Argentina defaulted on this debt and plunged the nation in

a severe recession, with a GDP contraction of          11% (see Panel C). Although Ar-
gentina subsequently reached a debt restructuring agreement with a large majority
of its debt holders in 2005, thus lowering its foreign-currency debt to GDP ratio to
23:5%, its continuing legal battles with hold-out creditors in e¤ect shut it out from

international foreign-currency debt markets, so much so that its foreign-currency-
debt-to-GDP ratio continued to decline to 7:8% until 2014.11
    Being unable to issue foreign-currency debt, Argentina inevitably had to rely on

domestic-currency …nancing, as can be seen in Panel B of Figure 5, which plots
Argentina’s M 2+ Domestic-currency Debt-to-GDP ratio. This ratio was at 20% in
2001 and thereafter jumped to hover 38%. By defaulting on its foreign-currency
debt, and thereby removing its debt-overhang, Argentina, however, was able to
  1 1 The district court enjoined Argentina on February 23, 2012 from servicing the 2005 re-

structured bonds unless Argentina also paid in full all past principal and interest payments
due to hold-out hedge fund investors. As a result of this injunction Argentina eventually ca-
pitulated and agreed to repay the hold-out investors (see “Argentina clears way for repayment
of ‘holdout’creditors”, Financial Times 31 March 2016). See CEIC for data source.



                                             40
clock up a relatively high GDP growth performance after 2002, as Panel C of Figure
5 reveals. But, it also su¤ered a bout of remarkably high in‡ation in a global context
of low in‡ation: Panel D of Figure 5 shows that Argentina’s in‡ation went from 8%
in 2006 to 39% in 2014! Argentina’s experience with domestic-currency …nancing

and high in‡ation sharply contrasts with the experience of China and suggests that
its choice of capital structure was constrained. Given the high in‡ation, Argentina
would probably have chosen foreign-currency debt …nancing had it been able to do

so.
      Foreign-exchange reserves management: the example of Switzerland. It
is only recently that Switzerland has engaged in large-scale foreign-exchange reserve
operations. Almost all examples of countries that had accumulated large reserves

until 2007 were Asian countries. More speci…cally, the conventional wisdom is that
these countries all belonged to a ‘dollar block’: their reserve accumulation policy
was a reaction to the Asian …nancial crisis of 1997 and an e¤ort to self-insure against

dollar risk through precautionary savings (McKinnon, 2000). Switzerland does not
belong to a ‘dollar block’, nor is it in need of precautionary savings. Yet, Switzerland
has rapidly built huge foreign-currency reserves in a period of …ve years, from 2007
to 2012, and increased its reserves-to-GDP ratio from under 10% to over 70%, as

can be seen in Panel A of Figure 8.
      Switzerland’s reserve management can be understood in terms of our analysis in
section 7. It engaged in a large accumulation of reserves under special circumstances

during which its currency was overvalued by international investors. Over the …ve-
year period Switzerland increased its M2+ Domestic-currency Debt to GDP ratio
from 170% to over 220% as a result of its foreign exchange operations (see Panel
B). Yet, in‡ation dropped from a rate of 2:5% in 2007 to de‡ation territory by

2014, as can be seen in Panel C. Finally, although Switzerland’s GDP-growth rate
collapsed from 4% in 2007 to      2% in 2009, as a result of the global …nancial crisis,
thereafter it has largely recovered to pre-crisis levels, as Panel D illustrates.


                                           41
9     Conclusion

In this paper we take a corporate …nance approach to the question of debt and

monetary …nancing of a nation’s investments. We propose a conceptual innovation,
namely that a nation’s money can be seen as similar to a …rm’s equity. Both serve
as a store of value. Moreover, a nation’s currency is a claim on the nation’s residual

output just as a …rm’s equity is a claim on the …rm’s residual cash ‡ow.
    We show that a Modigliani-Miller theorem for nations holds in a frictionless
economy, which implies that the classical quantity theory of money also holds.
After introducing two types of frictions, namely, a willingness to repay problem

under debt …nancing and a willingness to in‡ate problem under equity …nancing, we
characterize the optimal capital structure of nations. We then extend our analysis
to introduce a debt overhang problem, and analyze to how monetary policy and

debt monetization, as well as foreign-exchange reserve management, can mitigate
this problem.
    Over all, our analysis connects notions from monetary economics, …scal theory,
and international …nance under a uni…ed corporate …nance framework. Our theory

emphasizes the process by which …at money enters the economy through purchases
of real goods and services and how in‡ation costs are linked to dilution costs and
wealth transfers from existing money holders to new money holders.

    By framing the …nancing problem of nations as a problem similar to the …nancing
choices of corporations we are able to make explicit the costs and bene…ts of printing
money for a nation. In particular, if the bene…ts of printing money in terms of
added …nancing of valuable investments are substantial they may justify paying the

potential costs of in‡ation.
    We have only taken a …rst step in the formal analysis by specifying an extremely
simple static model. One important aspect we have oversimpli…ed and which de-
serves further research is the fact that a nation is not quite a company, as Krugman


                                         42
(1996) has observed. The non-tradeable sector of a nation’s economy is a closed
system, which responds to monetary and …scal stimulus when depressed. Macro-
economic stimulus involves other funding considerations, which we have abstracted
from entirely.

   Another area worth exploring is the dynamics of a nation’s capital structure.
How frequently should a nation rely on money issues? When should it build up
and draw down its foreign-currency reserves? What should be the maturity of its

foreign-currency debt? Finally, a fundamental area which requires further analy-
sis is governance and moral hazard problems in how nations are governed. We
have assumed for simplicity that funding and investment decisions are made by the
government of a nation in the best interest of its citizens. But this is hardly a

realistic description of how most nations are governed. For common stock in corpo-
rations shareholders have voting rights, which they can exercise to appoint boards
of directors and CEOs that pursue policies in their best interest. Corporations also

restrict CEO discretion on equity issuance and buybacks, which require shareholder
approval.
   Countries also have institutions that allow citizens to bring to power govern-
ments that act in their interest. But these institutions are di¤erent from corpo-

rate governance and they do not link a citizen’s (or non-citizen’s) voting rights to
domestic-currency holdings (at least not directly). How does this separation be-
tween control rights and residual rights to the nation’s output a¤ect the question

of how nations should be …nanced? How does it a¤ect the discretion given to
governments to print money? We leave these questions for future research.




                                        43
      Appendix
      Proof of Theorem 1: Suppose …rst that the nation raises k from risk-neutral
foreign investors against domestic-currency claims. For example, a payment in
domestic currency of       0m   in period 0. The increase                0m   must then be at least
equal to E[p2 ( )]k. In other words, the foreign sellers of capital in period 0 must

be able to purchase a fraction of period 2 output that is expected to be equal to k.
Equivalently, the nation could raise k by issuing a domestic-currency debt promise
of    0m   to be paid at the beginning of period 2, or any combination of domestic-
currency payment in period 0 and domestic-currency debt payment in period 2 that

in total add up to      0 m.   By investing k, the nation’s expected period 2 output is
given by Q(k) f (w) =          , and for any realization             the period 1 price level is given
by:
                                               m(1 +        0)
                                    p2 ( ) =                     :

The representative consumer’s problem in period 1, after the investment k is made,

is then given by:

                                                              1
                          maxf (w       x) + p1 xE                 g
                          x 0                               p2 ( )


                                                                              f (w)
                    =     maxf (w       x) + x                                      g
                          x 0                       f (w)(1 +          0)      w

Suppose that, as we later verify:


                                                             1;
                                     f (w)(1 +      0)


then it is again optimal to set x = w and the representative consumer’s payo¤ is
given by
                                                        :
                                           1+       0

      Second, suppose that the nation borrows k from risk-neutral foreign investors
against a promise to repay D = k in period 1 output, which is equivalent to …nancing


                                               44
the investment with (risk-free) foreign-currency debt. Under assumption A1, the
period 1 price level for any realization           is then:

                                                         m
                                      p2 ( ) =                         ;
                                                    [             k]

and the representative consumer’s problem is:

                              m                k                                                k
       maxf (w       x) + x     E                  g = maxf (w                    x) + x            g;
       x 0                    w        m                     x 0                            w

Since Q(k) > 1 it is a fortiori optimal to set x = w, so that the representative
consumer’s payo¤ is:            k. Equivalence between the …rst and second form of
…nancing k then requires that:

                                                   =                  k;
                                      1+       0


or,
                                                         k
                                           0   =                  :
                                                              k
Now,     0m   is set so that:
                                           0m
                                                  = k:
                                        E[p2 ( )]
Substituting for
                                                        m(1 +          0)
                                    E[p2 ( )] =                             ;

we then indeed obtain:
                                                         k
                                           0   =                  :
                                                              k
      Finally, we verify that the condition

                                                                      1
                                      f (w)(1 +          0)


is equivalent to the positive NPV condition, (Q(k)                              1) f (w) > k.

      It is straightforward to adapt this argument to any combination of foreign-
currency debt and money …nancing and to extend the logic to the case of risky
foreign-currency debt with no deadweight costs of default.


                                                   45
    Proof of Lemma 1: If the nation funds investment k by issuing money                                               0m   in
period 0, the price level for any realization of                      in period 2 will then be

                                                m(1 +            0 )(1    +        1)
                                   p^2 ( ) =

under a monetary-dove government, and

                                                        m(1 +             0)
                                        p2 ( ) =

under a monetary-hawk government.12
    Accordingly, foreign investors will demand a payment in money                                        0m      in exchange
for the investment k such that:

                                                      1
                               [                +              ] 0m = k
                                   E[^
                                     p2 ( )]         E[p2 ( )]

where,
                                                     m(1 +        0 )(1        +    1)
                               E[^
                                 p2 ( )] =

and
                                                         m(1 +             0)
                                      E[p2 ( )] =                               :

    Substituting for p^2 ( ) and p2 ( ) and rearranging we obtain that:

                                        0
                                                (1       +                     )=k
                                     1+     0                    1+        1

So that:
                                                     k(1 +         1)
                           0   =                                                              :                        (12)
                                    [1 + (1           ) 1]                k(1 +          1)

    Note that    0   is an increasing function in                   1.     Thus, at               1   = 0,   0   reaches its
lower bound:
                                                             k
                                                0   =                 ;                                                (13)
                                                                  k
which is the same as in Theorem 1, when the Modigliani-Miller irrelevance theorem
for nations holds.
  1 2 Note that we assume implicitly here that domestic consumers sell all their endowment to

…rms in period 1 so that x = w. It is optimal for domestic consumers to do so if       is low
enough, which we assume in the remainder of the analysis.


                                                        46
   While foreign investors assign a present value of k to                                            0 m,   domestic residents
value   0m   at:
                                                             1
                                  [                     +             ] 0m
                                      E[^
                                        p2 ( )]             E[p2 ( )]
or, substituting for p^2 ( ) and p2 ( ) at:

                                            0
                                                    (1               +                       ):
                                       1+       0                         1+             1

When        >      domestic residents therefore perceive a loss in expected purchasing
power from …nancing the investment k with a money issue of:

                                                                 0               1
                                       (            )                                    :
                                                        1+       0 1+                1

Substituting       0   as in (11), we have
                                            (     ) 1k
                                                        :
                                           1 + (1   ) 1

   Proof of Theorem 2: There are two possible outcomes when the nation relies
on foreign-currency debt …nancing. Either the nation limits its indebtedness so as
to always be willing to service its debt obligations, or the nation issues so much

debt that it defaults if the low productivity shock                                          L    is realized. In the former
situation, the maximum debt promise the nation can credibly make is given by
D=      L    (k; w), so that a necessary and su¢ cient condition for safe debt is:

                                                    L                k.                                                  (14)

Suppose that this condition is violated, then the debt promise the nation must make
to be able to raise k through an external debt issue is given by D = k= , and a

necessary condition for risky debt …nancing is
                                                                     k
                                                H                        .                                               (15)

When condition (15) holds but condition (14) is violated, the nation can fund itself
with risky debt and incurs an expected deadweight cost of default given by:

                                             (1             )    L           .


                                                            47
     When           , equity …nancing involves the following expected dilution cost:

                                                                      0               1
                                               (         )                                    :
                                                             1+          0 1+             1


Comparing expected deadweight costs of default to expected dilution costs, substi-

tuting for    0   and rearranging we obtain the condition (3) above.
     Note …nally that when
                                                                              k
                                                        H            <            ;

foreign-currency debt …nancing is not feasible as the nation would then default with
probability one.


     Proof of Proposition 1: The nation can entirely avoid default for any foreign-
currency debt it issues D                      L    . Given that issuing domestic-currency liabilities
involves a strictly positive dilution cost when                                           >           it is optimal for the nation

to issue at least DL =                 L       . Since DL < k the nation must then also issue
domestic-currency claims of (1 +                    0 )(k                 L           ) given in (16) if it wants to issue
only safe debt. Proceeding as in the proof of Lemma 1, we …nd that

                                                   (k            L         )(1 + 1 )
                       0   =                                                                                            ;     (16)
                               [1 + (1              ) 1]                  (k    L    )(1 +                         1)


and the nation then incurs expected dilution costs of

                                   0       (        )    1           (           )(k                   L       )   1
                                                                =
                           1+          0       1+    1                        1 + (1                   )   1


on the portion of the investment k                          L         it …nances with domestic-currency debt.
     If the nation entirely …nances k with foreign-currency debt it incurs expected

default costs of (1            )   L           . Therefore, it is optimal to issue a combination of
safe foreign-currency debt DL =                     L            and domestic-currency debt [(1 +                           0 )(k

 L     )     1]m, when:

                           (              )(k        L           )    1
                                                                                  (1              )   L        ;
                                       1 + (1           )    1



                                                                 48
which is condition 5.


   Proof of Proposition 2: Given that                                     >       it is optimal for the nation to issue at
least DL =    L       . When the nation issues DL it must also issue domestic-currency

claims of (1+ 0 )(k            L           ) given in (16). The nation then incurs expected dilution
costs of
                                                   (          )(k             L        )   1
                                                           1 + (1             )   1

on the portion of the investment k                               L        it …nances with domestic-currency debt.
   If the nation issues DH =                            H            of foreign-currency debt it incurs expected

default costs of (1            )       L       . It then also incurs expected dilution costs of

                                               (             )(k              H        )   1
                                                                                               :
                                                           1 + (1             )   1


It is then optimal to issue foreign-currency debt DH =                                              H          and domestic-currency

debt [(1 +   0 )(k             H           )       1]m, when:

                           (              )(k                H        )   1
                                                                                      (1           )    H          ;
                                        1 + (1               )   1


where
                                                       (k            H         )(1 +           1)
                      0   =                                                                                                 :           (17)
                               [1 + (1                  ) 1]              (k               H           )(1 +           1)

   Note that      L   <    H.          Therefore, if

                               (           )(k              L        )    1
                                                                                  (1           )       L       ;
                                        1 + (1               )   1


the nation issues DL =                 L           of foreign-currency debt; if
                                   k                                                                       k
             (            )(   L
                                               1)      1                          (            )(          H
                                                                                                                           1)   1
                                                           >1                                                                       ;
                     1 + (1                )   1                                           1 + (1                  )   1


the nation issues DH =                     H           foreign-currency debt.


   Proof of Proposition 3: When condition (2) holds it is optimal for the nation
to either issue foreign-currency debt DL =                                        L         or DH = k= . When foreign


                                                                     49
investors have responsive beliefs ( 0 ) =                                   +       0    the nation faces dilution costs

                 (          )(k               L        )   1        ( + 0                    )(k       L            )   1
                                                               =                                                            ;          (18)
                         1 + (1               )    1                   1 + (1                  +       0)      1

where
                                 0                                        +          0
                                         (1                     0   +                    ) = (k            L        );                 (19)
                         1+          0                                   1+         1

when it issues safe foreign-currency debt DL =                                           L    . It faces expected default
costs (1     )       L       when it issues risky foreign-currency debt DH = k= . The
nation is indi¤erent between DL and DH when                                              = b, where

                         ( +b 0                        )(k          L       )   1
                                                                                    = (1           )   L        ;                      (20)
                           1 + (1                              b 0)     1

and it strictly prefers DH when                            > b.


   Proof of Lemma 3: Suppose that                                           H       (0; w) > D0 >                        L      (0; w). The
expected payo¤ under no investment is then:

                         (   H       (0; w)             D0 ) + (1               )   L (1       ) (0; w):

In addition, when D0                     L        the nation’s expected payo¤ under an equity-…nanced
investment is as before:
                                                   (1           ( ))                D0 :

   Whether the nation decides to invest or not then depends on the following
condition:

             (1              ( ))                       (0; w) + (1                 )(D0           L           (0; w)):

   By assumption, D0 >                        L        (0; w), so that for some parameter values we may

have:
                                              (1             ( ))                   (0; w)

and
             (1              ( ))         <             (0; w) + (1                 )(D0           L           (0; w)):


                                                                    50
In such situations D0 is so large that it overhangs the nation’s e¢ cient investment
decision.


   Proof of Theorem 3: Default can be avoided with no monetization if


                                         m      p2 ( )g,


where
                                                   m
                                    p2 ( ) =            .
                                                f (w g)
Substituting for p2 ( ) we obtain the condition


                                        f (w        g)      g.


When
                                        f (w        g) < g,

monetization is needed to avoid default, and default can be avoided with moneti-

zation   2m   if
                                     m+      2m       p2 ( )g,

where
                                               m(1 + 2 )
                                    p2 ( ) =             .
                                                f (w g)
Substituting for p2 ( ) we obtain the following condition

                                         g          f (w     g)
                                    2                           .                             (21)
                                             f (w      g)    g

Now, as long as f (w           g) > g there exists a             2   > 0 such that inequality 21 is
satis…ed.
   When: 1)        f (w     g) < g; 2) f (w         g) > g, and; 3) inequality 21 holds, the

central bank sets    2    such that the …scal authority’s budget constraint is binding


                                     m+      2m     = p2 ( )g.



                                               51
     Consumers’budget constraint in period 2 after balancing the government budget
is then
                      (1      )m + m +        2m   = p2 ( ) f (w           g)

or
                             m(1 +    2)   = p2 ( ) f (w           g).

When f (w       g)       g there does not exist a        2    > 0 such that inequality 21 is
satis…ed, so that foreign-currency debt cannot be monetized.


     Proof of Proposition 6: By issuing an amount                   0    of domestic currency less
than or equal to     R   the nation is able to obtain foreign-currency reserves by in-
curring no in‡ation costs. These reserves can be used later to help …nance the

nation’s investment k, either through direct purchases of investment goods from
international markets or by using the reserves as collateral. A maximum stock of
reserves R equal to
                                                    1
                            R=[               +              ]     Rm
                                  E[^
                                    p2 ( )]        E[p2 ( )]
can then be accumulated without any in‡ation cost since for                      0     R   we have

 ( 0)      .
     Note furthermore that

                                           m(1 +      R )(1   +     1)
                             E[^
                               p2 ( )] =


and
                                               m(1 +      R)
                                E[p2 ( )] =                    :

Substituting for p^2 ( ) and p2 ( ) and rearranging we then obtain the desired expres-
sions.




                                              52
References

[1] Admati, A. R., DeMarzo, P. M., Hellwig, M. F., and P‡eiderer, P. C. (2014)

   “The Leverage Ratchet E¤ect”, http://ssrn.com/abstract=2304969

[2] Aguiar, M., M. Amador, E. Farhi and G. Gopinath (2013) “Crisis And Com-
   mitment: In‡ation Credibility and the Vulnerability To Sovereign Debt Crises”,

   NBER Working Paper No. w19516

[3] Araujo, A., M. Leon and R. Santos (2013) “Welfare analysis of currency
   regimes with defaultable debts,” Journal of International Economics, 89(1),

   143-153.

[4] Bacchetta P., E. Perrazi, and E. van Wincoop (2015) “Self-Ful…lling Debt
   Crises: Can Monetary Policy Really Help?” CEPR Discussion Paper No.

   DP10609

[5] Baker, M. (2009) “Capital Market-Driven Corporate Finance”, Annual Review
   of Financial Economics, Vol. 1: 181-205

[6] Barro, R. (1974) “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?” Journal of Political
   Economy 82: 1095–1117

[7] Bolton, P. and O. Jeanne (2007) “Structuring and Restructuring Sovereign

   debt: The Role of a Bankruptcy Regime,”Journal of Political Economy 115(6),
   901-924.

[8] Bulow, J. and K. Rogo¤. (1989) “A Constant Recontracting Model of Sov-

   ereign Debt”, Journal of Political Economy, 97: 155–78.

[9] Burnside, C., Eichenbaum, M. and S. Rebelo (2001) “Prospective de…cits and
   the Asian currency crisis” Journal of Political Economy 109: 1155–98.




                                      53
[10] Caballero, R. and Panageas, S. (2007) “A global equilibrium model of sudden
    stops and external liquidity management” MIT, Department of Economics,
    Discussion Paper

[11] Calvo, G. (1988) “Servicing the public debt: the role of expectations”American

    Economic Review 78, 647–661.

[12] Chang, R. and A. Velasco (2000) “Liquidity Crises in Emerging Markets:
    Theory and Policy,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1999, ed. by Ben S.
    Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).

[13] Cochrane, J.H. (2005) “Money as Stock”, Journal of Monetary Economics 52:
    501–528

[14] Cole, H. and Kehoe, T. (2000) “Self-ful…lling debt crises” Review of Economic

    Studies, 67(1): 91–116.

[15] Corsetti, G. and L. Dedola (2014) “The Mystery of the Printing Press: Self-
    Ful…lling Debt Crises and Monetary Sovereignty,” Discussion Paper University
    of Cambridge

[16] Dittmar, A. and A. Thakor (2007) “Why Do Firms Issue Equity?” Journal of

    Finance, Vol. 62, No. 1: 1-54

[17] Dooley, M.P., Folkerts-Landau, D. and Garber, P. (2004) “The revived Bretton
    Woods system: the e¤ects of periphery intervention and reserve management
    on interest rates and exchange rates in center countries”NBER Working Paper

    No. 10332.

[18] Du, W. and Schreger, J. (2015) “Sovereign Risk, Currency Risk, and Corporate
    Balance Sheets” Harvard, Department of Economics Working Paper

[19] Eaton, J., and Gersovitz, M. (1981) “Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theo-
    retical and Empirical Analysis.” Review of Economic Studies, 48(2): 289–309


                                        54
[20] Eichengreen B., R. Hausmann and U. Panizza (2003), “The pain of original
    sin”, in Eichengreen et al., Other People’s Money - Debt Denomination and Fi-
    nancial Instability in Emerging Market Economies, University of Chicago Press,
    Chicago and London.

[21] Esty, B. C., and Millet, M. M. (1998) “Petrolera Zuata, Petrozuata C.A.”HBS
    No. 299-012. Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing

[22] Friedman, M. (1969) “The Optimum Quantity of Money,” in The Optimum
    Quantity of Money and Other Essays. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.

[23] Gourinchas, P.O., and Rey, H. (2007) “From world banker to world venture cap-
    italist: The U.S. external adjustment and the exorbitant privilege” in Richard

    Clarida (ed.): G7-Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment,
    University of Chicago Press, Chicago

[24] Hahn, F. H. (1965) “On some problems of proving the existence of an equi-
    librium in a monetary economy”, in F.H. Hahn and F.P.R. Brechling eds., The

    Theory of Interest Rates, London: Macmillan

[25] Hahn, F. H. (1982) Money and In‡ation, Oxford: Basil Blackwell

[26] Hong, H., J. Scheinkman and W. Xiong (2006), “Asset Float and Speculative
    Bubbles”, Journal of Finance, Volume 61(3): 1073–1117

[27] Huang, H. and Xie, D. (2008) “Fiscal Sustainability and Fiscal Soundness”
    Annals of Economics and Finance, 9: 239-251

[28] Irwin, N. (2013) The Alchemists: Three Central Bankers and A World On Fire,

    Penguin Books, New York

[29] Jeanne, O. (2007) “International reserves in emerging market countries: too
    much of a good thing?” in (W.C. Brainard and G.L. Perry, eds.), Brookings
    Papers on Economic Activity, 1–55, Washington DC: Brookings Institution.


                                       55
[30] Jeanne, O. (2009) “Why Do Emerging Market Economies Borrow in Foreign
    Currency?” IMF Working Paper 03/177

[31] Jeanne, O. (2009) “Debt Maturity and the International Financial Architec-

    ture” American Economic Review 99(5): 2135-48

[32] Jeanne, O. and H. Wang (2013) “Fiscal Challenges to Monetary Dominance,”
    Working Paper Johns Hopkins University

[33] Jeanne, O. and Zettelmeyer, J. (2005) “Original Sin, Balance-Sheet Crises, and
    the Roles of International Lending.”In Other People’s Money: Debt Denomina-
    tion and Financial Instability in Emerging Market Economies, Eichengreen, B.

    and Hausmann, R. (eds) 95–121. Chicago and London: University of Chicago
    Press

[34] Krugman, P. (1988) “Financing vs. Forgiving a Debt Overhang” Journal of
    Development Economics 29: 253-68

[35] Krugman, P. (1996) “A country is not a Company”, Harvard Business Review,
    January-February Issue

[36] Leeper, E. (1991) “Equilibria under ‘Active’and ‘Passive’Monetary and Fiscal
    Policies,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 27:129-147.

[37] Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2014) “Learning from In‡ation Experiences”

    Quarterly Journal of Economics (forthcoming)

[38] McKinnon, R. (2000) “The East Asian Dollar Standard, Life After Death?”
    Economic Notes by Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena, 29(31-82)

[39] Myers, S.C. (1977) “The Determinants of Corporate Borrowing”, Journal of
    Financial Economics, 5: 147-175




                                        56
[40] Myers, S.C. (1984) “The Capital Structure Puzzle”, Journal of Finance Vol.
    XXXIX, pp. 575-592.

[41] Myers, S.C. and N.S. Majluf (1984) “Corporate Financing and Investment

    Decisions when Firms have Information that Investors do not have”, Journal
    of Financial Economics 13, pp. 187-221.

[42] Nue
       no G. and C. Thomas (2015) “Monetary Policy and Sovereign Debt Vul-

    nerability,” Banco de Espae
                              na Working Paper

[43] Reis, R. (2017) “Can the Central Bank Alleviate Fiscal Burdens?” CEPR Dis-
    cussion Paper No. DP11736

[44] Sachs, J. (1984) “Theoretical Issues in International Borrowing” Princeton
    Studies in International Finance 54.

[45] Scheinkman, J. and W. Xiong (2003) “Overcon…dence and Speculative Bub-

    bles”, Journal of Political Economy 111 (6), 1183-1220

[46] Sims, C. A. (1994) “A simple model for study of the determination of the price
    level and the interaction of monetary and …scal policy,” Economic Theory

    4:381–399.

[47] Sims, C.A. (2001) “Fiscal consequences for Mexico of adopting the dollar”,
    Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 33: 597–616.

[48] Woodford, M. (1995) “Price level determinacy without control of a monetary
    aggregate,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 43:1–46.




                                        57
                      Figure 1: Foreign-currency Debt Securities as a Percentage of GDP

This figure plots the foreign-currency debt securities to GDP ratio for respectively the U.S., U.K., Japan and China
from 1993 to 2014.

        US: Foreign-currency debt securities as % of GDP      %              UK: Foreign-currency debt securities as % of GDP       %
                                                              0.05                                                                  1.20


                                                                                                                                    1.00
                                                              0.04

                                                                                                                                    0.80
                                                              0.03

                                                                                                                                    0.60

                                                              0.02
                                                                                                                                    0.40

                                                              0.01
                                                                                                                                    0.20


                                                              0.00                                                                  0.00
1993   1996    1999    2002    2005    2008    2011    2014          1993   1996    1999    2002     2005    2008    2011    2014


       Japan: Foreign-currency debt securities as % of GDP    %             China: Foreign-currency debt securities as % of GDP     %
                                                              0.14                                                                  0.60


                                                              0.12                                                                  0.50


                                                              0.10                                                                  0.40


                                                              0.08                                                                  0.30


                                                              0.06                                                                  0.20


                                                              0.04                                                                  0.10


                                                              0.02                                                                  0.00
1993   1996    1999    2002    2005    2008    2011    2014          1993   1996    1999    2002    2005     2008    2011    2014
                        Figure 2: M2+ Domestic-currency Debt as a Percentage of GDP

This figure plots the sum of M2 and Domestic-currency Debt as a percentage of GDP for respectively the U.S., U.K.,
Japan and China from 1993 to 2014.

          US: M2 + Domestic currency debt as % of GDP          %               UK: M2 + Domestic currency debt as % of GDP          %
                                                               180                                                                  250

                                                               170                                                                    230

                                                                                                                                      210
                                                               160
                                                                                                                                      190
                                                               150
                                                                                                                                      170
                                                               140
                                                                                                                                      150
                                                               130
                                                                                                                                      130
                                                               120
                                                                                                                                      110

                                                               110                                                                    90

                                                               100                                                                    70
1993   1996    1999    2002    2005    2008   2011      2014          1993   1996   1999    2002    2005    2008   2011      2014


       Japan: M2 + Domestic currency debt as % of GDP          %              China: M2 + Domestic currency debt as % of GDP          %
                                                               300                                                                    210

                                                                290
                                                                                                                                      190
                                                                280

                                                                270                                                                   170

                                                                260
                                                                                                                                      150
                                                                250

                                                                240                                                                   130

                                                                230
                                                                                                                                      110
                                                                220

                                                                210                                                                   90
1993    1996    1999    2002   2005    2008    2011     2014          1993   1996    1999    2002   2005    2008    2011       2014
                                                            Figure 3: Inflation

This figure plots the inflation rate for respectively the U.S., U.K., Japan and China from 1993 to 2014.

                      US: Inflation rate                            %                           UK: Inflation rate                           %
                                                                    4.0                                                                       4.5

                                                                    3.5                                                                       4.0

                                                                    3.0
                                                                                                                                              3.5
                                                                    2.5
                                                                                                                                              3.0
                                                                    2.0
                                                                                                                                              2.5
                                                                    1.5
                                                                                                                                              2.0
                                                                    1.0
                                                                                                                                              1.5
                                                                    0.5

                                                                    0.0                                                                       1.0

                                                                    -0.5                                                                      0.5
1993   1996    1999      2002     2005        2008   2011    2014          1993   1996   1999       2002     2005       2008   2011   2014

                      Japan: Inflation rate                         %                           China: Inflation rate                    %
                                                                    3.0                                                                   25

                                                                    2.5
                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                    2.0

                                                                    1.5                                                                       15

                                                                    1.0
                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                    0.5

                                                                    0.0                                                                       5

                                                                    -0.5
                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                    -1.0

                                                                    -1.5                                                                      -5
1993   1996    1999      2002     2005        2008   2011    2014          1993   1996   1999       2002     2005       2008   2011   2014
                                                Figure 4: GDP Growth

This figure plots the GDP growth rate for respectively the U.S., U.K., Japan and China from 1993 to 2014.

                  US: GDP growth rate                    %                         UK: GDP growth rate                    %
                                                             5                                                                5

                                                                                                                              4
                                                             4
                                                                                                                              3
                                                             3
                                                                                                                              2
                                                             2
                                                                                                                              1

                                                             1                                                                0

                                                                                                                              -1
                                                             0
                                                                                                                              -2
                                                             -1
                                                                                                                              -3
                                                             -2
                                                                                                                              -4

                                                             -3                                                               -5
 1993   1996   1999    2002   2005      2008   2011   2014        1993   1996   1999    2002    2005     2008   2011   2014

                  Japan: GDP growth rate                 %                         China: GDP growth rate                 %
                                                             6                                                                16

                                                                                                                              14
                                                             4
                                                                                                                              12
                                                             2
                                                                                                                              10

                                                             0                                                                8

                                                                                                                              6
                                                             -2
                                                                                                                              4
                                                             -4
                                                                                                                              2

                                                             -6                                                               0
 1993   1996   1999    2002   2005      2008   2011   2014        1993   1996   1999   2002    2005      2008   2011   2014
                                                     Figure 5: Argentina

This figure plots the Foreign exchange reserve as a percentage of GDP, sum of M2 and Domestic-currency
Debt as a percentage of GDP, inflation rate, and GDP growth rate for Argentina from 1993 to 2014.

        Argentina: Foreign exchange reserve as % of GDP          %
                                                                                    Argentina: M2 + Domestic currency debt as % of GDP           %
                                                                      14                                                                              50

                                                                                                                                                      45
                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                                      40
                                                                      10                                                                              35

                                                                                                                                                      30
                                                                      8
                                                                                                                                                      25

                                                                      6                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                      15
                                                                      4
                                                                                                                                                      10

                                                                      2                                                                               5
 1993   1996    1999     2002     2005     2008    2011    2014              1993     1996     1999     2002     2005     2008     2011     2014


                   Argentina: Inflation rate                 %                                  Argentina: GDP growth rate                   %
                                                                 40                                                                           10

                                                                 35

                                                                 30                                                                              5

                                                                 25
                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                 20

                                                                 15
                                                                                                                                                 -5
                                                                 10

                                                                 5                                                                               -10
                                                                 0

                                                                 -5                                                                              -15
 1993   1996    1999    2002     2005     2008    2011    2014             1993     1996     1999     2002     2005     2008     2011     2014
