                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      CONSUMER MOBILITY AND THE LOCAL STRUCTURE OF CONSUMPTION
                             INDUSTRIES

                                          Sumit Agarwal
                                        J. Bradford Jensen
                                        Ferdinando Monte

                                       Working Paper 23616
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23616


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 2017, Revised January 2020




A previous version of this paper circulated with the title “The Geography of Consumption”. We
would like to thank David Atkin, Andrew Bernard, Victor Couture, Jonathan Dingel, Colin
Hottman, Nate Miller, Steve Redding, Andrés Rodriguez-Clare, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Tony
Yezer, and seminar participants at Columbia, Harvard-MIT, National University of Singapore,
NBER, Philadelphia and Richmond FED, Singapore Management University, Southern
Methodist University and University of Virginia for helpful comments and discussions. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23616.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Sumit Agarwal, J. Bradford Jensen, and Ferdinando Monte. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Consumer Mobility and the Local Structure of Consumption Industries
Sumit Agarwal, J. Bradford Jensen, and Ferdinando Monte
NBER Working Paper No. 23616
July 2017, Revised January 2020
JEL No. F1,F14,L8,R1,R2

                                         ABSTRACT

We study local employment, establishment density, and establishment size across industries
delivering final consumption, which comprise a substantial fraction of production, shape local
amenities, and pay different wages. In a stylized model of consumer mobility, lower industry
storability/durability concentrates demand in space, increasing equilibrium employment. Credit
card transactions data show that consumer mobility is limited and varies substantially across
sectors; moreover, expenditure declines more rapidly with distance in sectors transacted more
frequently. Lower storability/durability, proxied by average transaction frequency, increases a
sector’s local employment via higher establishment density. Variation in consumer mobility is as
economically significant as consumers’ expenditure shares.

Sumit Agarwal                                   Ferdinando Monte
National University of Singapore                McDonough School of Business
Mochtar Raidy Building                          Georgetown University
15 Kent Ridge Drive                             37th & O Street, NW
Singapore                                       Washington, DC 20057
ushakri@yahoo.com                               and NBER
                                                ferdinando.monte@georgetown.edu
J. Bradford Jensen
McDonough School of Business
Georgetown University
Washington, DC 20057
and Peterson Institute for International Economics
and also NBER
jbj24@georgetown.edu
1        Introduction
The delivery of …nal consumption involves around forty percent of employment and twenty-…ve percent
of GDP in modern economies. These large magnitudes are consequential for the fortunes of small towns
and big cities alike. The local composition of these industries, like apparel stores, gasoline stations,
health services, or restaurants, helps to shape “amenities,” a component of the residential attractiveness
of di¤erent locations, by modifying consumption opportunities. Amenities further a¤ect housing values,
the spatial sorting of skilled individuals, and wage and well-being inequality.1 These industries also
pay di¤erent wages at the national level, in part re‡ecting di¤erent productivity and skill demand: for
example, monthly wages in the United States in 2007 for restaurant employees averaged one thousand
dollars but reached well beyond three thousand dollars for workers in health services.2
        Despite their potentially far-reaching implications, surprisingly little is known about the market incen-
tives that shape the relative supply of these di¤erent industries. We investigate the empirical determinants
of the “local structure of consumption industries,” i.e., the local composition of employment, number of
establishments, and establishment size across industries that deliver …nal consumption.
        A natural starting point for our discussion is that, in industries delivering …nal goods and services,
…rms make production and location decisions taking into account a consumer’s willingness to travel to the
point of sale. Households devote considerable resources to procuring …nal consumption: data from the
2017 National Household Transportation Survey, for example, show that, among all trips by privately-
owned vehicles, more than 67% were taken for purposes like shopping and errands or recreation. Individual
mobility is, largely, consumer mobility. We then organize our analysis around a highly stylized framework
where consumers solve an optimal travel distance and inventory problem. Their choices are a function
of individual travel costs and the storability/durability of a particular sector’s output. Heterogeneity
in individual travel costs generates a demand that smoothly decays with distance. In lower storabil-
ity/durability sectors, agents optimally choose lower inventories and a higher frequency of purchase trips
for a given total consumption; hence, consumers’ willingness to travel long distances per trip falls and
their demand decays faster with distance. Producers, who use land and labor, respond by limiting the
use of the locations most distant from consumers, and substitute this input with workers; in equilibrium,
when storability/durability is lower, local employment is higher.
        We examine individual purchase trips in more than 1.7 million credit card transactions by 70 thousand
American consumers in 2003, to provide the …rst cross-sectoral description of consumers’local geographical
mobility (more simply, “consumer mobility”). Consumer mobility is quite limited: agents appear to
purchase from just a few among the geographically proximate locations, and the median transaction
occurs at a distance of about 9 km from the home location. However, distances traveled and the associated
decline in expenditure, or “gravity,” vary substantially across sectors: for example, expenditure out of
the town of residence of consumers (“out-of-home”) is about 33% of the expenditure in the home town
of residence (“at-home”) for apparel stores, but only 11% for food stores. Most of the sectoral variation
in gravity is accounted for by extensive margins of adjustment, like individuals taking fewer out-of-home
    1
        See for example Diamond (2016) and Couture, Gaubert, Handbury, and Hurst (2019).
    2
        This computation uses the County Business Patterns 2007 and the set of industries described below.



                                                               2
trips, or by fewer individuals traveling out-of-home altogether.
      Importantly, the data clearly show that gravity is stronger in sectors where transactions are more fre-
quent on average. This fact is a direct implication of our stylized framework: lower storability/durability
implies both a higher average frequency of transactions and a faster decline of expenditure with dis-
tance. Note that our simple model suggests that the average frequency of transactions is a proxy for
durability/storability, after controlling for consumers’ expenditure shares across sectors. We construct
consumers’budget shares across sectors using the CEX expenditure survey from the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics in 2003. The negative correlation between gravity and frequency is robust to controlling for
expenditure shares and is then consistent with consumer mobility decisions in‡uencing the local structure
of consumption industries. We use the frequency of transactions as a proxy for durability/storability in
the rest of the paper and control for CEX expenditure share throughout.
      Of course, one must interpret cross-sectoral correlations with caution. It is in principle possible that
consumers do not choose distances traveled as a function of storability/durability, and that the observed
sectoral variation in consumer mobility merely re‡ects di¤erences in establishment density due to supply-
side industry characteristics, like …xed costs. In supplemental results, reassuringly, we report evidence
consistent with a speci…c role for consumers’decisions in distances traveled. The short span of our credit
card data, about eight months, allows us to reasonably assume a …xed supply network. We examine the
role of individual agents’income on the geographical distribution of their trips, as proxied with the fraction
of out-of-home transactions. We also compare the travel behavior of the same individual under two travel
costs regimes as a function of that individual’s income. In particular, we assemble daily precipitation data
from thousands of weather stations across the United States; we reconstruct local weather conditions at
the time of each purchase; we then examine the di¤erence in spatial distribution of transactions of an
individual during rainy vs. non-rainy days, again as a function of income. In both cases, we control for
many potentially confounding factors with the use of available data or …xed e¤ects. We …nd that agents’
income modulates the spatial distribution of purchases in a way that is related to the sector average
frequency of transactions. Since the supply side is …xed, di¤erences in mobility across sectors that are
related to individual income are likely to re‡ect heterogeneous individual decisions.
      To quantify the in‡uence of consumer mobility on the local structure of consumption industries, we ex-
amine how sectors with di¤erent storability/durability respond to variation in population size. This exer-
cise leverages an implication of consumers’more limited willingness to travel for low storability/durability
sectors: a larger local population should imply a relatively more substantial increase in local employment
in high-frequency sectors, relative to low-frequency sectors. We evaluate this implication using County
Business Patterns data from 1998 and 2007 (dates around our credit card sample period). We address
the endogeneity problem arising from regressing county-sector level employment on the county population
relying on geological variation in the presence of aquifers.3
      We …nd that a larger county population induces a more substantial increase in employment in high-
frequency sectors relative to low-frequency sectors. This increase is wholly accounted for by an increase
in the number of establishments, which is consistent with a reduction in the average distance between
  3
      We follow intuitions in Burch…eld, Overman, Puga and Turner (2006) and Duranton and Turner (2017).



                                                           3
consumers and points of sale within the county. We …nd that the economic signi…cance of the consumer
mobility channel is as big as the economic signi…cance of the variation associated with consumers’expen-
diture shares. In ancillary results, we also show evidence that the spillover of a larger local population on
neighboring counties’employment via consumer mobility is relatively smaller in high-frequency sectors, as
a more geographically concentrated local demand would imply; however, conditional on the frequency of
transactions, this spillover is still relatively stronger in sectors with larger consumer expenditure shares.
Several robustness exercises further limit concerns about confounding factors.
       This work contributes to the literature in three related ways.
       Our main contribution is to analyze, in a systematic way across sectors, the determinants of the local
structure of consumption industries. We …nd evidence that a lower storability/durability of a sector’s
output increases its local employment and local establishment density, consistent with a central role
of consumer mobility in shaping local equilibrium outcomes. This contribution is signi…cant in two
directions. First, the empirical determinants of the structure of these industries have received little
systematic attention in the literature.4 Yet, they are likely consequential for the fortunes of di¤erent
localities. Industries that cater to …nal demand account for a major share of employment and GDP. Their
amenity value is prominently associated with the attractiveness of an area; this attractiveness varies
for di¤erent demographic and skill groups, with consequences on local productivity, house prices, wages
and well-being inequality.5 Further, data from the U.S. County Business Patterns shows that in 2007,
the standard deviation of average monthly wages across these industries was more than twelve hundred
U.S. dollars, plausibly re‡ecting considerable variation in skill demand and productivity, and further
in‡uencing the desirability of particular regions. Second, our results complement a more traditional view
of the sectoral composition of locations based on Central Place Theory, where sectors with larger overall
expenditure (or smaller economies of scale, or the more commonly demanded varieties within a sector)
are found in most cities, while sectors with the smaller expenditure (or most signi…cant economies of
scale, or the less commonly demanded varieties within a sector) are observed only in large cities.6 Our
results indicate that after controlling for consumers’ budget shares, consumer mobility appears to have
an independent and economically equal role.
       Our second contribution is to provide insight into the nature of the spatial frictions that in‡uence
consumer behavior: lower storability/durability of a sector’s output reduces consumers’ optimal travel
length decisions, and generates a faster decline of expenditure with distance. This contribution is impor-
tant for two reasons. First, it complements and brings together a growing literature related to spatial
frictions in consumption markets. This literature mostly focuses on speci…c sectors7 and as such it is
   4
     The vast literature about the sectoral composition of locations has focused on broad sectors, narrower sectors within
manufacturing, or occupational functions: see, for example, Duranton and Puga (2001, 2004, 2005), Rosenthal and Strange
(2004), Ellison, Glaeser and Kerr (2010), Davis and Dingel (2019).
   5
     See for example Glaeser, Kolko, and Saiz (2000), Diamond (2016), Couture and Handbury (2019), Couture, Gaubert,
Handbury, and Hurst (2019). The work on endogenous consumption amenities has mostly taken a homogeneous view of
these di¤erent consumption sectors and focused on the role of income.
   6
     See Christaller (1933) for foundations. For theoretical work on Central Place Theory, see for example Hsu (2012) or Hsu,
Holmes, and Morgan (2014); for an empirical test, see Schi¤ (2015).
   7
     The literature has for example considered food distribution (Allcott et al., 2018), gasoline (Houde, 2012), health care
(Raval and Rosenbaum, 2018), movie theaters (Davis, 2006), or restaurants (Couture, 2016, Davis, Dingel, Monras and
Morales, 2018). Some work considers the response of cross-border consumer travel in response to exchange rates (Chandra,


                                                             4
able to accommodate sector-speci…c considerations. Our uni…ed view necessarily abstracts from these
speci…cities to highlight a common feature, storability/durability, that appears to be economically signif-
icant in explaining the local structure of consumption industries.8 Second, this contribution speaks to
the recent literature on the tradeability of services,9 which has mostly focused on estimating the decline
of service ‡ows with distance, with less focus on the underlying reasons why distance a¤ects trade. Our
results indicate that, for the signi…cant fraction of economic activity related to consumer behavior, a lower
storability/durability of a sector’s output makes it appear less “tradeable.”10 Understanding the nature
of these frictions is important for the e¤ect that local policies, like new transportation infrastructure,
may have across sectors. Relatedly, our results also suggest that, everything else equal, innovative on-line
technologies to deliver consumption goods might …nd more natural targets in markets where consumer
mobility frictions matter most.11
    Our third contribution is to quantify salient features of consumer mobility in a systematic way across
industries for the …rst time. We establish new sector-level facts like the distributions of traveled distances,
gravity estimates, and the margins of expenditure decline. A signi…cant fraction of the extensive litera-
ture in quantitative spatial economics12 needs to make assumptions about and calibrate small-geography
models. Our analysis is the …rst to provide direct evidence, comparable across sectors, to inform those
choices. This evidence ultimately allows for improved positive and normative quantitative implications
of those studies.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces a highly stylized model to describe
our main intuition about consumer mobility and local equilibrium outcomes. In Section 3, we present a set
of cross-sectoral stylized facts on consumer mobility. Section 4 investigates empirically the local structure
of consumption industries. Section 5 describes ancillary results, robustness analyses and limitations of
our work. Section 6 concludes.
Head, and Tappata, 2014), or tax rates (Agarwal, Marwell and McGranahan, 2017; Baker, Johnson and Kueng 2018).
    8
      Previous work has shown that durability/storability is important for the study of commodity markets (e.g., Williams
and Wright, 1991, Coleman, 2009); obtaining consistent estimates of demand elasticity (Hendel and Nevo 2006a,b); the
consequences of exchange rate devaluations (Alessandria, Kaboski and Midrigan, 2010); understanding retail pricing strategies
and measuring in‡ation (Chevalier and Kashyap 2018); accounting for consumer response to local sales taxes (Baker, Johnson
and Kueng, 2018).
    9
      See for example Jensen and Kletzer (2010), Gervais and Jensen (2019), or Eckert (2019).
   10
      These considerations are reminiscent of intuitions that can be traced back to Von Thunen’s (1936) model of rural land
use, or Karádi and Koren (2017) for a more modern version; for an empirical test of the Von Thunen model, see for example
Fafchamps and Shilpi (2003) about Nepal.
   11
      While online transactions are inherently less suitable for some consumption activities (like a restaurant dinner), our
results speak to frictions that makes some industries natural targets for e-commerce. On-line transactions grew from about
0.9% of total retail sales in 2000 to 6.4% in 2014 (Hortaçsu and Syverson, 2015), arguably to ease the burden of travel
frictions that we are analyzing here. The literature about on-line transactions is growing and includes for example papers
on the role of taxes in determining sales of on-line versus traditional retailers (Ellison and Ellison, 2009), the importance
of distance and the persistence of home bias in on-line auctions (Hortaçsu, Martínez-Jerez and Douglas, 2009), or the gains
from e-commerce (Dolfen et al., 2019).
   12
      See Redding and Rossi-Hansberg (2017) for a survey.




                                                             5
2         A Simple Model of Shopping
We start by introducing a highly stylized model of consumer behavior and equilibrium employment to
frame our discussion. Our setting is essentially a mirror image of an Alonso-Mills-Muth monocentric city
model: all agents live in a single place, and they choose where to shop. Since they want to consume
at a constant rate over time, but travel is costly, an inventory problem emerges. We generalize ideas
present in Oi (1992) – but dating back at least to Baumol (1952) – to a setting where consumers with
heterogeneous travel costs choose 1) how far to travel for their purchases, 2) how frequently to do so, and
3) the purchase size per trip. Producers use homogeneous labor and land heterogeneous in its distance j to
consumers, to supply a good only di¤erentiated by its point of sale. A given price function p (j) induces a
spatial distribution of supply from optimal producers’choices; and a spatial distribution of demand, from
optimal consumers’ choices. The equilibrium price function makes demand and supply identical point-
wise and determines the marginal plot of land used. The good is characterized by a storability/durability
parameter (“storage cost” for brevity) g: We think of storability/durability as a general characteristic
of the sector, capturing the length of time over which a good or service can deliver its utility ‡ow. For
perishable items, this concept is intuitive: fruit, for example, will depreciate if not eaten quickly. More
generally, this concept may re‡ect depreciation due to use (as in the case of a shirt) or to the passage of
time (as in the case of a haircut). This parameter g regulates, in equilibrium, the spatial decay in demand
and hence a¤ects the equilibrium distribution of supply and total employment.

2.1         Producers
There is one sector with productivity A. Producers operate in perfect competition and are potentially
active in any location j 2 [0; +1). Each location j is endowed with a …xed amount of land D. A …rm
located in j uses land and labor L (j) to produce goods with the production function Q (j) = AD1       L (j) :
Firms located in j choose labor to maximize pro…ts:

                                         (j) = p (j) AD1        L (j)      wL (j)            R (j) D

where p (j) and R (j) are the output price and the rental rate of land at j; w is the wage, which we assume
…xed and determined in an outside sector13 . The optimal quantity of labor is given by

                                                                  1=(1    )
                                                           A
                                            L (j) = D                          p (j)1=(1      )
                                                                                                           (1)
                                                           w

Output as a function of the price, that is, the supply curve at j, is given by

                                                                         =(1     )
                                                                                             =(1   )
                                        Q (j) = A1=(1   )
                                                            D                        p (j)                 (2)
                                                                  w
    13
         We generalize this assumption below.




                                                                  6
Absentee landlords rent their land to the highest price. Under free entry, positive pro…ts in a location
bid up these land prices; in equilibrium, the price of land is R (j) = R p (j)1=(1                )
                                                                                                      and pro…ts are zero
everywhere.14

2.2        Consumers
A measure N of consumers is heterogeneous in t, an increasing index of individual travel costs. All
consumers (exogenously) live in location 0. Each agent wants to consume a …xed quantity q of the good
over one unit of time: in particular, in a fraction di of the unit time, the consumer eats a …xed quantity
q        di of the good. Assuming a …xed quantity consumed simpli…es the problem and emphasizes the role
of the price function p (j) in allocating consumers to purchase locations.
         A consumer with travel cost t wants to minimize the total cost of consuming q units of the good per
unit of time, c (t) :15 In particular, the consumer takes as given p (j) and solves:

                                                                                q    z
                                           c (t) = min p (j) q + (j; t)           +g                                      (3)
                                                    j;z                         z    2

In this expression,          (j; t) is the cost per trip for a consumer t traveling to j, with         (j; t)   0,   j   > 0,
    t   > 0,    jt   > 0. The consumer chooses the distance traveled j and how much to buy every trip (the
“batch size”) z. A batch size z implies average inventory holdings of z=2, and hence total inventory costs
of gz=2; a batch size z also implies a frequency of q=z trips per period (ignoring integer constraints) and
hence          (j; t) q=z in travel costs. For a given distance traveled j, the consumer balances inventory costs
(increasing in z) and travel costs (decreasing in z). This is just the classic trade-o¤ in optimal inventory
models, and delivers an optimal batch size of

                                                                               1=2
                                                              2q (j; t)
                                                z (j; t) =                                                                (4)
                                                                 g

Consumers buy more per trip when the travel costs are high (to economize on the number of trips) or
when the storage costs are low (to take advantage of the durability of the good). Note that, conditional
on q, variation in g induces variation in the frequency q=z. Using this expression in (3), we can rewrite
the cost minimization uniquely as a function of distance. The optimal distance traveled then satis…es

                                                        1          1=2
                                           p0 (j) q =     (j; t)         j   (j; t) (2qg)1=2                              (5)
                                                        2

In choosing the optimal distance, consumers intuitively balance price savings with travel and inventory
costs. A marginally longer trip makes consumers save                     p0 (j) per unit purchased;16 however, they pay
more in travel costs and inventory costs (since with longer distances they optimally buy larger batches).
A higher storage cost e¤ectively raises the marginal cost of distance in (5): as g increases, inventories are
    14
     In this equation, R w =(1 ) (1           ) =(1 ) A1=(1 ) is a constant independent of our parameters of interest.
    15
     We can think of this as part of a more general problem where consumers have a (large enough) income spent on this
sector and on an outside good left out of the analysis.
  16
     In equilibrium, the price will decrease in j, so that p0 (j) > 0:



                                                               7
more expensive, the optimal batch size in (4) is smaller and the optimal number of trips q=z grow. Quite
naturally, consumers choose to travel closer and more frequently when storability/durability decreases,
everything else equal.

2.3      Equilibrium price
We now solve for the equilibrium price function and the associated spatial distribution of production.17
The price function will turn out to be the solution to a second order di¤erential equation. We make three
assumptions that allow for analytic results (and point out where they are helpful): we specialize the travel
cost function to      (j; t) = (jt)2 ; we assume that t                 U nif orm[1; 2]; and set        = 1=2 in the production
function.
       Our …rst assumption lets us write the …rst order condition (5) for a consumer t as,

                                                                              1=2
                                                                          q
                                                     t=        p0 (j)                                                             (6)
                                                                         2g

This equation describes the solution to an optimal assignment problem: for a given (monotonically de-
creasing and convex) price function p (j), it implicitly matches each consumer type t to a unique location
j (t), with j 0 (t) < 0.
       In equilibrium, demand and supply of goods are equal in all j where consumers choose to travel. Using
(6) and the distributional assumptions on t, we can write the cumulative distribution function Pr j < J
of consumers traveling up to a distance J; and its density n J , as
                           (                               )
                                                     1=2                                 1=2                                1=2
                                     0           q                        0          q                        00        q
         Pr j < J = Pr t            p J                        =2+p J                          =) n J     p        J              (7)
                                                2g                                  2g                                 2g

The total quantity demanded at j is then N q n (j) : Equating this demand to supply (2), the equilibrium
in location j requires
                                                                                     g 1=4
                                         p00 (j) =   2
                                                         p (j) , with          0 3=4 1=2 ;                                        (8)
                                                                                q N
where      0   depends on parameters.18 This condition must hold for any location j where the good is
produced. Equation (8) is a second order di¤erential equation in the price function p (j).

De…nition 1 An equilibrium is a price function p (j) and a cuto¤ allocation of land jmax such that a)
producers maximize pro…ts, b) the marginal land owner obtains zero rents, c) consumers optimally choose
distance, and d) demand and supply of goods are the same at every point j.

       To …nd the equilibrium price function, we impose that the consumers with the lowest (t = 1) and
the highest (t = 2) travel costs choose the maximum distance, j (1) = jmax , and the minimum distance,
j (2) = 0; respectively; and that, at j = jmax , the price of the product is zero (otherwise, rents R (j) would
  17
    All necessary derivations in this subsection and the next are reported in Appendix B, p. 42.
  18                                    1=2
    In particular, 0    2 1=4 A D=w         : Our third assumption of = 1=2 allows us to write this di¤erential equation as
linear in p (j).


                                                                   8
be positive, and some …rms would have an incentive to enter slightly farther, paying zero rent). The
equilibrium price function is given by

                                1
                   p (j) =              q 1=4 g 1=4 N 1=2 [exp f (jmax     j)g     exp f     (jmax     j)g]                 (9)
                             21=2   0

The price decreases with distance for j 2 [0; jmax ] : The value jmax is an implicit and decreasing function
of .

2.4      Aggregate Implications
We now explore some equilibrium implications of this stylized model.
       Gravity holds. Expenditure at a given place j is given by

                                           X (j)     N n (j) qp (j) = x p (j)2

where the last equality uses (7) and (8).19 Since the price is decreasing in j, expenditure decreases with
distance and gravity holds. Analogously to continuous–types labor market models of assignment,20 this
framework delivers a non-constant distance elasticity of expenditure. This elasticity is generated by the
complementarity between j and t, and the distribution of t.21
       Gravity is stronger when storage costs are higher. Consider the slope [X (jmax )                        X (0)] =jmax =
  X (0) =jmax . When g is higher, the marginal cost of distance for all consumers grows and the willingness
to take long trips shrinks. This implies that the marginal plot of land is no longer viable for production,
and jmax falls.22 Since output is still …xed at N q but there is less land, more demand must be concentrated
at shorter distances, in particular at j = 0, so that p (0) grows.23 The average slope of the expenditure is
then higher when g grows.24
       The average frequency of transactions grows when storage costs are higher. Consider the
expression for the optimal batch size z in (4): as g grows, a consumer will reduce the batch size z for any
distance traveled. She will also reduce the distance traveled j (t), since the marginal cost of distance is
higher. Hence, z unambiguously drops, and the frequency q=z unambiguously rises for each individual,
and on average.25 Conditional on q, a higher frequency proxies for a higher g.
  19
     In this expression, x = 2 1=2 20 is a function of parameters not involving g or N .
  20
     See for example Sattinger (1979), Costinot and Vogel (2010), Monte (2011).
  21
     A related setting is studied in Karádi and Koren (2017): they focus on the general equilibrium implications of sectoral
location choice (our model is partial equilibrium in that we only study equilibrium in one product market), where, however,
the impact of distance is modeled as a classic iceberg decay; hence, expenditure declines log-linearly with distance. From this
perspective, our framework is related to demand–side nonlinear pricing models in international trade: for example, Fieler
(2011) or Fajgelbaum, Grossman and Helpman (2011).
  22
     Recall that jmax decreases with , and increases with g.
  23
     Using (9), it’s easy to see that p (0) / g 1=4 [exp f jmax g exp f jmax g], which increases with g since we show in
Appendix B that jmax is constant.
  24
     Since the equilibrium expenditure function has a varying distance elasticity over j, it is di¢ cult to prove that the slope
becomes steeper at every j. However, Lemma 2 in page 42 shows that over j 2 [0; jmax ], 1) the unweighted average slope
X 0 (j), 2) the average slope X 0 (j) weighted by the number of agents n (j), and 3) the average slope of X 0 (j) weighted by
the expenditure at j, X (j), all become more negative as g grows.
  25
     See Lemma 3 on p. 44 for a proof.



                                                               9
      A crucial consequence of the last two implications is that gravity is stronger in high-frequency sectors.
      In response to an increase in the number of consumers, 1) total employment grows more,
and 2) the average distance of output to consumers grows less, when storage costs are higher.
The total employment and the average distance of output to consumers in the sector are given by
                                               Z   jmax
                                                                         l
                                     Leq =                L (j) dj =       1=2
                                                                               g 1=4 N 3=2                  (10)
                                                0                      Aw
                                               R jmax
                                                0       jQ (j) dj           N 1=2
                                    Deq =                              d                                    (11)
                                                        Nq                  g 1=4

where l and d depend on parameters not including g or N:26 The intuition is simple. If population
N increases, total output N q must grow in the same proportion, by the assumption of …xed q. This
expansion in demand –and production –requires both more workers Leq and more distant land jmax ( ).
The incentive of producers to economize on distant land, however, is stronger when g is higher: with
high storage costs, long distances are particularly expensive for consumers; hence, employment must grow
relatively more, and distance relatively less, to accommodate the increase in production.

2.5      Confounding Factors
We have so far described the simplest possible framework to illustrate our logic. In this subsection, we
discuss the theoretical implications of two features of the data that might be relevant in our empirical
analysis. First, we have assumed that labor supply is in…nitely elastic at a given wage; however, local labor
supply may be upward sloping in wages, for example, via commuting links;27 this e¤ect may slow down
the growth in employment in response to exogenous changes. Second, while we can, in theory, consider
the e¤ect of an exogenous change in the population, in practice variation in population may be associated
with changes in local productivity, which also a¤ect employment. Hence, simple linear regressions may
su¤er from endogeneity bias.
      Let us assume that the labor supply has a …nite elasticity " > 0 with respect to wages w, i.e., Ls = N w" :
Equation (10) now just describes the labor demanded by …rms Ld , rather than equilibrium employment.
Let us also assume that the equilibrium population and productivity are related via N = N A , where N
is an exogenous component, and              0 captures in a reduced-form way the positive relationship between
local productivity and population. This relation may come via agglomeration externalities or because
high productivity reduces the local consumer price index and attracts more residents. Equating labor
demand Ld to labor supply,

                                     Ld = L g 1=4 N 3=2 A3      =2 1
                                                                       w   1=2
                                                                                 = N A w"                   (12)
 26
      See Lemmas 4 and 5 and on pp. 45 and following for a proof.
 27
      See for example Monte, Redding and Rossi-Hansberg (2018).




                                                              10
This equation determines an equilibrium wage,28 which we can then substitute in eq. (10) to obtain
                                                                1    "        3"+1   (3"+1)  2"
                                                      ^ g 2 (2"+1) N 2"+1 A
                                                Leq = L                                 2"+1                                      (13)

      ^ is again a function of parameters. An increase in productivity A will increase population, since
where L
                                                                                             2"
N = N A ; when this relation is not too strong (in particular,                          <   3"+1 ),   an increase in productivity will,
quite naturally, reduce equilibrium employment. This intuition will hold as long as the labor supply is
not perfectly rigid (i.e., " > 0). Moreover,
                                                                    @Leq
                                                                         <0
                                                                    @g@A
In other words, a simple comparison of low to high population (or population density) places may also
be an implicit comparison of low to high productivity places; and a higher productivity, everything else
equal, implies employment that grows relatively less, or falls relatively more, in high g sectors than in low
g sectors. This direction would be the opposite indicated by our simple model.
         Note, however, that if we were able to induce exogenous variation in N , we should still expect a
positive cross partial between population and g, since:

                                                                    @Leq
                                                                          >0                                                      (14)
                                                                    @g@ N

This cross-partial derivative is positive even in the presence of labor market equilibrium feedbacks (i.e.,
our intuition carries through to a more general data-generating process where equilibrium employment
responds to local labor supply and wages).
         Armed with these intuitions, we turn to an empirical exploration of consumer mobility and its conse-
quences on local outcomes.


3         Consumer Mobility
In this section, we present basic facts about consumer mobility. We argue that consumer mobility is low
and that distance appears a primary friction. Expenditure declines quickly with distance. This decline is
heterogeneous across sectors, is mostly explained by extensive margins of adjustment, and is related to
the average frequency of transactions within a sector.

3.1         Data Description
We describe consumers’ geographical mobility patterns using a large proprietary dataset containing a
sample of credit card transactions from a major …nancial institution. These transactions occurred roughly
between March and October 2003. A transaction record contains, among other things, an exact date,
an account ID, the amount spent, and a Merchant Category Code (MCC), which we will refer to as
a “broad category,” in this classi…cation’s terminology, or simply “sector”. A transaction record also
                                                     2=(2"+1)
    28
         In particular, w = L g 1=4 N 1=2 A   =2 1




                                                                         11
contains information (to be processed) on the purchase location. This location can only be identi…ed
at the level of Census incorporated place or county subdivision. In addition to all distinct transactions,
we have information on the account itself, including self-reported income, age, and the associated ZIP
code.29 We aggregate residence ZIP codes to the level of the purchase location using a correspondence
from the GeoCorr database from the Missouri Census Data Center. After cleaning the data, we have
1,722,873 transactions for 71,377 accounts (see Appendix A for a complete description of data cleaning
and processing). The average transaction is 68 dollars, and total purchases amount to around $116 million.
Table 1 gives a breakdown by 21 broad categories. The largest categories in terms of observations are
Gasoline Services, Food Stores, Miscellaneous Retail, and Eating and Drinking Places.30

                    Table 1: Summary of transaction amounts (in USD), by sector

Broad Category                                      Median            Mean       St. Dev.        Sum             N
Agricultural Services                                   83             136            212    1,307,616        9,615
Amusement, Rec. Serv.                                   45              89            169    1,771,086       19,897
Apparel                                                 49              75            114    6,112,646       81,778
Auto Repair/Service/Parking                             41             151            325    3,464,626       22,990
Auto and Truck Sales/Service/Parts                      66             198            423    6,624,392       33,473
Building Mat./Hardware/Garden Supp.                     42             101            258    9,658,412       95,568
Communications                                          53              91            122      559,201        6,113
Durable Goods                                           68             209            521      837,246        4,004
Eating and Drinking Places                              26              39             73    8,770,958      227,715
Food Stores                                             30              46             59   12,116,604      265,828
Furniture, Home Furnishings, Equip.                     60             194            430   10,853,963       55,917
Gasoline Services                                       19              22             31    6,934,785      312,670
General Merchandise Stores                              43              67            122   13,963,544      207,866
Health Services                                         71             164            375    4,487,799       27,381
Hospitality                                             96             170            308    6,430,175       37,934
Misc. Retail                                            32              65            182   16,100,792      248,069
Misc. Services                                          95             316            703    1,870,560        5,919
Motion Pictures                                         14              19             44      272,948       14,048
NonDurable Goods                                        38              78            175      640,203        8,246
Other Vehicles Sales/Service/Parts                      76             259            746    1,366,449        5,279
Personal Services                                       37              74            210    2,406,679       32,563
Total                                                   30              68            188   116,550,684   1,722,873



3.2      Consumers Visit Few Locations
We start our exploration by considering how far consumers travel across locations for purchases. In the
raw data with all transactions, we count expenditure ‡ows between around 18 thousand unique locations.
Since we want to describe “day-to-day” mobility and purchasing behavior, we focus, in much of the
analysis, on transactions that occur within a distance of 120 km between the location of residence and
 29
      The same source data was used in Agarwal, Marwell, and McGranahan (2017).
 30
      Table C.1 in the Appendix (page 48) shows summary statistics by state of purchase.


                                                            12
sale.31 Among all the location pairs within this threshold, we observe around 1.5 million transactions
between only around 121 thousand pairs (2.8% of the possible pairs). There are 12.3 transactions per
pair on average, and two transactions for the median pair. Overall, the matrix of residence-sales location
purchases appears sparse.
       To dig deeper into this apparently low mobility, we construct a residence location–level dataset. For
each residence, we compute 1) the total number of locations visited by all consumers living in that
residence; 2) the total number of locations in the data within 120 km; 3) the average distance from the
residence location to these locations; and 4) the share of locations visited out of those available. The
four rows of Table 2 report summary statistics on these items. The …rst row shows that consumers in
the median residence visit only 7 distinct sales locations during the sample period. The second and third
rows indicate that these residences vary both in terms of how many locations are close-by and in terms
of their average distance to them. The fourth row shows that, regardless of the source (few opportunities
or long distances), the overall fraction of available locations where purchases occur is also small.


       Table 2: Summary statistics across residence locations (transactions within 120km)

variable                                   min        p10      p25       p50       p75       p90     max       mean         N
Sales locations visited                       1          2        3         7        14        27      445     11.17     9,479
Sales locations available                     2         66      112       192       338       646    1,115     271.82    9,479
Mean distance to sales locations           16.8       63.1     69.7      76.1      80.6      83.6     97.2     74.41     9,479
Share available locations visited             0       0.01     0.02      0.04      0.07      0.12     0.67      0.05     9,479

       In Table 3 , we then ask what accounts for this low mobility. In column 1 of Table 3 we regress the
log of the number of sales locations visited on the log of the number of sales locations available and …nd
an elasticity of 0.55: overall, the number of visited locations grows at about half the pace of the available
ones. Distance has a strong role: controlling for the number of available sales locations, a 1% increase in
the average distance to those locations is accompanied by a 2.4-2.6% decrease in the number of locations
visited (columns 2 and 3).32 The next section characterizes distances traveled more in detail.

3.3      The Distance Traveled Varies by Sector
This …rst snapshot paints a picture where consumers have many options but choose to shop only in a
limited number of locations, and where distance plays a central role. How far, then, do people travel for
their purchases?
       The median transaction in the data occurs about 9 km from home. There is a large dispersion around
this typical value: the …rst 25% of transactions occur within the same location, while the third quartile is
around 30 km. A long right tail of high distances is likely due to account holders traveling outside town
  31
     Distance is always computed between the centroids of two locations using the Haversine formula. We identify and exclude
on-line transactions, where the distance is not meaningful. Monte, Redding, and Rossi-Hansberg (2018) …nd this threshold
to be one where gravity in home-to-work commuting ‡ows has a change in slope, so it is a natural cuto¤.
  32
     In Tables C.2 and C.3 of Appendix C.2 (page 47), we repeat this analysis using a sample of users with at least one
transaction every two days. The fraction of locations visited has a similar distribution. In a regression analysis, distance has
twice the impact of the number of available locations on the total number of locations visited.


                                                              13
                                Table 3: Locations available and locations visited

      Dependent variable:                                               Log of number of sales locations visited
                                                                           (1)        (2)             (3)
      Sales locations within 120km, log                                 0.548***                         0.568***
                                                                         (0.010)                          (0.010)
      Average distance to sales locations within 120km, log                           -2.374***         -2.594***
                                                                                       (0.125)           (0.090)
      Constant                                                          -0.988***     12.096***         10.061***
                                                                         (0.052)       (0.539)           (0.399)
      R2                                                                  0.22            0.09              0.32
      N                                                                   9,479          9,479             9,479
                 Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01



for work or tourism.33 Figure 1 shows select percentiles of the distances at which transactions occur, by
sector. The heterogeneity in the distance traveled is very signi…cant: moving from the sector at the 10th
percentile of the median distance traveled to the sector at the 90th, such median distance goes up by a
factor of around 7. The patterns make sense overall: the median transaction occurs at 4 km for staple
items like Food Stores, and around 12 km for Eating and Drinking Places; it is, however, above 20 km
for Durable Goods and 33 km for Amusement and Recreational Services.34
    The distance traveled by consumers is a combination of their willingness to travel (as mediated by
their optimal shopping behavior) and supply conditions like the density of producers. We return to this
consideration in robustness exercises at the end of this section. Having characterized distances traveled,
we now analyze how they relate to expenditure ‡ows.

3.4    Gravity in Consumer Expenditure
A substantial literature has documented the decay of goods’ trade ‡ows with distance at international
and intra-national levels; these studies have limited implications for the behavior of consumers, who
buy merchandise from producers only infrequently and consume services in addition to goods.35 We
address this gap in two steps: …rst, we document that gravity also holds for consumers’behavior; second,
we analyze the margins of this decline across individuals and point out a stylized feature of the data
consistent with our simple model: gravity is stronger where the frequency of transactions is higher.
  33
     We report more statistics on the untruncated data in the Appendix. Tables C.4 and C.5, in pages 50 and 51 respectively,
show percentiles in the distribution of transaction distances by sector, unweighted and weighted by value of the transaction.
People spend the typical dollar farther than where the typical transaction occurs, as re‡ected in rightward shifts in the
value-weighted distributions.
  34
     Davis (2006) …nds that larger population within 10 miles increases demand to a movie theater and that the geographical
market of a theater extends for at most 15 miles around it: consistently, we …nd for the same industry that 75% of the
transactions occur within around 11 miles.
  35
     See, e.g., Hillberry and Hummels (2007) or Disdier and Head (2008). Intranational ‡ows of goods typically record only
…rm-to-…rm transactions.



                                                             14
                                 Hospitality
                   Amusement, Rec. Serv.
                          Communications
                            Durable Goods
         Other Vehicles Sales/Service/Parts
                             Misc. Services
                                    Apparel
                Eating and Drinking Places
        Furniture, Home Furnishings, Equip.
                         Gasoline Services
               General Merchandise Stores
                                Misc. Retail
                           Health Services
        Auto and Truck Sales/Service/Parts
                        NonDurable Goods
               Auto Repair/Service/Parking
     Building Mat./Hardware/Garden Supp.
                         Personal Services
                            Motion Pictures
                       Agricultural Services
                               Food Stores

                                                  2.5         5          10         20     40      80     160           320       640   1280
                                                                                   Distance (km, log scale)

                                                    p25              median             p75
                                               Notes: Sorted by median distance; a dot is absent for percentiles equal to zero.




                              Figure 1: Distances traveled by sector (select percentiles)


3.4.1     Expenditure patterns display gravity

We start our exploration of gravity in consumer behavior by investigating how quickly total expenditure
decays with distance.36 For a given sector, we denote with Xhs the total expenditure of consumers residing
in location h on merchants selling in location s. Except where noted otherwise, we restrict from now on
the analysis to transactions occurring at distances up to 120 km. We make full use of the information
available in the data comparing 1) expenditure inside vs. outside one’s place of residence, and 2) the
decline in expenditure across merchants at di¤erent distances from the residence location. First, we
estimate the change in expenditure associated with shopping out of the home residence (“out-of-home”):

                                                               (h)       (s)
                                         log Xhs =        +          +         +       1(h6=s) + "hs                                    (15)
   36
      To our knowledge, the …rst formulation of a gravity law for …nal consumers was proposed by Reilly (1931): “Two
cities attract retail trade from any intermediate city or town in the vicinity of the breaking point, approximately in direct
proportion to the populations of the two cities and in inverse proportion to the square of the distance from these two cities
to the intermediate town.”



                                                                      15
where 1(h6=s) is an indicator function assuming the value of 1 if h 6= s and zero otherwise; in this regression,
the expenditure of residents on their home location, Xhh , is included. Second, we estimate the impact of
distance on trade ‡ows with a regression of the form

                                                      (h)        (s)
                                    log Xhs =     +         +          + log disths + "hs                                 (16)

In this equation, disths is the distance between the centroids of h and s; this regression includes only
pairs where h 6= s because we do not measure the distance of transactions within the residence location.
                                                                                                   (h)         (s)
In both equations,       is a constant, and a set of origin and destination …xed e¤ects,                 and         , controls
for unobserved location-speci…c di¤erences in factors such as size, transportation infrastructure, produc-
tivity, or intensity of competition (Anderson and Van Wincoop, 2003). These two approaches highlight
complementary features of the data. The coe¢ cient                     in Equation (15) measures the expenditure drop
associated with visiting the average out-of-home location; hence, it shows the importance of very short
trips, for which distance is poorly measured. The coe¢ cient                   in Equation (16) shows the elasticity of
expenditure to distance considering only out–of–home expenditure ‡ows, where instead distance can be
measured.
       We estimate Equations (15) and (16) across all sectors. We …nd, unsurprisingly, very clear distance
e¤ects. Estimating (15), the expenditure in the average location out-of-home is only about 8:8% of the
average expenditure at home ( =            2:435; robust s.e. 0.021).37 When we estimate (16), we …nd a slope
of     1:051 (robust s.e. of 0.006), in line with estimates in the trade literature.38 A comparison of these
two coe¢ cients shows that a large decay already occurs at very short distances.
       These pooled estimates mask large di¤erences across sectors. Table 4 shows the coe¢ cients of
(column 1) and       (column 4) when we estimate Equations (15) and (16) by sector.39 Sectors in this table
are ordered by the out-of-home dummy in column 1 (this ordering will be kept throughout the paper for
ease of reference). The strong decay at short distances is pervasive across sectors. However, the decay is
heterogeneous: in sectors like Food Stores, the expenditure in the average location out-of-home is around
9% of the expenditure at home; this fraction grows to 20% for Eating and Drinking Places, to 38% for
Personal Services, and 91% for Durable Goods.
       The impact of distance as measured by estimates of (16) is consistent with this picture: the correlation
between the two sets of coe¢ cients across sectors is 0.68. However, the much smaller distance coe¢ cients
in these estimates are notable: for the typical sector, a 1% increase in distance is associated with a 0.41%
decrease in expenditure, and almost all coe¢ cients are below the benchmark value of approximately 1 for
international trade. We conclude that most of the decline in expenditure happens at short distances as
measured in (15), which we will focus on for much of the remaining analysis.
       Column (7) in Table 4 reports, for each sector, the simple average of the number of purchases per
account in the transaction data. Our simple model above suggests that the frequency of transactions may
serve an inverse proxy for the storability/durability of a sector’s output, g: a lower storability/durability
  37
     Using all data rather than only transactions within 120 km, we …nd = 2:545 (robust s.e. 0.0223).
  38
     This slope is not particularly sensitive to changes in the cuto¤. See Appendix C.4, page 52, for further discussion.
  39
     All p-values are computed using heteroskedasticity–robust standard errors. The number of observations reported excludes
“singletons,” i.e. those observations that would be absorbed by …xed e¤ects and do not contribute to the estimation.


                                                                16
increases inventory costs and induces shorter and more frequent trips. The model also suggests that the
observed frequency of transactions can be in‡uenced by the overall importance of a sector in consumers’
expenditure, q. To capture this intuition, we develop a correspondence between the MCC classi…cation
and the items in the Consumer Expenditure Survey from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. We report the
budget shares in this data (CEX expenditure shares in what follows) among our sectors in 2003 in Column
(8). We note for now the tendency of sectors with stronger gravity to be purchased more frequently. We
return to this aspect in more detail after we have a better understanding of which margins account for
the expenditure drop over space.

                                    Table 4: Decline in expenditure
                                             Out of Home                Gravity            Frequency of   CEX
Category                                coe¤     pv      obs.   coe¤      pv        obs.   transactions   share
                                         (1)    (2)       (3)     (4)     (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)
Food Stores                             -2.23 0.00 22,649       -0.85    0.00     18,632       7.53        0.14
Gasoline Services                       -2.08 0.00 39,666       -0.60    0.00     34,615       8.86        0.06
General Merchandise Stores              -1.78 0.00 26,837       -0.93    0.00     23,932       5.14        0.02
Misc. Retail                            -1.70 0.00 34,052       -0.65    0.00     30,042       5.25        0.06
Eating and Drinking Places              -1.57 0.00 34,504       -0.56    0.00     31,022       5.93        0.10
Building Mat./Hardware/Garden Supp.     -1.40 0.00 14,185       -0.73    0.00     11,604       4.15        0.04
Auto Repair/Service/Parking             -1.25 0.00     4,414    -0.40    0.00      3,013       1.83        0.03
NonDurable Goods                        -1.16 0.00       978    -0.65    0.00        758       1.68        0.01
Health Services                         -1.12 0.00     5,134    -0.33    0.00      3,910       2.16        0.05
Apparel                                 -1.10 0.00 15,918       -0.53    0.00     14,066       2.91        0.07
Furniture, Home Furnishings, Equip.     -1.07 0.00 12,286       -0.57    0.00     10,734       2.33        0.07
Auto and Truck Sales/Service/Parts      -1.04 0.00     7,298    -0.33    0.00      5,508       1.98        0.16
Motion Pictures                         -1.04 0.00     1,922    -0.34    0.00      1,248       2.16        0.02
Amusement, Rec. Serv.                   -1.03 0.00     2,958    -0.23    0.00      2,329       2.03        0.04
Personal Services                       -0.96 0.00     5,203    -0.31    0.00      3,760       2.46        0.01
Misc. Services                          -0.92 0.06       220     0.91    0.02        116       1.57        0.03
Communications                          -0.89 0.00       424    -0.41    0.01        263       1.36        0.04
Agricultural Services                   -0.88 0.00       552     0.42    0.11        190       1.86        0.02
Other Vehicles Sales/Service/Parts      -0.68 0.41       257    -0.59    0.08        128       1.64        0.00
Hospitality                             -0.64 0.01     1,392    -0.14    0.08      1,158       1.53        0.02
Durable Goods                           -0.09 0.90         79    1.11    0.67         15       1.64        0.03



3.4.2   Gravity and frequency

Why does expenditure decay with space? As distance increases, there may be fewer people traveling out-
of-residence; moreover, those who are traveling may do so less frequently, or spend a di¤erent amount per
transaction. These margins map into simple decompositions in the spirit of Hummels and Klenow (2005)
and Hillberry and Hummels (2007). In any given sector, we express the total expenditure of consumers
in h falling on merchants in s as




                                                    17
                             Xhs =            Nhs                xhs           =                                       (17)
                                              |{z}               |{z}
                                         account margin   expenditure margin
                                    =         Nhs                 fhs              xhs =fhs                            (18)
                                              |{z}               |{z}              | {z }
                                         account margin   frequency margin     batch size margin


Equation (17) says that as distance increases, expenditure can decrease either because the number of
agents traveling decreases (the extensive “account” margin) or because agents spend less on average. In
turn, (18) suggests that lower expenditure per account on average can arise either because each transaction
is smaller (the “batch size” margin) or because consumers transact less often (the “frequency” margin).
When we re-estimate Equation (15) with the left side being the log of each of these three terms, the
coe¢ cients on the out-of-home dummy add up to the overall coe¢ cient                    reported in column 1 of Table
4 (and similarly for Equation      (16)).40
    Figure 2 shows the results of this decomposition for (15). The length of each bar corresponds to
column 1 in Table 4. We …nd two broad messages.
    First, most of the decline in expenditure over space is due to fewer people traveling outside, or people
taking less frequent trips. The blue bar measures the contribution of the “account” margin. For the
typical sector, 72% of the drop in out-of-home expenditure is associated with fewer people traveling
outside, rather than to people spending less on average for out-of-home transactions.41
    The remaining part of each bar measures the decline due to lower average expenditure per account. The
gray section indicates that the average expenditure per account drops outside of home almost exclusively
because of the “frequency” margin: consumers spend less on average out-of-home because they choose
to travel outside less frequently, not because they spend less per transaction. The drop in the average
transaction value (the “batch size” margin) has a limited role in most cases. Tables C.8 and C.9 in
the Appendix (p. 54) show that the combination of the “account” and “frequency” margins typically
contributes 90%-95% of the decline in expenditure. As a benchmark, Hillberry and Hummels (2007) …nd
that, for …rm-to-…rm shipments within U.S., for short distances the extensive margin explains almost the
totality of the decay.
    Second, Figure 2 suggests that a large part of the heterogeneity in gravity seems associated with
heterogeneity in the frequency margin and not associated with the “batch size” margin –i.e., the length
of the bar varies because of variation in the gray section.42 This fact is very apparent when we plot the
out-of-home expenditure as a share of home expenditure exp ( ) (using column 1 in Table 4) against the
average number of transactions per account in the sector from the data. Figure 3 shows this relation
  40
     A further angle of this decomposition could relate to the Alchian and Allen (1964) conjecture: consumers should be
willing to travel more for higher quality goods and services when travel costs do not vary with quality. Hence, there should
be a positive relationship between the average value of a transaction and distance. Unfortunately, our data do not allow
measurement of unit values and hence cannot be used to speak to this conjecture. For related work on international trade,
see Hummels and Skiba (2004).
  41
     Tables C.6 and C.7, in the Appendix (p. 53), show the actual values of the “account” and “expenditure” margins with
associated p-values for both Equations (15) and (16).
  42
     A simple regression of the out-of-home dummy on each of the “account”, “frequency”, and “batch size”margin coe¢ cients
separately has R2 of 75%, 87%, and 7% respectively.


                                                            18
                                  Food Stores
                            Gasoline Services
                 General Merchandise Stores
                                  Misc. Retail
                   Eating and Drinking Places
        Building Mat./Hardware/Garden Supp.
                  Auto Repair/Service/Parking
                           NonDurable Goods
                              Health Services
                                       Apparel
         Furniture, Home Furnishings, Equip.
          Auto and Truck Sales/Service/Parts
                              Motion Pictures
                      Amusement, Rec. Serv.
                            Personal Services
                               Misc. Services
                             Communications
                         Agricultural Services
           Other Vehicles Sales/Service/Parts
                                   Hospitality
                              Durable Goods

                                                        -2                     -1                           0
                                                                  Out-of-home expenditure dummy

                                   Account                   Frequency                    Batch Size



                            Figure 2: Margins in the out-of-home expenditure drop


for the sectors where the out-of-home dummy is signi…cantly di¤erent from zero at 10% level. A simple
regression line through this data has a slope of -.69 (robust s.e. 0.07) and an R2 of 0.86.43 Note that
since the average number of transactions has not been used directly to compute the out-of-home dummy,
there is nothing mechanical about this empirical relation.
       In line with an implication of our simple model, expenditure decays faster in more frequently transacted
sectors. Our interpretation of this relation is that when storage costs are high, the average inventory held
shrinks: this reduction is achieved by purchasing smaller batches, but more frequently. Since travel is
expensive, however, a higher frequency can only be optimal with reduced travel distances. Hence, across
sectors, if storage costs are higher, the frequency of purchase should grow, and the expenditure should
decline faster with space.
       Our interpretation of this …gure relies on two orders of considerations. First, we are using the frequency
of transactions as a proxy for storability/durability. A higher frequency however, might also arise from
  43
     The …gure excludes Durable Goods and Other Vehicles Sales/Service/Parts, an outlier. Using all estimates, the regression
line would have a slope of -0.77 (robust s.e. 0.09), with R2 = 0:78: Figures C.2 and C.3 in the Appendix, starting at page
55, replicate this …gure for all the sectors and for the impact of distance using eq. (16). We have also experimented with an
alternative measure of frequency that gives more weight to users which spends more overall in the data, with very similar
results.


                                                             19
                                                                                   Hospitality
                                                         .5
     Out-of-home expenditure as a share of home expenditure




                                                                                          Agricultural Services
                                                                  Communications
                                            .4




                                                                              Misc. Services
                                                                                                                   Personal Services


                                                                                          Amusement, Rec.   Serv.
                                                                                                       Motion  Pictures
                                                                             Auto and Truck Sales/Service/Parts
                                                                                         Furniture, Home Furnishings, Equip.
                                                                                                                                       Apparel
                                                                                                           Health Services
                                                                               NonDurable Goods
                             .3




                                                                              Auto Repair/Service/Parking




                                                                                                                                       Building Mat./Hardware/Garden Supp.




                                                                                                                                                                             Eating and Drinking Places
               .2




                                                                                                                                                                                 Misc. Retail
                                                                                                                                                                General Merchandise Stores




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Gasoline Services

                                                                                                                                                                                                          Food Stores
                                .1




                                                              1                                                 2                            4                                                                           8
                                                                                                            average number of transactions per account



                                                                                                 Figure 3: Drop in expenditure out of home


a larger expenditure share. We …nd that the linear pattern in Figure 3 does not appear to be driven by
this alternative explanation: after controlling for the CEX expenditure share, a linear …t for the …gure
has a very similar slope of -0.68 (robust s.e. 0.06), and leaves the R2 basically una¤ected; the expenditure
share has a coe¢ cient of -.33 (robust s.e. of 0.9). Hence, the variation in the frequency of transactions
associated to gravity does not appear to be induced by heterogeneous budget shares.
   Second, our interpretation of Figure 3 implicitly assumes that consumers actually make travel distance
decisions, and that these decisions are in part related to the storability/durability of a sector’s output.
Although our intuition about consumer’s travel likely conforms to everyday experience, some supply-side
characteristics of di¤erent industries, like …xed costs, may make some sectors’ establishments denser in
space, and render frequent trips less expensive. This scenario might produce patterns consistent with those
in Figure 3. In two exercises in Appendix D, we directly examine the individual-level spatial distribution
of transactions during the eight months of our data. This short span allows us to assume that the retail
environment (location and size of establishments) is stable. We …nd evidence consistent with explicit
consumer decisions in travel distance that are related to the average frequency of transactions across
sectors, after controlling for CEX expenditure shares.
   We …rst examine the role of individual agents’characteristics, like age and income, on the out-of-home

                                                                                                                                        20
fraction of trips across sectors. After controlling for sector and ZIP code or individual …xed e¤ects, as
well as a number of other factors, we …nd that an individual with higher income makes at-home pur-
chases relatively more in high-frequency sectors, compared to an observationally equivalent, lower-income
individual. Econometrically, the coe¢ cient on the simple interaction between income and frequency of
transactions is negative and signi…cant.
    We also compare the behavior of the same individual across sectors under two travel costs regimes as
a function of that individual’s characteristics. In particular, we leverage daily precipitation data provided
by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (Menne et al., 2012). For each centroid of a
residence location in our data, we identify the closest weather station among the roughly twelve thousand
disseminated across the United States, and we reconstruct local weather conditions at the time of each
purchase. We then compare the fraction of out-of-home transactions of the same individual during rainy
vs. non-rainy days across sectors, and relate this di¤erence to individual characteristics. We allow
here as well for a rich set of controls. We …nd that an individual with higher income responds to the
same “rain” shock by making purchases in high-frequency sectors relatively more local, as compared
to an observationally equivalent, lower-income individual. Econometrically, the coe¢ cient on the triple
interaction between income, frequency of transactions, and a “rain” dummy is negative and signi…cant.
    In both cases, we …nd that agents’ income modulates the spatial distribution of purchases in a way
that is related to the sector average frequency of transactions. In these exercises, the retail environment
is plausibly stable and confounding factors are accounted for with a detailed set of controls; we conclude
that the di¤erential impact of individual income on observed travel across sectors is likely to come from
an active consumer decision.
    These results do not speak to the equilibrium impact of consumer mobility on the composition of local
employment and establishment density. We turn to this question next.


4    The Local Structure of Consumption Industries
To quantify the in‡uence of consumer mobility on the local structure of consumption industries, we
leverage an intuition we have provided in Section 2.4. In response to a larger local population, we might
expect to see local employment in high storage-cost sectors grow relatively faster than employment in
sectors with low storage costs: …rms economize on consumer travel time by limiting the amount of distant
land used, substituting land with labor to a greater extent the lower is the storability/durability of the
sector. In addition, if savings in travel time are at the root of this behavior, we might expect to see
employment growth driven by a higher density of stores (that is, a reduced average distance between
consumers and stores).
    In this section, we consider the empirical counterpart of that relation. We study the impact of
di¤erences in population on county–sector outcomes as a function of the sector’s average number of
transactions, our simple proxy for storage costs. We see the forces we describe playing out in a long-run
equilibrium, after the entry-exit margin of new establishments has been allowed to adjust. Hence, our
main empirical examination will leverage cross-sectional di¤erences across space and sectors. In particular,



                                                     21
we estimate regressions of the form

                                                                           0
                      ln ysct =   +   ln popct + ln f reqs    ln popct +       X + F E + "sct               (19)

In this regression, s indexes MCC sectors, c indexes counties, and t denotes calendar years (t = 2007 and
1998). The dependent variable ln ysct may assume three values. We …rst use log employment in s; c; t,
ln empsct : to construct it, we have started with data in the relevant years from County Business Patterns,
and have developed a correspondence between NAICS 6 digits and MCC codes. Always using County
Business Pattern data, we also explore the response of the number of local establishments ln ysct = ln nsct ,
and employees per establishment ln ysct = ln (empsct =nsct ); ln popct is the county log population in the
year from the County Economic Pro…le of the Bureau of Economic Analysis, and f reqs is the average
frequency of transactions by sector in the credit card data, as reported in column (7) of Table 4 above.
The vector X collects other controls like the county’s average personal income per capita, from the
County Economic Pro…le of the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the county land’s area, and may include
other controls as robustness, as described below. Importantly, we always include the interaction of log
population with the CEX expenditure share: hence, we interpret the frequency of transactions as a proxy
for storability/durability. Finally, F E is a set of …xed e¤ects, varying across speci…cations (sector …xed
e¤ects are always included); and "sct is a stochastic unobserved term.

4.1   Cross-Sectional Correlations
We start by estimating eq. (19) with OLS for 1998 and 2007. Table 5 reports the results. In the …rst two
columns, the dependent variable is county-sector log employment; columns (3) and (4) use total number
of establishments, and columns (5) and (6) use the average number of employees per establishment. Each
group of two columns di¤ers by the set of …xed e¤ects used: columns (1), (3) and (5) use sector …xed
e¤ects and year …xed e¤ects; columns (2), (4) and (6) allow for commuting zone-year and sector-year
dummies, i.e., control for heterogeneous time trends within sectors and within commuting zones.
   The regression results show that population enters positively. Moreover, sectoral employment grows
less with population in sectors that are transacted more frequently. Columns (3)-(6) indicate that this
slower employment growth occurs about equally via fewer establishments and a lower number of employees
per establishment.
   This cross-sectional correlation runs contrary to our intuition, which would suggest a positive inter-
action between population and frequency. The analysis in Section 2.5 indicated that unobserved factors
like local productivity might generate a negative interaction between population and frequency in equi-
librium. We then inspect the source of the negative interaction sign in Table 5. In particular, we consider
the behavior of counties with di¤erent initial characteristics that may be related to productivity. We
group counties in 5 bins according to their initial population density in 1998: if county population and
density are related to productivity (e.g., Combes et al., 2012), we might expect this coe¢ cient to vary
with the set of counties included in the regression. We then re-estimate columns (2), (4) and (6) in Table
5 progressively for the set of counties up to and including the q th quintile, with q = 1; :::; 5. The left panel



                                                       22
                       Table 5: Local outcomes and frequency of purchase (OLS)
      Dependent variable:                             county-sector log         county-sector log        county-sector log
                                                        employment               establishments        employees per estab.
                                                      (1)        (2)            (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)
      Log land area                                0.125***       -0.023     0.122***       0.011        0.003     -0.034***
                                                     (0.010)      (0.016)      (0.007)      (0.011)     (0.006)     (0.009)
      Log income per capita                        1.113***     1.006***     0.935***     0.813***     0.178***    0.193***
                                                     (0.035)      (0.044)      (0.025)      (0.030)     (0.020)     (0.025)
      Log population                               1.209***     1.386***     0.907***     1.015***     0.303***    0.371***
                                                     (0.007)      (0.010)      (0.005)      (0.006)     (0.004)     (0.006)
      Log population      log frequency            -0.077***    -0.079***    -0.041***    -0.041***    -0.036***   -0.038***
                                                     (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.003)
      Log population      CEX expenditure share    0.388***     0.395***     0.623***     0.627***     -0.235***   -0.231***
                                                     (0.050)      (0.050)      (0.028)      (0.028)     (0.041)     (0.041)
      Constant                                     -13.469***   -11.780***   -12.185***   -10.544***   -1.284***   -1.236***
                                                     (0.242)      (0.352)      (0.159)      (0.242)     (0.141)     (0.198)
      Sector Fixed E¤ects                             Yes            No         Yes          No          Yes          No
      Year Fixed E¤ects                               Yes            No         Yes          No          Yes          No
      Sector-Year Fixed E¤ects                        No             Yes        No           Yes          No         Yes
      Commuting Zone-Year Fixed E¤ects                No             Yes        No           Yes          No         Yes
      R-square                                       0.84         0.86          0.89        0.91         0.52       0.54
      N                                             121,336      121,336      121,336      121,336     121,336     121,336
                              Standard errors clustered at county level in parentheses.
                                               * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01




of Figure 4 plots the coe¢ cient          q   on the interaction between population and frequency including pro-
gressively more quintiles. The panel shows that in low-density counties, a marginal increase in population
is associated with larger employment in high-frequency compared to low-frequency sectors. This larger
employment occurs entirely via an increase in the number of establishments, i.e., via a reduction in the
distance of consumers to establishments within the county. Hence, we …nd support for the implications of
our stylized model on the cross-sectoral behavior of employment in this subset of counties. As we include
progressively denser (and arguably more productive) counties, however, the e¤ect becomes smaller and
then it reverses.
   Our analysis of potential sources of endogeneity in Section 2.5 suggests a potential alternative strategy
to examine the implications of our simple model. In particular, eq. (13) indicates that if we were able
to induce variation in the exogenous component of the population N , we should expect a positive cross
partial between population and g. In the next subsection, we use an instrumental variable approach to
approximate this variation.

4.2   Instrumental Variable Estimates
To induce variation in N , we exploit the underlying geological composition of a county, namely the
presence of aquifers, borrowing an intuition developed in Burch…eld, Overman, Puga, and Turner (2006)
and Duranton and Turner (2017). An aquifer is an underground layer of water-bearing rock, and the


                                                                23
.1




                                                                                                    .1
.05




                                                                                                    .05
0




                                                                                                    0
-.05




                                                                                                    -.05
-.1




                                                                                                    -.1
       1                               2                         3                     4   5               1                               2                         3                      4              5
                                                 Population density quintile in 1998                                                                 Population density quintile in 1998

                                                                  Employment                                                              Establishments                     Employees per establishment
       Note: Dashed lines are 95% standard errors.                                                         Note: Dashed lines are 95% standard errors.




                                                        Figure 4: Slope of interaction of population and frequency (OLS)


           presence of di¤erent types of aquifers induces quasi-random variation in the population residing over
           the territory of a county. We compute the fraction of land of a county laying over consolidated and
           semiconsolidated aquifers.44 We instrument county population with those fractions, and the interaction of
           population and frequency of transactions with the interaction of the same percentages with the sector-level
           frequency of transactions. All our speci…cations control for the interaction of the CEX expenditure share
           with population, which we instrument with the product of those percentages with the CEX share. Overall,
           we instrument 3 endogenous variables with 6 instruments. Since the instruments are time-invariant, they
           induce quasi-random variation in population across counties over space but not within counties over time:
           hence, our estimation approach is consistent with our intention of leveraging cross-sectional di¤erences in
           a long-run equilibrium.
                    Our main results are reported in Tables 6-8, which estimate eq. (19) using two-stage least squares.
           In these tables, standard errors are clustered at the county level to allow for correlation in the outcome
           variable, within counties, across sectors and time.45 The strategy results in a good …rst stage across all
           speci…cations. Across all tables, we report the Sanderson-Windmeijer (2015) partial F-statistic for the
           strength of the …rst stage identi…cation.
                    Column (1) of Table 6 shows that, after controlling for endogeneity, the sign on the interaction
           coe¢ cient is of the expected sign: in 2007, when the population of a county is larger because of underlying
           geological reasons, the e¤ect on employment is larger in a sector with high storage costs than in a sector
           with low storage costs. Moving from the minimum to the maximum average frequency changes the
           growth in employment by 2:2 percentage points for a 10% increase in population. This is equivalent to
               44
                This geological information comes from the United States Geological Service, Principal Aquifers of the 48 Conterminous
           United States, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. We use standard geoprocessing software to compute the
           county composition.
             45
                We have replicated these results with an alternative clustering: in each year, we have split counties in twenty quantiles
           of population, and generated groups for combinations of population class times sector. The patterns of signi…cance in our
           regressor of interest are unchanged.


                                                                                               24
100 2:5=7:79 = 28% of the estimated baseline increase in employment for the lowest frequency sector.46
Column (2) and (3) show the same regression run in 1998 and for the stacked sample of two cross-sections
with year …xed e¤ects. Obviously, time trends may be operating di¤erentially for di¤erent areas and
sectors, and this may a¤ect our estimates in the stacked regression. In column (4) and (5), we allow
for heterogeneous time trends across sectors (both columns), and across U.S. states (column (4)) or
commuting zones (column (5)). As we include more detailed geography …xed e¤ects, the cross-sectional
variation that is left for the instruments to exploit becomes narrower. Nonetheless, the coe¢ cient on the
interaction term stays positive and signi…cant. In the most restrictive speci…cation, where we only exploit
geological di¤erences between counties within the same commuting zone, moving from the smallest to the
largest frequency sector changes the employment response by 1:39 percentage points per 10% increase in
population or 11% of the baseline impact of population. In comparison, moving from the lowest to the
highest CEX expenditure share sector changes the employment response by about 1.23 percentage points
per 10% increase in employment or 10% of the baseline impact for the sector with the lowest share.

                  Table 6: Local employment and frequency of purchase (2SLS)
                                                                       (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)
       Dependent variable:                                                      county-sector log employment
       Sample years :                                                   07        98        98,07      98,07      98,07
       Log population                                                0.757***   0.887***   0.817***   0.803***   1.210***
                                                                      (0.097)    (0.075)    (0.083)    (0.125)    (0.084)
       Log population      log frequency                             0.118**     0.073*    0.096**    0.088**    0.074**
                                                                      (0.048)    (0.041)    (0.042)    (0.041)    (0.038)
       Log population      CEX expenditure share                      0.804      0.983*    0.903**    0.881**     0.785*
                                                                      (0.500)    (0.507)    (0.445)    (0.445)    (0.431)
       Log income per capita                                         1.615***   1.603***   1.623***   1.769***   1.017***
                                                                      (0.140)    (0.136)    (0.134)    (0.295)    (0.202)
       Log land area                                                 0.104***   0.136***   0.120***   0.184***    -0.024
                                                                      (0.012)    (0.011)    (0.011)    (0.034)    (0.043)
       Sector Fixed E¤ects                                             Yes        Yes        Yes        No         No
       Year Fixed E¤ects                                               No         No         Yes        No         No
       Sector-Year Fixed E¤ects                                        No         No         No         Yes        Yes
       State-Year Fixed E¤ects                                         No         No         No         Yes        No
       Commuting Zone-Year Fixed E¤ects                                No         No         No         No         Yes
       R-square                                                        0.77       0.79       0.78      0.73       0.69
       N                                                              60,413     60,923    121,336    121,336    121,336
       S.W. F stat: Log Population                                    28.03      43.35      37.78      11.92      20.14
       S.W. F stat: Log Population         log frequency              20.44       24.9      25.74      13.43      16.28
       S.W. F stat: Log Population         CEX expenditure share      12.81      15.89      15.29      16.55      14.88
                                   Standard errors clustered at county level in parentheses.
                                                * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01



    The regressions shown so far indicate that if storage costs are reasonably proxied by the observed
 46
    The coe¢ cient on ln popct is in‡uenced, in general, by all other general equilibrium e¤ects coming through a larger
market. Here and below, we compare the impact of the range in log frequency to the baseline to give a broad sense of the
magnitude, but such an e¤ect should be interpreted with caution.


                                                                25
frequency of transactions, consumers’ mobility choices have economically relevant consequences on em-
ployment: in response to larger population, all sectors want their output to grow; however, the desire to
economize on distance is stronger (and hence the substitution of land with employment growth is greater)
in sectors where storage costs are high. To investigate how this equilibrium impact comes about, we ask
next how employment is increasing in the county. In practice, an increase in local sectoral employment
may be generated entirely at the intensive margin, i.e., via more employees per store. If time savings
are important, however, we might expect that demand in high storage cost sectors is served by a higher
density of stores, i.e., via a lower average distance between consumers and stores. Our model does not
have a speci…c prediction about this mechanism, but suggests that the average distance between con-
sumers and output should be smaller (and grow less with population) in high–g sectors (Equation (11));
in other words, the county density of stores, an inverse proxy of the distance between consumers and
establishments, should be growing faster in high g than in low g sectors.
   Table 7 and 8 show that indeed, the geographical concentration of stores grows relatively faster with
population in high storage-cost relative to low storage-cost sectors. In particular, Table 7 replicates Table 6
but uses the log number of establishments in a given county-sector-time as a dependent variable. Estimates
on the interaction coe¢ cient are now two to three percentage points larger and strongly signi…cant. These
results are consistent with a situation where, in response to a common increase in population, the increase
in demand is more geographically concentrated for high storage costs goods and services, where people
desire frequent transactions and shorter trips; the supply side then responds by increasing employment
via a relatively denser presence of stores. The most conservative estimates imply that the highest storage-
cost sector has 1:99 percentage points larger number of establishments relative to the lowest storage-cost
sectors, when population increases 10% (about 24% of the baseline impact of population of the lowest
frequency sector). In comparison, moving from the sector with the lowest to the highest CEX expenditure
share implies a 2:02 percentage point increase for a 10% increase in employment, about 25% of the baseline
impact of the lowest CEX share sector. Table 8 considers the reaction of establishment size. The results
show that, if anything, establishments become slightly relatively smaller on average; the e¤ect is always
insigni…cantly di¤erent from zero.
    To understand more about how the instrument works and how it ‡ips the sign of the interaction,
we re-estimate our IV regressions starting from the quintile of counties with lowest density and then
progressively including all the others (mimicking the construction of Figure 4 above). The results are
reported in Figure 5. The instrument operates by raising the estimated net e¤ect of population times
frequency throughout the range of densities. The sign of the interaction coe¢ cient using the full sample
(at quintile 5 in the left panel of Figure 5) switches from negative to positive because the instrumental
variable approach estimates a stronger positive e¤ect on the extensive margin of the number of stores,
and a weaker negative e¤ect on the store size.47
   Taken together, these results paint a picture consistent with the importance of consumer mobility for
  47
     A natural concern about the change in the sign between OLS and 2SLS is the presence of weak instruments. Limited
Information Maximum Likelihood (LIML) estimates have better small sample properties in presence of weak instruments,
and large di¤erences between 2SLS and LIML estimates may point to instrument weakness. We replicate in Appendix E.1
the tables of Section 4.2 and show that coe¢ cients and standard errors are indeed very similar.



                                                         26
                                       Table 7: Number of establishments and frequency of purchase (2SLS)
                                                                                                                    (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)
                         Dependent variable:                                                                          county-sector log number of establishments
                         Sample years :                                                                             07         98        98,07      98,07     98,07
                         Log population                                                                      0.471***               0.572***              0.519***           0.533***          0.789***
                                                                                                               (0.081)                 (0.061)               (0.069)           (0.095)              (0.060)
                         Log population                    log frequency                                     0.149***               0.097***              0.124***           0.114***          0.106***
                                                                                                               (0.038)                 (0.031)               (0.033)           (0.032)              (0.029)
                         Log population                    CEX expenditure share                             1.048***               1.783***              1.419***           1.370***          1.289***
                                                                                                               (0.292)                 (0.342)               (0.276)           (0.270)              (0.260)
                         Log income per capita                                                               1.441***               1.376***              1.420***           1.439***          0.941***
                                                                                                               (0.117)                 (0.101)               (0.106)           (0.216)              (0.133)
                         Log land area                                                                       0.100***               0.135***              0.118***           0.160***               0.035
                                                                                                               (0.011)                 (0.008)               (0.009)           (0.026)              (0.028)
                         Sector Fixed E¤ects                                                                       Yes                   Yes                      Yes            No                  No
                         Year Fixed E¤ects                                                                          No                    No                      Yes            No                  No
                         Sector-Year Fixed E¤ects                                                                   No                    No                      No             Yes                 Yes
                         State-Year Fixed E¤ects                                                                    No                    No                      No             Yes                 No
                         Commuting Zone-Year Fixed E¤ects                                                           No                    No                      No             No                  Yes
                         R-square                                                                               0.81                   0.84                   0.82             0.78              0.76
                         N                                                                                     60,413                 60,923                121,336           121,336           121,336
                         S.W. F stat: Log Population                                                               28.03               43.35                  37.78             11.92               20.14
                         S.W. F stat: Log Population                             log frequency                     20.44                24.9                  25.74             13.43               16.28
                         S.W. F stat: Log Population                             CEX expenditure share             12.81               15.89                  15.29             16.55               14.88
                                                                         Standard errors clustered at county level in parentheses.
                                                                                      * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01
.6




                                                                                                             .6
.4




                                                                                                             .4
.2




                                                                                                             .2
0




                                                                                                             0
-.2




                                                                                                             -.2




      1                               2                         3                     4             5               1                               2                         3                         4           5
                                                Population density quintile in 1998                                                                           Population density quintile in 1998

                                                                 Employment                                                                        Establishments                     Employees per establishment
      Note: Dashed lines are 95% standard errors.                                                                   Note: Dashed lines are 95% standard errors.




                                                         Figure 5: Slope of interaction of population and frequency (IV)



                                                                                                        27
    Table 8: Number of employees per establishment and frequency of purchase (2SLS)
                                                                      (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)          (5)
      Dependent variable:                                          county-sector log number of employees per establishment
      Sample years :                                                  07         98       98,07      98,07        98,07
      Log population                                               0.286***      0.314***   0.299***   0.270***   0.421***
                                                                       (0.044)    (0.038)    (0.036)    (0.055)    (0.047)
      Log population      log frequency                             -0.031        -0.024     -0.028     -0.026     -0.032
                                                                       (0.026)    (0.026)    (0.023)    (0.023)    (0.023)
      Log population      CEX expenditure share                     -0.244       -0.800**    -0.516     -0.489     -0.504
                                                                       (0.412)    (0.400)    (0.353)    (0.353)    (0.352)
      Log income per capita                                        0.174***      0.228***   0.203***   0.330***    0.076
                                                                       (0.059)    (0.064)    (0.058)    (0.127)    (0.117)
      Log land area                                                    0.004      0.001      0.002      0.023     -0.058**
                                                                       (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.015)    (0.026)
      Sector Fixed E¤ects                                               Yes        Yes        Yes        No         No
      Year Fixed E¤ects                                                 No         No         Yes        No         No
      Sector-Year Fixed E¤ects                                          No         No         No         Yes        Yes
      State-Year Fixed E¤ects                                           No         No         No         Yes        No
      Commuting Zone-Year Fixed E¤ects                                  No         No         No         No         Yes
      R-square                                                       0.26          0.27       0.26      0.23       0.19
      N                                                             60,413        60,923    121,336    121,336    121,336
      S.W. F stat: Log Population                                      28.03      43.35      37.78      11.92      20.14
      S.W. F stat: Log Population         log frequency                20.44       24.9      25.74      13.43      16.28
      S.W. F stat: Log Population         CEX expenditure share        12.81      15.89      15.29      16.55      14.88
                                   Standard errors clustered at county level in parentheses.
                                                * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01




local economic outcomes. In sectors with high storage costs, consumers should be more willing to trade
o¤ larger batches with frequent trips, but to do so they would choose to travel shorter distances. An
implication is that, in response to a larger population, …rms in high storage-cost sectors face a relatively
stronger incentive to increase production by economizing on land; hence, local employment should increase
relatively more. We proxy for storability/durability using the frequency of transactions in our credit card
data: our simple model suggests that storage costs induce variation in such frequency, conditional on
measures of overall consumer expenditure. We …nd support for the relevance of consumer mobility in
shaping the local structure of consumption industries. This support appears present both in a subset of
counties where endogeneity concerns may be more muted, and across all counties when an instrumental
variable strategy o¤ers a way of addressing such endogeneity. Employment responds via a denser network
of local suppliers, which reduces the average distance between consumers and establishments within a
county. This channel of adjustment is compatible with the importance of time savings for consumers in
sectors more frequently transacted. The economic signi…cance of storability/durability appears roughly
equal to the signi…cance of budget share variations in in‡uencing local equilibrium outcomes.




                                                                  28
5    Extensions, Robustness and Limitations
In this section, we summarize ancillary results and robustness exercises reported in the Appendix; we also
emphasize some limitations of our analysis.
    Spillovers into neighboring counties
    We have argued that, in response to a larger local population, local employment is relatively larger in
high-frequency sectors because the demand for those sectors is more spatially concentrated. One might
also think of examining the consequences of a larger local population on employment and establishments
in neighboring counties. If local demand in higher frequency sectors is relatively more concentrated, it
should spill relatively less into neighboring counties; however, a larger CEX expenditure share should still
imply larger neighboring employment, everything else equal. Testing these implications is harder for a
number of reasons: for example, the shape of the transportation infrastructure may tilt demand ‡ows
towards a particular subset of neighboring counties, or even beyond immediate neighbors. Nonetheless,
we analyze the response of neighbors’outcomes in Appendix E.2. In particular, we construct employment,
establishments, and employees per establishments in counties whose centroid is within 120 km from the
focal county. Tables E.4-E.6 then replicate Tables 6-8 using these neighboring counties outcomes as
dependent variables, and controlling for neighboring county observables. We …nd that a larger CEX
expenditure share on a sector still increases employment in neighboring counties relatively more. On the
other hand, in response to a larger local population, employment grows relatively less in high-frequency
sectors (where local demand should be more spatially concentrated) than in low-frequency sectors (where
local demand should be more likely to spill over). Consistent with a consumer mobility-based explanation,
high-frequency sectors still see relatively more establishments.
    Density and Sorting on Preferences
    Our instrumental variable is valid if aquifers a¤ect employment only through population. For …xed
land area, however, the presence of aquifers increases both population and density by construction. Hence,
in principle our exercise may pick up a comparison between a large (and high-density) place to a small
(and low-density) place. It could be the case that density has an independent di¤erential e¤ect across
sectors on top of population. For example, one might imagine that aquifers are associated with older
cities which are now denser, scarcer in space and where both residential and commercial rents are high;
it might be the case that the type of people that sort into these places have a stronger preference for
high-frequency sectors with respect to people that demand more space and possibly sort into newer and
maybe less dense cities. If this is true, places with higher density may attract high-frequency types of
economic activity relatively more.
    A series of considerations indicate that these concerns may be of limited practical importance. First,
the battery of regressions in Table 6-8 include a set of increasingly narrow geographic …xed e¤ects: in
the strictest speci…cation, we are comparing counties within the same commuting zone, rather than big
and dense commuting zones vs. small and sparse ones. Second, if the story we described was empirically
relevant, any heterogeneity in the impact of density would lead the coe¢ cient on the interaction term to
grow as we progressively include denser counties; however, Figure 5 shows that, if anything, the coe¢ cient
becomes smaller. Third, we can run regressions that directly control for a di¤erential e¤ect of income-


                                                    29
varying preferences or of density. In Appendix E.3, we report more details about these exercises. As a
summary, we …rst control for an interaction between income per capita and log frequency of transactions
to allow for heterogeneity in the role of income on local demand. Table E.7 shows that higher income is
associated to a relatively smaller employment in high-frequency sectors, while the coe¢ cient on population
times frequency is little a¤ected. In Table E.8 we then control for density, and its interaction with
frequency, directly. When we change population controlling for density, we are comparing, say, a small
sprawling place to a big sprawling place. The interaction between density and frequency is negative, that
is, a denser place has relatively less employment in high-frequency sectors than in low-frequency ones; this
negative sign is consistent with the evidence presented in Figure 5, that shows a declining slope on the
interaction as denser counties are included in the sample. Importantly, the coe¢ cient on the interaction
between population and frequency stays positive and signi…cant.
   Fixed costs. In Tables 6-8, we have argued that an exogenous increase in population tends to generate
demand that is more geographically concentrated for high storage-cost sectors than low storage-cost ones.
Heterogeneous …xed costs across industries, however, may also a¤ect the density of establishments and
hence confound our estimates.
   Two considerations support the view that these issues are not a primary concern. Similar to storage
costs, direct observations of …xed costs are hard to obtain. However, a reasonable proxy is the economy-
wide ratio of total employment to total establishments in a sector-year, i.e., the average establishment
size. If …xed costs are high, increasing returns to scale are more important, and we should expect a higher
employees-to-establishment ratio. With this measure in hand, we …rst …nd that the correlation between
the log average frequency of transactions and the log proxy for …xed costs across sectors is only 0.12,
and statistically indistinguishable from zero: hence, it is not empirically true that low …xed cost sectors
are those where transactions are more frequent. Second, we can explore the sensitivity of our analysis
to the interaction of …xed costs with population. This new interaction variable is again instrumented
with the interaction between …xed costs and county geological composition. Table E.9 in Appendix E.4
replicates the most conservative speci…cations in columns (5) and (6) for Tables 6-8. The coe¢ cient on
the interaction between frequency and population stays positive and of very similar magnitude. The
coe¢ cients on the interaction with the proxy for …xed costs are small and insigni…cant. Overall, we read
these results as further evidence consistent with a role of consumers’mobility on local economic outcomes.
   Selection into method of payment. It has been documented (see for example Wang and Wolman,
2016) that transactions of smaller dollar size tend to be executed with cash, rather than with other means.
Unfortunately, our data does not allow us to control for this choice. In unreported results, we …nd that
the average transaction value increases slightly with distance, controlling for consumer characteristics;
hence, short trips are less likely to be reported in our data. On the one hand, this selection will make
gravity appear less important than it actually is, since we are removing expenditure that occurs close-by;
this e¤ect will, in fact, be stronger in sectors where the average distance traveled is shorter, i.e., in sectors
with a high-frequency of transactions. Via this …rst channel, the relation between gravity and frequency
documented in Figure 3 should be steeper than we measure. On the other hand, this selection will also
remove more of the short trips (which are of higher frequency) than the longer trips (which are of low-



                                                       30
frequency). Via this second channel, the relation should be ‡atter than we measure. The fact that these
two forces tend to compensate each other makes it hard to o¤er clear predictions on the net e¤ect of these
unobservable choices, and hence our results should be interpreted with this limitation in mind.
    Trip chaining. It is natural to think that one way in which consumers optimize their shopping
behavior is to make a number of possibly unrelated purchases on a single trip to a commercial area.
For example, Shoag and Veuger (2017) document positive externalities of “big-box”stores on neighboring
businesses via the increased local foot tra¢ c. Our data is unfortunately too coarse to speak to that aspect:
out of all account-transaction dates in our data, only 25% have more than one transaction per day, and
less than 1% have at least 5 transactions; of the cases in which there is more than one transaction, 80%
are multiple transactions occurring in the same broad sector. How would our results be impacted if this
was the predominant behavior of consumers? Suppose that consumers always travel to one mall and buy
food every trip, but apparel every four trips. In that case, we would expect to see no relation between
gravity and the frequency of transactions, since the frequency of purchase di¤ers, while the distance stays
constant. More importantly, the frequency of transactions in the credit card data would less likely predict
heterogeneity in the impact of population on store density. The fact that we see at least some impact
is indicative that trip chaining is not the only relevant feature of the data.48 As above, however, we
emphasize that our conclusions should be considered accounting for this limitation.


6     Conclusion
In developed countries, a large fraction of economic activity in terms of employment and GDP is involved
in the delivery of …nal consumption. The local composition of these industries matters, among other
things, for the relative attractiveness of di¤erent places and the type of skills that they demand. These
outcomes, in turn, help to shape the economic success or decline of di¤erent areas. In this paper, we study
the determinants of the local structure of consumption industries, i.e., the local employment, the number
of establishments, and establishment size for industries delivering …nal consumption. The signi…cant travel
and time investment that consumers incur for their purchases requires attention to the main features of
consumer mobility. In our work, we characterize these features across sectors for the …rst time. We then
argue that consumer mobility appears to in‡uence the local structure of consumption industries in an
economically intuitive way: where travel frictions are expected to matter relatively more, employment
grows relatively more concentrated, and establishments are relatively denser, in response to a larger local
population. The economic signi…cance of storability/durability appears approximately as large as that
associated with variation in consumers’expenditure shares.
    One could see our …ndings as a local empirical analog of the classic proximity-concentration trade-
o¤ (PCT) in the foreign direct investment (FDI) literature.49 Firms in a location choose whether to
   48
      A natural way fo trip chaining to occur is via “shopping centers”. A shopping center is “a group of architecturally uni…ed
commercial establishments built on a site that is planned, developed, owned, and managed as an operating unit related in
its location, size, and type of shops to the trade area that the unit serves.” Shopping centers accounted for around 28% of
total consumer expenditure in 2005, the latest year available (see Table 1061, Section 22, Statistical Abstract of the United
States, 2012; and Consumer Expenditures in 2005, U.S. Dept. of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, report 998).
   49
      see for example Horstmann and Markusen (1992); or Brainard (1997).


                                                              31
serve customers in a neighboring location by expecting them to travel (“export” in PCT) or by opening
a new establishment closer to them (“FDI” in PCT); in sectors where the frequency of transactions is
high (high “transportation costs” in PCT), demand is more localized, and opening a new establishment,
i.e. the “FDI” option, becomes more attractive. In this sense, low storability/durability, high-frequency
industries are less “tradeable.” This analogy is useful when considering the expansion strategy of …rms
supplying services: whether within or across countries, some of these …rms need to decide the number
and location of establishments to open in order to serve a particular geographical market. We suggest
that the geographical scope of an establishment market is in part related to the interplay between dura-
bility/storability and consumers’mobility.
      Interestingly, even in the set of consumption industries that we analyze, we …nd a classic fact that
associates more trade and openness to higher average wages:50 the correlation between annual log wages
in the 2007 County Business Patterns and log frequency of transactions is -0.65 across our 21 sectors.
      Our results are subject to caveats that arise from the limited nature of our data and from the attempt
to bring under a uni…ed logic consumption markets that are potentially quite di¤erent. On the other
hand, our …ndings describe broad patterns of consumer behavior for a large portion of economic activity
in modern economies. Taken together, they suggest the importance of consumer mobility, as well as of
factors that facilitate or hinder it, in shaping important local outcomes. We hope this work will stimulate
further research in this direction.




 50
      See, for example, Bernard and Jensen (1999), Jensen (2011), or Gervais and Jensen (2019).


                                                            32
References
 [1] Abdel-Rahman, H. M. and A. Anas (2004). “Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomeration
    Economies,” Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics, Chapter 52, Elsevier.

 [2] Alchian, A., and W. Allen (1964). “University Economics”. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth.

 [3] Allcott, H., R. Diamond, J. Dube, J. Handbury, I. Rahkovsky, and M. Schnell (2018). “Is the Focus
    on Food Deserts Fruitless? Retail Access and Food Purchases Across the Socioeconomic Spectrum,”
    Working paper.

 [4] Agarwal, S., N. Marwell, and L. McGranahan (2017). “Consumption Responses to Temporary Tax
    Incentives: Evidence from State Sales Tax Holidays,”American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
    9:4, pp. 1–27.

 [5] Alessandria, G., J. Kaboski and V. Midrigan (2010). “Inventories, Lumpy Trade, and Large Devalu-
    ations,” American Economic Review, Vol. 100:5, pp. 2304-2339.

 [6] Anderson, J. (1979). “A Theoretical Foundation for the Gravity Equation,” American Economic
    Review, Vol. 69:1, 106:116.

 [7] Anderson, J. and E. Van Wincoop (2003). “Gravity with Gravitas: a Solution to the Border Puzzle,”
    American Economic Review, Vol. 93:1, pp. 170-192.

 [8] Baker, S., S. Johnson and L. Kueng (2018). “Shopping for Lower Sales Tax Rates,” NBER Working
    Paper 23665.

 [9] Baumol, W. (1952). “The Transactions Demand for Cash: An Inventory Theoretic Approach,”Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics, Vol. 66:4, pp. 545-556.

[10] Bernard, A. and J.B. Jensen, 1999. “Exceptional Exporter Performance: cause, e¤ect, or both?”
    Journal of International Economics, Vol. 47:1, pp. 1-25.

[11] Brainard, S. L. (1997). "An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity-Concentration Trade-o¤ between
    Multinational Sales and Trade," American Economic Review, Vol. 87:4, pp. 520-544.

[12] Burch…eld, M., H. G. Overman, and M. A. Turner (2006). “Causes of Sprawl: A Portrait from
    Space,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 121:2, pp. 587-633.

[13] Cameron, A. C. and K. P. Trivedi (2005). “Microeconometrics: Methods and Applications,” Cam-
    bridge University Press.

[14] Chandra, A., K. Head and M. Tappata (2014). “The Economics of Cross-Border Travel,”The Review
    of Economics and Statistics Vol. 96:4, pp. 648-661.

[15] Chevalier, J. and A. Kashyap (forthcoming). “Best Prices: Price Discrimination and Consumer
    Substitution,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol 11:1, pp. 126-59.

                                                  33
[16] Christaller, Walter (1933). “Die zentralen Orte in Süddeutschland.” Gustav Fischer, Jena.

[17] Coleman, A.M.G. 2009. “Storage, slow transport and the law of one price: theory with evidence from
    nineteenth century U.S. corn markets,” Review of Economics and Statistics 91(2) 332-350.

[18] Combes, P.F., G. Duranton, L. Gobillon, D. Puga and S. Roux (2012). “The Productivity Advantages
    of Large Cities: Distinguishing Agglomeration From Firm Selection,” Econometrica, Vol. 80, No. 6,
    pp. 2543–2594

[19] Costinot, A. and J. Vogel (2010). “Matching and Inequality in the World Economy,” Journal of
    Political Economy, Vol. 118:4, pp. 747-786.

[20] Couture, V. (2016). “Valuing the Consumption Bene…ts of Urban Density,” Working Paper.

[21] Couture, V., C. Gaubert, J. Handbury and E. Hurst (2019). “Income Growth and the Distributional
    E¤ects of Urban Spatial Sorting,” Working Paper, July.

[22] Disdier, A. and K. Head (2008). “The Puzzling Persistence of the Distance E¤ect on Bilateral Trade,”
    Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 90:1, pp. 37-48.

[23] Davis, D., J. Dingel, J. Monras, and E. Morales (2018). “How Segregated is Urban Consumption?,”
    Accepted, Journal of Political Economy.

[24] Davis, D. and J. Dingel (2019). “The Comparative Advantage of Cities,”mimeograph, The University
    of Chicago.

[25] Davis, P. (2006). “Spatial Competition in Retail Markets: Movie Theaters,” RAND Journal of Eco-
    nomics, Vol. 37:4, pp. 964-982.

[26] Diamond, R. (2016). “The Determinants and Welfare Implications of US Workers’Diverging Location
    Choices by Skill: 1980-2000,” American Economic Review, 106(3), pp. 479-524.

[27] Dolfen, P., L. Einav, P. Klenow, B. Klopack, J. Levin, L. Levin, and W. Best (2019). “Assessing The
    Gains from E-Commerce,” Working Paper.

[28] Dornbush, R., S. Fischer and P. Samuelson (1977). “Comparative Advantage, Trade, and Payments
    in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods,” American Economic Review, Vol. 67:5, pp.
    823-839.

[29] Duranton, G. and D. Puga (2001). “Nursery Cities: Urban Diversity, Process Innovation, and the
    Life Cycle of Products,” American Economic Review, Vol. 91:5, pp. 1454-1477.

[30] Duranton, G. and D. Puga (2005).“From sectoral to functional urban specialisation,” Journal of
    Urban Economics, Vol. 57:2, pp. 343-370.

[31] Duranton, G. M. A. Turner (2017). “Urban form and driving: Evidence from US cities,”forthcoming,
    Journal of Urban Economics.

                                                   34
[32] Eaton, J., and S. Kortum (2003). “Technology, Geography, and Trade,”Econometrica, Vol. 70:5, pp.
    1741-1779.

[33] Eckert, F.P. (2019). “Growing Apart: Tradeable Services and the Fragmentation of the U.S. Econ-
    omy,” mimeograph, Yale University.

[34] Ellison, G. and S. F. Ellison (2009). “Tax Sensitivity and Home State Preferences in Internet Pur-
    chasing,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 1:2, p. 53-71.

[35] Ellison, G., Glaeser and W. Kerr (2010). “What Causes Industry Agglomeration? Evidence from
    Coagglomeration Patterns,” American Economic Review, Vol. 100:3, p. 1195-1213.

[36] Fafchamps, M. and F. Shilpi, (2003). “The Spatial Division of Labor in Nepal,” Journal of Develop-
    ment Studies, Vol. 39:6, pp 23-66.

[37] Fajgelbaum, P., G. M. Grossman, and E. Helpman (2011). “Income Distribution, Product Quality,
    and International Trade,” Vol. 119:4, pp. 721-765.

[38] Fieler, A. C. (2011). “Nonhomotheticity and Bilateral Trade: Evidence and a Quantitative Explana-
    tion,” Econometrica, Vol. 79:4, pp. 1069-1101.

[39] Gervais, A. and J.B. Jensen (2019). “The Tradability of Services: Geographic Concentration and
    Trade Costs,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 118:C, pp. 331-350.

[40] Glaeser, E., J. Kolko, and A. Saiz (2001). “Consumer City,” Journal of Economic Geography, Vol.
    1:1, pp. 27-50.

[41] Hendel, I. and A. Nevo, (2006a). “Sales and consumer inventory,”RAND Journal of Economics, Vol.
    37, No. 3, pp. 543-561.

[42] Hendel, I. and A. Nevo (2006b). ”Measuring the Implications of Sales and Consumer Inventory
    Behavior,” Econometrica, Vol. 74, No. 6, pp. 1637–1673.

[43] Hillberry, R. and D. Hummels (2007). “Trade Responses to Geographic Frictions: a Decomposition
    Using Micro-Data,” European Economic Review Vol. 52:3, pp. 527:550.

[44] Horstmann, I. and J. R. Markusen (1992). “Endogenous Market Structures in International Trade,”
    Journal of International Economics Vol. 32:1-2, pp. 109-129.

[45] Hummels, D. and P. Klenow (2005). “The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Exports,” American
    Economic Review, Vol. 95:3, pp. 704-723.

[46] Hummels, D. and A. Skiba (2004). “Shipping the Good Apples Out? An Empirical Con…rmation of
    the Alchian-Allen Conjecture,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 112:6, pp. 1384-1402.




                                                     35
[47] Hortaçsu, A., F. A. Martínez-Jerez, and J. Douglas (2009). “The Geography of Trade in Online Trans-
    actions: Evidence from eBay and MercadoLibre,”American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, Vol.
    1:1, p. 53-74.

[48] Hortaçsu, A. and C. Syverson (2015). “The Ongoing Evolution of US Retail: A Format Tug-of-War,”
    Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 29:4, pp. 89-112.

[49] Houde, J.F. (2012). “Spatial Di¤erentiation and Vertical Mergers in Retail Markets for Gasoline,”
    American Economic Review, Vol. 102:5, pp. 2147-2182.

[50] Hsu, , W. (2012). “Central Place Theory and City Size Distribution,” The Economic Journal, Vol
    122 (September), pp. 903-932.

[51] Hsu, W., T. Holmes and F. Morgan (2014). “Optimal City Hierarchy: A dynamic Programming
    Approach to Central Place Theory„” Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 154, pp. 245-273.

[52] Jensen, J. B. and L. Kletzer (2010). “Measuring Tradable Services and the Task Content of O¤-
    shorable Services Jobs,” in “Labor in the New Economy,” NBER.

[53] Jensen, J.B. (2011). “Global Trade in Services: Fear, Facts, and O¤shoring,” Peterson Institute for
    International Economics Press.

[54] Karádi, P. and M. Koren (2017). “Cattle, Steaks and Restaurants: Development Accounting when
    Space Matters,” Working paper.

[55] Menne, M.J., I. Durre, R.S. Vose, B.E. Gleason, and T.G. Houston (2012). “An Overview of the
    Global Historical Climatology Network-Daily Database,”Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic Tech-
    nology, Vol. 29, pp. 897-910.

[56] Mian, A. and A. Su… (2014). “What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?,” Econometrica,
    Vol. 82:6, pp. 2197–2223.

[57] Monte, F. (2011). “Skill Bias, Trade, and Wage Dispersion,” Journal of International Economics,
    Vol. 83:2, pp. 202-218.

[58] Monte, F., S. Redding and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2018). “Commuting, Migration, and Local Employ-
    ment Elasticities,” American Economic Review, Vol 108:12, pp. 3855-90.

[59] Murray, K., F. Di Muro, A. Finn and P. Popkowski Leszczyc, (2010). “The E¤ect of Weather on
    Consumer Spending,” Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, Vol. 17, pp. 512-520.

[60] Nakamura, E. (2008). “Pass-Through in Retail and Wholesale,”American Economic Review: Papers
    and Proceedings, Vol. 98:2, 430-437.

[61] Oi, W. (1992). “Productivity in the Distributive Trades: the Shopper and the Economies of Massed
    Reserves,”in “Output Measurement in the Services Sectors", University of Chicago Press, p. 161-193.


                                                  36
[62] Raval, D. and T. Rosenbaum (2018). “Why is Distance Important for Hospital Choice? Separating
    Home Bias from Transport Costs,” Working Paper.

[63] Redding, S. and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2018). “Quantitative Spatial Economics,” Annual Review of
    Economics, Vol. 9:21-58, pp.21-58.

[64] Reilly, W. (1931). “The Law of Retail Gravitation,” New York: Knickerbocker Press.

[65] Rosenthal, S. and W. Strange (2004). “Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomeration
    Economies,” Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics, Chapter 49. Elsevier.

[66] Schi¤, N. (2015). “Cities and Product Variety: Evidence from Restaurants,” Journal of Economic
    Geography, Vol 15, pp. 1085-1123.

[67] Shoag, D. and S. Veuger (2017). “Shops and the City: Evidence on Local Externalities and Local
    Government Policy from Big-Box Bankruptcies,” The Review of Economics and Statistics. Forth-
    coming.

[68] Von Thunen, J. H. (1966). “Isolated State: an English Edition of Der Isolierte Staat”Oxford: Perg-
    amon Press.

[69] Wang, Z. and A. Wolman (2016). “Payment Choice and Currency Use: Insights from Two Billion
    Retail Transactions,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 84, pp. 94-115.

[70] Williams, J.C., and B. D. Wright, 1991, Storage and Commodity Markets, Cambridge University
    Press, Cambridge, U.K.




                                                  37
                               Web Appendix for
                            “Consumer Mobility and
                 The Local Structure of Consumption Industries”
                              (Not for Publication)
                                               Sumit Agarwal
                                      National University of Singapore

                                             J. Bradford Jensen
                                           Georgetown University

                                              Ferdinando Monte
                                           Georgetown University



A     Data Processing
A.1    Merchant codes
The transaction data classi…es merchants using the MCC classi…cation. Classi…cations of merchants
come at a “broad” and “narrow” level. We exclude narrow merchant categories that either refer to a
transaction which can be executed without involving physical movement of a provider or a customer, or
those that are of commercial, rather than private, nature. These categories broadly include items like
airlines, cruise lines, direct marketers, online marketers, insurance, …nancial institutions, business services,
political organizations, and other codes reserved for cash advances and balance transfers. The result is a
classi…cation of 27 broad categories.

A.2    Transaction data
The raw transaction data comes from U.S. credit card statements issued between March and October,
2003. Some earlier transactions still appear in the …le as the date in which they are recorded, which
may not necessarily be the date of the transaction. There are originally 3,530,027 records in the data
for 134,008 unique accounts. Each record comes from a line in an individual credit card statement. A
record contains the account number, transaction date and post date, amount and type of the transaction,
the original merchant category code (MCC), and string information on the merchant name and location.
After merging this data with the merchant codes above, 1,247,438 transactions are dropped. Of these
dropped observations, around 1.1 million records are related to 1) cash advances, interest, late fees, account
adjustments, balance transfers, card payments and similar activities not generated by actual purchases;
2) direct marketers and telemarketers, 3) unknown merchants. We also exclude transactions relating to
educational services (where the account-holder likely pays for somebody else), and transportation services
and vehicle rentals, where location of transaction and location of service use are di¤erent. We further
keep only records that are actual purchases (“transaction type”code equal to 253) originating on or after
February 1, 2003. This leaves us with 2,156,978 transactions from 80,087 accounts.

                                                      38
A.3    Account data
The account data for the months of March to October 2003 originally comprises 2,272,825 records for
249,032 accounts. Among other things, each line contains the record date (year and month) for the entry,
the account number, a person ID, the date of birth and gender of the account holder, an external status
code, a reported income, a 5 digit ZIP code and the state of residence. Di¤erent lines for the same
account may be present in the account data because of various events that a¤ect the account (the end
of the billing cycle or updates to the month end balance, for example). 28,928 observations appear to
be of inactive cards (no information for state, ZIP code, and date of birth), so we drop them. Towards
matching the account information with the transaction data, we start by keeping unique combinations of
account number, date of birth, state, ZIP code and record date. We …nd 4 accounts for which the date of
birth of the account holder changes, and we make that information consistent by picking the oldest date
of birth. After this adjustment, almost all records are unique within account number-event date. We
drop three accounts, where the same set of several ZIP codes are reported for each record date, making it
di¢ cult to …nd a residence location. This processing leaves us with 1,746,667 account number-event date
records for 239,369 unique accounts. This step tells us the residence location of an account whenever an
account event occurs. Next, we reconstruct where the account holder resided for each of the transactions
described above.

A.4    Matching transactions and account data
We match the transaction and account data to assign a location of residence to each purchase. For a given
account, we match the month of the transaction in the …rst …le to the event month in the account data, if
possible. For those observations where this is not possible, we match the closest account information that
precedes the transaction; when this second option is not feasible, we match it with the earliest information
following the transaction. The matching process leaves us with 2,138,575 transactions matched from 78,418
unique accounts. Out of the totality of matched transactions, only 151,725 did not …nd the exact event
month in the account information: 142,520 records among these come from transactions in February 2003,
which are then matched with information in March.

A.5    Extracting merchant location name
The data provides us with a full merchant name string (including usually merchant name, location/phone
number and state) and a merchant name string. Here we explain how we extract the potential city and
state names of each transaction.
   We …rst extract the merchant state. The state of the merchant is typically located at the end of the
full merchant name. We extract the last two characters of the merchant name string if the last three
start with a space. Only 1,588 transactions do not meet this requirement: in most cases, the last two
letters still represent a state (or a foreign country), but we won’t be able to rule out false positives. We
match these states with a list of U.S. states and country abbreviations to verify that we have extracted
U.S. states. We match only 52% of the 1,588 thousand problematic observations, and more than 98% of


                                                    39
the other transactions. Keeping only transactions where a U.S. state could be identi…ed leaves us with
2,106,552 observations.
       To identify the set of observations we might match with a location name, we start by extracting a
potential location name. To do so, we remove from the full merchant name string the merchant name
that the data provides (from the left of the string) and the state we have extracted (from the right of the
string). This procedure generates 7,777 observations with an empty potential location name.
       We then mark transactions of common online providers51 and …nd the words "Online", "On Line",
".com", ".net" in 100,265 observations. We mark observations where the …nal part of the string before the
state is a phone number –these are typically online stores –and …nd 188,316 of them. We are left with
1,901,658 transactions that may contain city names, 90% of those for which a state name could be found,
for 73,385 unique accounts. Note that the largest contributor to the drop in observations is transactions
with a phone number rather than a location at the end of the merchant name. We will attempt to match
this list of location names with a list of U.S. city and place names from the U.S. Census. Before turning
to the di¤erent steps in that match, we will discuss brie‡y how we recover the list of cities.

A.6       List of cities and places in the United States
We construct a list of city names and states from the year 2000 U.S. Census Gazetteer List of Places and
the year 2000 U.S. Census list of County Subdivisions. The List of Places contains incorporated places
and unincorporated Census Designated Places (CDP); it excludes towns in the New England states, New
York, and Wisconsin, and boroughs in New York (treated as Minor Civil Divisions, or MCDs). The list
of County Subdivisions contains, among other things, MCDs (called for example townships, parishes,
districts), and Census County Divisions. Both lists contain, among other things, population in 2000 and
latitude and longitude of the location.
       While FIPS codes are unique, our match to merchants will be on a location name. Hence it may
happen that within the list, we have more than one record with the same name (for example, we may
have “Mountain View city” and “Mountain View, CDP”). In those cases, we attribute to a name the
coordinates with the highest population in 2000.52

A.7       Finding location names in the transactions data and computing distances
We attempt to …nd the name of a city in four passes. First, we match the location name and state identi…ed
above with the list of U.S. Places. We immediately …nd a match for 1,454,166 out of the 1,901,658 we
intend to match, 76% of our observations. Out of the 447,492 transaction with no match, 122,737 have
names and states that match the MCD list. We assign "match quality" equal to 10 to those transactions
matched at this …rst pass. We have 324,755 transactions with no location information (about 17% of the
transactions) that we cannot match exactly.
  51
     We identify Paypal, QVC, AOL, Shutter‡y, MUI Movies Unlimited, Amazon, Microsoft, Expedia, Untd.com, Ebay, and
Net‡ix.
  52
     An alternative could have been to compute the average longitude and latitude of all the occurrences, weighted by
population. However, we would still need a unique FIPS code identi…er, since accounts will be associated to place codes, not
names. This di¤erence makes the approach infeasible.


                                                            40
   In several instances, the name of a city in the transaction data is truncated from the original. The
second pass of the match involves matching truncated versions of city names from the U.S. Census to
location names in the transaction data. We assign “match quality” equal to 9 to those cases where the
name of a location in the transaction data, of length n, matches the …rst n characters of a city name.
We further assign “match quality” equal to 8 where, for a location name of length n, there is a match in
the …rst n   1 characters. Obviously, it can happen that one city in the transaction data can be matched
to more than one city in the Census list. We only keep cases where the match is either unique or there
are two matches. We solve the two-matches case as follows: if the match is to a Census place and to
a minor civil division, we keep the coordinates of the Census place; otherwise, we take the place with
the highest population and downgrade the “match quality” by 1. With the second pass, we are able to
recover 114,056 observations.
   In other instances, some locations may not be matched because of extra spaces or special characters
(e.g., “St. Louis” vs. “St Louis”). In the third pass, we “standardize” the name of the remaining
unmatched locations by removing all spaces, commas, full stops, and dashes both in the transaction and
in the Census …les. We assign “match quality” equal to 9 to these observations. With this process, we
recover additional 20,796 observations, bringing the number of matched transactions to 1,711,755.
   Finally, we identify the remaining unmatched locations with at least one thousand transactions and
…x those matches by hand. There are 44 of these instances. We recover 31,664 observations more (also
assigned “match quality” equal to 10), bringing the total to 1,743,419 matched transactions, or 91.7% of
the transactions we intended to match. For these matched transactions we can attribute a latitude and
longitude of the merchant.
   The account data provides ZIP code information for each account. We match these ZIP codes against
Census Places and (if we don’t …nd a match) MCD lists using concordances for the year 2000 provided by
the census. For the few cases in which we cannot …nd a correspondence, we use analogous ZIP-places and
ZIP-MCD concordances for the year 2010. In some cases, a ZIP code may span two or more geographical
units: we keep in that case the unit that accounts for the highest fraction of population of the ZIP
code. We then have analogous geographies for account and merchant sides, and can compute the bilateral
distance between the centroid of the account and shopping locations for each transaction.
   The process of matching ZIP codes to geographical areas leads to a small loss in observations. Our
working sample has 1,722,873 transactions (90.6% of the transactions we intended to match) and 71,377
accounts. In our classi…cation, 92.2% of observations have match quality equal to 10, and 7.2% have
match quality 9, leaving less than 1% of observations with quality 8 (0.61%) and 7 (0.01%).




                                                   41
B     Theoretical derivations
B.1    Equilibrium Price
The generic solution to (8) is
                                                     p (j) = c1 exp f jg + c2 exp f                    jg                                    (B.1)

To pin down the constants of integration, we use implications of our conjectured land allocation. In
particular, since j (t) is decreasing, the person with the lowest travel cost, t = 1, will travel the maximum
distance, jmax    j (1). At that distance, the price of the product will have to be zero (otherwise, some
…rms would have an incentive to enter slightly farther).
    Using (B.1), it follows that

                                                      c1 exp f jmax g = c2 exp f                     jmax g                                  (B.2)

Using the same information in the implicit function for the distance traveled (eq. (6)), when t = 1 =)
j (1) = jmax , and hence,

                                                 1=2
                                           2g            1
                                                             = c2 exp f           jmax g        c1 exp f jmax g                              (B.3)
                                            q

We can substitute (B.2) in the last equation to obtain,

                                               1=2
                                      2g             1
                                                         = c2 exp f               jmax g + c2 exp f               jmax g
                                       q
                                                                             1=2
                                                                  1    2g             1
                                                     c2 =                                 exp f jmax g                                       (B.4)
                                                                  2     q

and hence
                                                                            1=2
                                                              1       2g          1
                                                     c1 =                             exp f       jmax g
                                                              2        q
We can then rewrite the price function as

                                  1=2                                                                  1=2
                      1    2g              1                                               1    2g           1
       p (j) =                                 exp f         jmax g exp f jg +                                   exp f jmax g exp f   jg =
                      2     q                                                              2     q
                                1=2
                  1       2g          1
              =                            [exp f (jmax               j)g     exp f            (jmax     j)g]                                (B.5)
                  2        q

and the implicit equation for distance,

                                               1
                                      t=         [exp f (jmax               j)g + exp f           (jmax          j)g]                        (B.6)
                                               2

The individual with the highest t travels as close as possible, i.e., t = 2 =) j (2) = 0. Imposing this in




                                                                             42
the equation for distance traveled, the value of jmax is then implicitly de…ned by

                                                         4     exp f jmax g = exp f                   jmax g

For jmax        0, the LHS starts at 3, is decreasing and concave, and crosses zero once; the RHS starts at
1, is decreasing and convex, and never crosses zero. Hence, there is a unique solution jmax ( ). Totally
di¤erentiating this equation with respect to jmax and ,

                                                                       djmax            jmax
                                                                             =                   <0
                                                                        d

This implies that less land is used if                         is higher, and also that the elasticity of jmax to                          is   1, i.e., the
product      jmax ( ) is a constant independent of :

B.2     Aggregate Implications
Lemma 2 . The average slope of the expenditure function X (j) between j 2 [0; jmax ] (unweighted,
weighted by the number of agents n (j), and weighted by total expenditure X (j)) grows more negative
when g is higher.

Proof. Recall from (9) that

                                                                                                                                                    1=2
                   1              1=4 1=4       1=2                                                                                        1    2
      p (j) =                 q       g     N            [exp f (jmax              j)g       exp f        (jmax     j)g] ; with p
                21=2    0                                                                                                                  2    q

Di¤erentiating with respect to j, we have

                                                             1=2
                                                    g
                              p0 (j) =                                 [exp f (jmax          j)g + exp f           (jmax     j)g]
                                                    2q

The expenditure function X (j) has slope

                                                                   X 0 (j) = 2x p (j) p0 (j)

The average unweighted slope over j 2 [0; jmax ] is
                  Z    jmax                                        Z   jmax
            1                     0                      2x
                              X (j) dj =                                      p (j) p0 (j) dj =
           jmax    0                                  jmax         0
                                                                        1=2
                                                              g                     1                                    2 sinh [     jmax ]2
                                                =                                              q 1=4 g 1=4 N 1=2    2x                          =
                                                              2q                 21=2    0                                          jmax
                                                          2 sinh [            jmax ]2 x          1=4 3=4
                                                =                                            q        g    N 1=2
                                                                         jmax            0




                                                                                   43
which is more negative when g is higher. The agents density–weighted average slope is
                     Z      jmax                                            Z       jmax                                                          Z    jmax
               1                                                      2x                                                                    2x
                                   n (j) X 0 (j) dj =                                           n (j) p (j) p0 (j) dj =                                       n (j) p (j) p0 (j) dj
              jmax      0                                         jmax          0                                                          jmax    0
                                   1=2        Z      jmax                                                           1=2               Z   jmax
               2x         q                                                                      2x            q
       =                                  2
                                                            p (j)2 p0 (j) dj =                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                 p (j)2 p0 (j) dj =
              jmax       2g                      0                                              jmax          2g                      0
                            1=2                            1=2                                                            2
                   g                2x            q               2         1                                                 8 sinh [ jmax ]3
       =                                                                                    q 1=4 g 1=4 N 1=2                                  =
                   2q              jmax          2g                     21=2        0                                                 3
                                                                        !2
                                             3                 1=4                                                                    2
               8 sinh [ jmax ]                              0g                              1               1=4 1=4       1=2
       =                       x                                                                        q     g       N                    =
                   3 jmax                                N 1=2 q 3=4                21=2            0

               4 sinh [ jmax ]3 g
       =                       x
                   3 jmax        q

which is more negative when g is higher. The expenditure–weighted average slope is
                                                  Z      jmax                                                 Z    jmax
                                         1                                       2x2
                                                                            0
                                                                X (j) X (j) dj =                                          p (j)2 p0 (j) dj =
                                     jmax            0                           jmax                          0
                                                                 1=2                                                          2
                                          2x2             g                     1                   1=4 1=4        1=2            8 sinh [ jmax ]3
                              =                                                                 q       g     N                                    =
                                         jmax             2q               21=2         0                                                 3
                                           2                                    3
                                           0         4 sinh [ jmax ]
                              =                                                         Ng
                                         21=2            3 jmax

which is again more negative if g is higher.

Lemma 3 . The frequency of trips increases with g for each individual.

Proof. Since the frequency of trips is q=z, we consider the behavior of the batch size. We show that
agents buy smaller batches as g grows, implying they travel more frequently. From (4) and using the
functional form assumptions, the batch size is

                                                                                                                                          1=2
                                                                                                             2q tj (t; g)
                                                      z~ (t; j)        z (j (t; g) ; t) =
                                                                                                                 g

where we have evaluated the batch at the optimal distance for agent t, j (t), and we have made the
dependence of the travel function on the parameter g explicit. As g grows, the optimal batch for given
distance j (t; g) shrinks via the denominator. Also, the optimal distance traveled j (t; g) falls with g for
every agent. To see this, recall that j (t) is implicitly de…ned by (B.6). Totally di¤erentiating with respect
to j and t,

                                   1=2                                                              1=2                                                    1=2
                             q                                    dj                    2g                      1                                      2              N
           dt =                          p00 (j) dj =)               =                                       00
                                                                                                                  =) j 0 (t) =                                     2 p (j
                            2g                                    dt                     q                  p (j)                                      q           0        (t))

where we have used p00 (j) =                          2 p (j)    from (8) and the de…nition of                                            . Di¤erentiating with respect to t,



                                                                                                44
one can verify that j (t) is always convex:

                                                                     1=2
                                                                 2           N
                                          j 00 (t) = +                     2 p (j)2
                                                                                    p   0
                                                                                            (j) j 0 (t) > 0
                                                                 q         0

since p0 < 0 and j 0 < 0: Consider the function j (t; g) in the space (t; j), for two values g1 < g2 . Since
jmax is decreasing in g, j (1; g1 ) > j (1; g2 ), that is, j (t; g) starts at a lower value when g is higher. Since
both curves are always decreasing convex, j (1; g1 ) > j (1; g2 ) implies that they will cross at most once in
t 2 [1; 2]. However, for both values of g, j (2; g) = 0; hence, they cannot cross before, and j (t; g1 ) > j (t; g2 )
8t 2 [1; 2): For any agent t, the distance traveled decreases with g and so the batch size falls. This implies
that the frequency of trips increases for every agent.

Lemma 4 . The equilibrium total employment is

                                                               Leq = L g 1=4 N 3=2



Proof. Using the expression for labor demand (1) and                                   = 1=2
                                 Z       jmax                                   2 Z jmax
                                                                       1A
                        Leq                     L (j) dj = D                                 p (j)2 dj =
                                     0                                 2w          0
                                          2                                        2
                                1A                1                                     sinh (2 jmax )
                   = D                                         q 1=4 g 1=4 N 1=2                                    2jmax =
                                2w              21=2   0
                                          2                                                         2
                                1A                                                          1               q 5=4 g 1=4 N 3=2
                   = D                        [sinh (2 jmax )           2jmax ]                                                   =
                                2w                                                     21=2     0       2   1=4 A   D=w
                                                                                                                            1=2

                        sinh (2 jmax ) 2jmax
                   =                                                 q 5=4 g 1=4 N 3=2 =
                              23=2 AD1=2 w1=2
                           l
                   =         1=2
                                 g 1=4 N 3=2
                        Aw
          sinh(2 jmax ) 2jmax
with l       23=2 AD1=2 w1=2
                                q 5=4 . Note that l does not vary with g or N since jmax is constant with :

Lemma 5 . The average distance at which output is produced is
                                                       R jmax
                                                           0      jQ (j) dj    N 1=2
                                                                            =d
                                                                  Nq           g 1=4




                                                                           45
Proof. Using the expression for output (2),
                R jmax                                 Z jmax
                  0      jQ (j) dj     A2 D         1
                                   =                          jp (j) dj =
                         Nq            2    w Nq 0
                A2       D    1      1                      2 [sinh ( jmax )     jmax ]
            =                      1=2
                                          q 1=4 g 1=4 N 1=2               2
                                                                                        =
                2        w Nq 2         0
                A2       D    1      1      1=4 1=4 1=2        1=2 3=4
                                                                        2 2 [sinh ( jmax )        jmax ]
            =                             q     g     N     N     q                           2            =
                2        w N q 21=2 0                                                0g
                                                                                        1=4

                [sinh ( jmax )        jmax ]                               q 3=4 N 1=2
            =                                  q 3=4 g   1=4
                                                               N 1=2 = d
                               0                                              g 1=4




                                                               46
C     Additional Empirical Results: Descriptive Patterns
C.1    Summary Statistics by state
Table C.1 shows summary statistics on our main dataset by state of transaction.

C.2    Frequent users
Here we focus on consumers with at least 120 transactions in the sample (that is, around 2 transactions
per day from March to October). We term this “frequent users”(FUs) sample, and use it to show that the
limited mobility of consumers described above does not depend on including low-frequency usage. Our
FUs sample contains 1,955 accounts, conducting around 377 thousand transactions over the sample period.
They reside in 1,399 locations and shop in 6,149 of them; there are a total of 21,650 origin-destination
combinations over which we observe transactions.
    Table C.2 shows summary statistics for this sample. Consumers in the median residence visit only
13 distinct sales locations overall during the sample period (15.5 sales location on average). Both values
are higher than in the complete data; however, these consumers also live in places with richer options:
the median residence records 241 sales locations within 120 km (compared to 192 for the whole data).
Hence, the median residence sees consumers shop in 5% of the available locations (the mean is 6%), very
comparable to the values in the general data (4% and 7% respectively).
    Table C.3 replicates Table 3 in the sample of frequent users. The role of distance is twice as high as
the role of locations available. The distance elasticity is closer to conventional levels also found in the
trade literature.




                                                    47
        Table C.1: Summary of transaction amounts (in USD), by U.S. State of purchase

State             Median            Mean          St. Dev.             Sum                N
AK                    32              69               132           122,111           1,774
AL                    28              63               171         1,057,448          16,905
AR                    29              62               154           536,710           8,654
AZ                    28              69               230         1,768,032          25,681
CA                    30              72               207        10,504,912         146,418
CO                    26              60               179         1,655,955          27,636
CT                    31              68               178         4,047,578          59,444
DC                    26              64               163           249,546           3,917
DE                    30              72               216           482,253           6,680
FL                    30              70               212         7,143,974         102,526
GA                    27              63               181         2,621,643          41,767
HI                    33              78               205           405,416           5,196
IA                    28              60               167           795,665          13,366
ID                    29              64               158           298,824           4,671
IL                    30              68               181         4,647,933          68,574
IN                    29              63               161         2,168,487          34,338
KS                    29              62               183           966,213          15,656
KY                    29              63               192         1,088,033          17,216
LA                    29              61               140         1,151,874          18,865
MA                    31              67               166        10,239,352         152,870
MD                    28              67               185         2,404,395          35,802
ME                    32              70               168         1,161,195          16,553
MI                    30              66               166         3,146,431          48,022
MN                    29              67               172         1,720,008          25,707
MO                    29              65               184         1,859,377          28,612
MS                    30              65               186           502,186           7,688
MT                    33              65               130           283,635           4,358
NC                    28              65               180         2,414,488          37,408
ND                    29              63               142           209,849           3,337
NE                    30              67               191           519,324           7,707
NH                    32              80               274         1,819,532          22,853
NJ                    31              71               202         7,149,537         100,840
NM                    28              63               193           478,979           7,576
NV                    40              90               229         1,169,957          13,033
NY                    33              75               194        11,053,563         147,574
OH                    29              65               168         3,707,650          57,383
OK                    29              65               171           841,117          12,910
OR                    28              63               186         1,237,409          19,743
PA                    30              67               174         4,719,180          70,287
RI                    31              68               167         1,105,141          16,292
SC                    28              67               216         1,200,522          17,927
SD                    34              73               216           241,186           3,323
TN                    29              65               164         1,703,392          26,318
TX                    26              61               182         5,919,181          97,279
UT                    26              65               238           581,595           8,983
VA                    28              65               192         2,881,000          44,257
VT                    30              70               166           312,755           4,464
WA                    26              64               190         1,481,652          23,134
WI                    30              67               209         2,224,750          33,065
WV                    31              67               172           384,579           5,741
WY                    30              65               161           165,159           2,543
Total                 30              68               188       116,550,684       1,722,873




                                             48
           Table C.2: Summary statistics across residence locations (Frequent Users)

variable                             min      p10     p25     p50       p75      p90    max      mean        N
Sales locations visited                 1        6       9      13        20       27     129    15.47    1,399
Sales locations available               8       90     151     241       526      848   1,110    357.47   1,399
Mean distance to sales locations     21.1     59.1    64.9    71.1      76.8       81      95    70.43    1,399
Share available locations visited       0     0.02    0.03    0.05      0.08     0.13    0.46     0.06    1,399


                            Table C.3: Locations available and locations visited

      Dependent variable:                                     Log of number of sales locations visited
                                                                (1)        (2)              (3)
      Sales locations within 120km, log                       0.443***                      0.464***
                                                               (0.017)                       (0.017)
      Average distance to sales locations within 120km, log                -0.619***       -1.014***
                                                                            (0.164)         (0.118)
      Constant                                                  0.081      5.169***         4.272***
                                                               (0.095)      (0.699)          (0.502)
      R2                                                        0.33            0.02            0.37
      N                                                         1,399          1,399            1,399
                 Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01



C.3     Percentiles of distances traveled
These Tables show summary statistics on the percentiles of distances traveled by consumers by sector.
Table C.4 refers to percentiles in the unweighted distribution. Table C.5 shows the same percentiles
weighting each transaction with the correspondent purchase value.




                                                     49
                               Table C.4: Distribution of transaction distances (in km), by sector

                                              p10        p25        p50        p75       p90        p99      max     mean
     Agricultural Services                       0          0        5.6       14.6      28.7    1,514.1   6,372.1    50.1
     Amusement, Rec. Serv.                       0        7.9       33.3      327.1   1,600.3      4,130   8,237.4   454.1
     Apparel                                     0        4.7       15.6       52.1     364.7    3,825.3   8,253.1   201.1
     Auto Repair/Service/Parking                 0          0        7.9         24        78    2,315.3   7,937.3    94.7
     Auto and Truck Sales/Service/Parts          0          0        8.3         21      58.6      2,119   7,775.3    88.8
     Building Mat./Hardware/Garden Supp.         0          0        7.6       18.2      40.6    1,491.7   7,868.1    49.6
     Communications                              0        6.5       24.3      684.8     2,018    3,944.5   8,134.9   551.1
     Durable Goods                               0        5.8         22      162.2   1,652.5    3,946.5     7,115   420.9
     Eating and Drinking Places                  0          0       12.6       50.4     496.4    3,739.5   8,254.8   217.1




50
     Food Stores                                 0          0        4.2       15.3      53.8    2,409.1     8,218    93.8
     Furniture, Home Furnishings, Equip.         0        1.9       11.2       26.3     132.8    3,277.2   8,243.6   135.9
     Gasoline Services                           0          0        8.9       34.6       275    2,274.3   8,233.3   126.8
     General Merchandise Stores                  0          0        8.7       20.8      61.3    2,001.5   8,223.9    87.3
     Health Services                             0          0        8.6       20.3      46.3    2,231.3   7,969.9    83.9
     Hospitality                              51.3      162.8      366.8    1,011.1   2,257.8    4,158.5   8,253.1   801.8
     Misc. Retail                                0          0        8.6       29.6     353.9    3,729.5   8,223.9   192.6
     Misc. Services                              0        2.2       15.8       67.8   1,131.8    3,905.3   7,765.3   302.3
     Motion Pictures                             0          0        5.7       16.6      63.6    3,756.9   7,884.2   125.3
     NonDurable Goods                            0          0        8.2         22     143.7    3,421.9   7,768.4     145
     Other Vehicles Sales/Service/Parts          0        6.6       20.1         55     505.9    3,017.7   7,879.4   190.8
     Personal Services                           0          0        6.7         20     135.1    3,332.5   8,251.4   132.3
     Total                                       0          0          9       29.4     276.8    3,249.4   8,254.8   157.4
                      Table C.5: Value-Weighted Distribution of transaction distances (in km), by sector

                                             p10        p25       p50        p75       p90        p99        max     mean
     Agricultural Services                      0          0       6.7       16.8      36.3    1,348.7     6,372.1      52
     Amusement, Rec. Serv.                      0        8.2      37.3      419.5   1,752.7    4,290.5     8,237.4   530.3
     Apparel                                    0        5.3      16.8       56.1     438.5    3,864.5     8,253.1   222.1
     Auto Repair/Service/Parking                0          0       7.5       20.3      65.2    2,080.8     7,937.3    86.9
     Auto and Truck Sales/Service/Parts         0          0      11.7       27.8     113.3    2,246.5     7,775.3   105.8
     Building Mat./Hardware/Garden Supp.        0          0       9.9       23.4      54.2    1,572.5     7,868.1    56.2
     Communications                             0        4.5      14.7      113.6     1,522    3,818.2     8,134.9   367.8
     Durable Goods                              0       10.5      30.6      198.1   1,864.6    4,017.6       7,115   454.7
     Eating and Drinking Places                 0          1      15.4       79.3     711.2    3,940.4     8,254.8   264.2




51
     Food Stores                                0          0       5.2       16.9        55    2,374.7       8,218    91.8
     Furniture, Home Furnishings, Equip.        0        4.6      13.1       30.6     129.2    2,966.2     8,243.6   129.6
     Gasoline Services                          0          0       9.7       39.6     320.1    2,247.8     8,233.3   133.9
     General Merchandise Stores                 0          0       9.9       23.1      77.2    2,547.3     8,223.9     104
     Health Services                            0          0       9.8       24.9      75.7    2,686.1     7,969.9   112.3
     Hospitality                             59.6      179.2     434.1    1,320.3   2,664.2    4,331.4     8,253.1   949.2
     Misc. Retail                               0          0        13       49.7     703.8    3,911.7     8,223.9   254.7
     Misc. Services                             0        5.3      17.1       54.7     666.7    3,964.9     7,765.3     238
     Motion Pictures                            0          0       7.3       22.2     222.7    3,960.8     7,884.2   181.4
     NonDurable Goods                           0          3      11.2       34.1     742.2    3,942.2     7,768.4   249.6
     Other Vehicles Sales/Service/Parts         0        9.1      23.1       64.9     936.9      3,139     7,879.4   244.7
     Personal Services                          0          0      10.9       37.5     529.8    3,856.4     8,251.4   217.2
     Total                                      0          0      12.3       40.5     434.7    3,709.5     8,254.8   205.3
C.4    Gravity over all distances
In Figure C.1, we estimate Equation (16) including origin-destination pairs at progressively longer dis-
tances. Speci…cally, we split all the (h; s) pairs in 20 quantiles of distances, and estimate it using only
the …rst group, then only the …rst two, and so on, up to the whole set of observations. Figure C.1 shows
the coe¢ cient on log distance. As one can see, changes of around +/- 30% in the 120 km cuto¤ (from
80 km to 160 km) only imply a variation in the gravity coe¢ cient of around 0.1: hence, around our
cuto¤ distance, the overall gravity slope is not particularly sensitive to the speci…c cuto¤ value. Di¤erent
sectors are more or less represented at di¤erent distances (see also Tables C.4 and C.5), implying that
the coe¢ cient       varies.
                 -.4
                 -.6
                 -.8
             slope
                 -1
                 -1.2
                 -1.4




                        5      10   20    40    80     160      320     640    1300   2600
                                          mean distance in the quantile


                                    Figure C.1: Gravity in Expenditure




                                                    52
C.5    Margins decomposition
Tables C.6 shows the actual values of the account and expenditure margin with associated p-values for the
margins decomposition associated with Equation (15); Table C.7 shows the actual values of the account
and expenditure margin with associated p-values associated with Equation (16).
   Tables C.8 and C.9 show the composition of frequency and batch size margin into the overall expen-
diture margin. They also show the share of the frequency margin in the expenditure margin, and the
overall role of frequency and account margins in the total decline of expenditure with distance. As in
the main text, all p-values are computed using heteroskedasticity–robust standard errors; the number of
observations reported excludes singletons, i.e. those observations that would be absorbed by …xed e¤ects
and do not contribute to the estimation.


                             Table C.6: Expenditure out of home place
                                         Overall    Accounts   Margin   Expenditure Margin   Share Accounts    Obs.
 Category                              coe¤   pv    coe¤        pv      coe¤        pv           Margin
 Food Stores                           -2.23 0.00   -1.12      0.00     -1.11      0.00           0.50        22,649
 Gasoline Services                     -2.08 0.00   -0.97      0.00     -1.11      0.00           0.47        39,666
 General Merchandise Stores            -1.78 0.00   -1.08      0.00     -0.71      0.00           0.60        26,837
 Misc. Retail                          -1.70 0.00   -1.07      0.00     -0.63      0.00           0.63        34,052
 Eating and Drinking Places            -1.57 0.00   -0.93      0.00     -0.64      0.00           0.59        34,504
 Building Mat./Hardware/Garden Supp.   -1.40 0.00   -0.87      0.00     -0.53      0.00           0.62        14,185
 Auto Repair/Service/Parking           -1.25 0.00   -0.88      0.00     -0.38      0.00           0.70         4,414
 NonDurable Goods                      -1.16 0.00   -1.05      0.00     -0.11      0.45           0.91           978
 Health Services                       -1.12 0.00   -0.77      0.00     -0.35      0.00           0.68         5,134
 Apparel                               -1.10 0.00   -0.83      0.00     -0.27      0.00           0.75        15,918
 Furniture, Home Furnishings, Equip.   -1.07 0.00   -0.85      0.00     -0.23      0.00           0.79        12,286
 Auto and Truck Sales/Service/Parts    -1.04 0.00   -0.81      0.00     -0.23      0.00           0.78         7,298
 Motion Pictures                       -1.04 0.00   -0.85      0.00     -0.18      0.01           0.82         1,922
 Amusement, Rec. Serv.                 -1.03 0.00   -0.66      0.00     -0.37      0.00           0.64         2,958
 Personal Services                     -0.96 0.00   -0.89      0.00     -0.07      0.12           0.93         5,203
 Misc. Services                        -0.92 0.06   -0.63      0.00     -0.29      0.52           0.69           220
 Communications                        -0.89 0.00   -0.61      0.00     -0.28      0.04           0.69           424
 Agricultural Services                 -0.88 0.00   -0.66      0.00     -0.21      0.10           0.75           552
 Other Vehicles Sales/Service/Parts    -0.68 0.41   -0.71      0.00      0.03      0.97           1.04           257
 Hospitality                           -0.64 0.01   -0.49      0.00     -0.15      0.40           0.76         1,392
 Durable Goods                         -0.09 0.90   -0.27      0.04      0.18      0.76           3.15            79




                                                       53
                                        Table C.7: Gravity in expenditure
                                              Overall      Accounts    Margin    Expenditure Margin     Share Accounts         Obs.
 Category                                  coe¤    pv      coe¤         pv       coe¤        pv             Margin
 Food Stores                               -0.85 0.00      -0.36       0.00      -0.49      0.00              0.42        18,632
 Gasoline Services                         -0.60 0.00      -0.25       0.00      -0.35      0.00              0.41        34,615
 General Merchandise Stores                -0.93 0.00      -0.50       0.00      -0.43      0.00              0.54        23,932
 Misc. Retail                              -0.65 0.00      -0.40       0.00      -0.25      0.00             0.61         30,042
 Eating and Drinking Places                -0.56 0.00      -0.31       0.00      -0.25      0.00             0.55         31,022
 Building Mat./Hardware/Garden Supp.       -0.73 0.00      -0.39       0.00      -0.34      0.00             0.53         11,604
 Auto Repair/Service/Parking               -0.40 0.00      -0.23       0.00      -0.16      0.00              0.59         3,013
 NonDurable Goods                          -0.65 0.00      -0.40       0.00      -0.24      0.01              0.62           758
 Health Services                           -0.33 0.00      -0.25       0.00      -0.09      0.08              0.74         3,910
 Apparel                                   -0.53 0.00      -0.36       0.00      -0.17      0.00              0.67        14,066
 Furniture, Home Furnishings, Equip.       -0.57 0.00      -0.40       0.00      -0.17      0.00              0.70        10,734
 Auto and Truck Sales/Service/Parts        -0.33 0.00      -0.26       0.00      -0.07      0.08              0.79         5,508
 Motion Pictures                           -0.34 0.00      -0.28       0.00      -0.07      0.22              0.80         1,248
 Amusement, Rec. Serv.                     -0.23 0.00      -0.10       0.00      -0.13      0.00              0.44         2,329
 Personal Services                         -0.31 0.00      -0.27       0.00      -0.04      0.27              0.86         3,760
 Misc. Services                             0.91 0.02      -0.11       0.06       1.02      0.01             -0.12           116
 Communications                            -0.41 0.01      -0.26       0.00      -0.15      0.21              0.63           263
 Agricultural Services                      0.42 0.11      -0.12       0.21       0.54      0.03             -0.28           190
 Other Vehicles Sales/Service/Parts        -0.59 0.08      -0.07       0.17      -0.51      0.10              0.13           128
 Hospitality                               -0.14 0.08      -0.08       0.00      -0.06      0.39              0.55         1,158
 Durable Goods                              1.11 0.67       0.00                  1.11      0.67             0.00             15




Table C.8: Expenditure out of home place: number of transactions and average expenditure
                                         Expenditure     Batch size     Frequency      Share of        Share of
                                            margin         margin         margin      Frequency   Account+Frequency    Obs.
  Category                               coe¤     pv    coe¤     pv    coe¤     pv     margin          margins
  Food Stores                            -1.11 0.00     -0.18 0.00     -0.93 0.00        0.84            0.92         22,649
  Gasoline Services                      -1.11 0.00     -0.09 0.00     -1.02 0.00        0.92            0.96         39,666
  General Merchandise Stores             -0.71 0.00     -0.06 0.00     -0.65 0.00        0.91            0.97         26,837
  Misc. Retail                           -0.63 0.00      0.05   0.00   -0.68 0.00        1.08            1.03         34,052
  Eating and Drinking Places             -0.64 0.00      0.02   0.05   -0.66 0.00        1.04            1.02         34,504
  Building Mat./Hardware/Garden Supp.    -0.53 0.00     -0.02 0.48     -0.51 0.00        0.96            0.99         14,185
  Auto Repair/Service/Parking            -0.38 0.00     -0.21 0.00     -0.16 0.00        0.43            0.83          4,414
  NonDurable Goods                       -0.11 0.45      0.02   0.88   -0.13 0.04        1.17            1.02            978
  Health Services                        -0.35 0.00     -0.17 0.00     -0.18 0.00        0.52            0.85          5,134
  Apparel                                -0.27 0.00     -0.01 0.54     -0.26 0.00        0.95            0.99         15,918
  Furniture, Home Furnishings, Equip.    -0.23 0.00     -0.01 0.88     -0.22 0.00        0.97            0.99         12,286
  Auto and Truck Sales/Service/Parts     -0.23 0.00     -0.01 0.85     -0.22 0.00        0.96            0.99          7,298
  Motion Pictures                        -0.18 0.01      0.02   0.72   -0.20 0.00        1.10            1.02          1,922
  Amusement, Rec. Serv.                  -0.37 0.00     -0.19 0.01     -0.18 0.00        0.48            0.81          2,958
  Personal Services                      -0.07 0.12      0.16   0.00   -0.23 0.00        3.31            1.17          5,203
  Misc. Services                         -0.29 0.52     -0.20 0.64     -0.09 0.37        0.32            0.79            220
  Communications                         -0.28 0.04     -0.17 0.25     -0.11 0.09        0.38            0.81            424
  Agricultural Services                  -0.21 0.10      0.01   0.94   -0.22 0.00        1.04            1.01            552
  Other Vehicles Sales/Service/Parts      0.03   0.97    0.27   0.71   -0.24 0.28       -7.96            1.39            257
  Hospitality                            -0.15 0.40     -0.04 0.81     -0.11 0.11        0.75            0.94          1,392
  Durable Goods                           0.18   0.76   0.02    0.97   0.17    0.50      0.91            1.19             79




                                                               54
   Table C.9: Gravity in expenditure: number of transactions and average expenditure
                                                                                          Expenditure      Batch size          Frequency           Share of              Share of
                                                                                             margin          margin              margin           Frequency       of Account+Frequency    Obs.
   Category                                                                               coe¤     pv     coe¤     pv         coe¤     pv          margin                margins
   Food Stores                                                                            -0.49 0.00      -0.13 0.00          -0.36 0.00             0.73                  0.84          18,632
   Gasoline Services                                                                      -0.35 0.00      -0.04 0.00          -0.31 0.00             0.89                  0.93          34,615
   General Merchandise Stores                                                             -0.43 0.00      -0.09 0.00          -0.33 0.00             0.78                  0.90          23,932
   Misc. Retail                                                                           -0.25 0.00      -0.01 0.16          -0.24 0.00             0.95                  0.98          30,042
   Eating and Drinking Places                                                             -0.25 0.00      -0.02 0.00          -0.23 0.00             0.90                  0.96          31,022
   Building Mat./Hardware/Garden Supp.                                                    -0.34 0.00      -0.07 0.00          -0.27 0.00             0.80                  0.91          11,604
   Auto Repair/Service/Parking                                                            -0.16 0.00      -0.09 0.07          -0.07 0.00             0.44                  0.77           3,013
   NonDurable Goods                                                                       -0.24 0.01      -0.09 0.23          -0.15 0.00             0.62                  0.86             758
   Health Services                                                                        -0.09 0.08       0.03   0.56        -0.11 0.00             1.30                  1.08           3,910
   Apparel                                                                                -0.17 0.00      -0.02 0.12          -0.16 0.00             0.90                  0.97          14,066
   Furniture, Home Furnishings, Equip.                                                    -0.17 0.00      -0.04 0.06          -0.13 0.00             0.77                  0.93          10,734
   Auto and Truck Sales/Service/Parts                                                     -0.07 0.08       0.02   0.53        -0.09 0.00             1.33                  1.07           5,508
   Motion Pictures                                                                        -0.07 0.22       0.02   0.72        -0.08 0.03             1.23                  1.05           1,248
   Amusement, Rec. Serv.                                                                  -0.13 0.00      -0.04 0.28          -0.08 0.00             0.66                  0.81           2,329
   Personal Services                                                                      -0.04 0.27       0.08   0.02        -0.12 0.00             2.84                  1.25           3,760
   Misc. Services                                                                          1.02   0.01     1.13   0.00        -0.11 0.18            -0.11                 -0.24             116
   Communications                                                                         -0.15 0.21      -0.24 0.05           0.09   0.15          -0.61                  0.40             263
   Agricultural Services                                                                   0.54   0.03     0.68   0.01        -0.15 0.35            -0.27                 -0.63             190
   Other Vehicles Sales/Service/Parts                                                     -0.51 0.10      -0.51 0.10          -0.00 0.98             0.01                  0.13             128
   Hospitality                                                                            -0.06 0.39      -0.05 0.41          -0.01 0.72             0.18                  0.63           1,158
   Durable Goods                                                                           1.11   0.67     0.96   0.73         0.15   0.79           0.14                  0.14              15



C.6    Gravity and the frequency of transactions
These …gures show further robustness on the relation between gravity and the frequency of transactions.
Figure C.2 shows the correspondent of Figure 3 using all coe¢ cients, not just the ones signi…cantly
di¤erent from zero; one can clearly note the outlier “Durable Goods” in the top-left part of the graph.
Figure C.3 uses the strength of gravity as measured by regression (16) using all estimated slopes. We
have also experimented with an alternative measure of frequency that gives more weight to users that
spend more overall, with essentially identical results.
                                                        1
                             Out-of-home expenditure as a share of home expenditure
                                     .2         .4      0    .6          .8




                                                                                      1                  2                            4                       8
                                                                                                     average number of transactions per account




                        Figure C.2: Drop in expenditure out of home (all coe¢ cients)




                                                                                                                    55
                                 1
                                 .5
                           Gravity slope
                              0  -.5
                                 -1




                                           1           2                            4                     8
                                                   average number of transactions per account




                     Figure C.3: Gravity and frequency of transactions (all slopes)


D     Additional Empirical Results: Individual Level Responses
The analysis in Section 3 has shown that the strength of gravity varies by sector with the frequency
of travel, which we interpret as related to sector-level characteristics like storability and durability. In
this Appendix, we ask if, for a …xed network of suppliers, individual characteristics predict additional
sector-level heterogeneity in travel behavior. We …rst explore whether individual heterogeneity a¤ects
geographic patterns of purchase across sectors. We then compare the behavior of the same individual
under two travel cost regimes, and ask whether the travel response to this shock across sectors is a function
of individual characteristics.
    To ensure our results are a faithful representation of individual behavior, we limit the analysis to
“frequent users,”i.e., users with at least 120 transactions in our sample. We further require these accounts
to have valid (self-reported) income and age. These individual-level analyses are based on about 1,400
individual accounts. Since we have 21 sectors, our data comprises roughly 29 thousand individual-sector
observations.

D.1    The Role of Individual Characteristics
We are interested in whether the travel behavior of consumers in the same shopping environment varies
across sectors with demographic characteristics. Since the number of transactions comes in integer values,
a Poisson model is an appropriate starting point. In particular, we will estimate Poisson models where
the mean number of out–of–home transactions for individual i in sector s; outi;s , takes the general form:
                                                         n                                         0
                                                                                                                          o
                                           ~si ] = exp
                    E [outi;s jni;s ; xi ; x                 +      0    ni;s +        0
                                                                                       0    xi +    ~si
                                                                                                   1x     +   i   +   s       (D.1)

In this expression, ni;s is the total number of transactions for account i in sector s; xi are individual log
                    ~si are a set of interactions between those individual variables and three sector-level
age and log income; x

                                                                  56
characteristics: the frequency of transactions, the CEX expenditure share, and the U.S.-wide average
number of employees per establishment from the County Business Patterns in 1998-2007; and                           i   and   s
are vectors of individual and sector dummies. Note that since we are controlling for the total number of
transactions, this analysis e¤ectively examines the response of the geographical composition of purchases
to di¤erent covariates; also note that shape of the geographical units of observations plays a limited role
since our dependent variable sums across all locations other than the residence location.
       Our coe¢ cients of interest are the interactions of demographic characteristics with the average fre-
quency of transactions. Table D.1 shows the results of this estimation. In all speci…cations, we cluster
standard errors at the individual level to allow for correlation in the number of transactions out-of-home
within individuals across sectors. All the models include sector-…xed e¤ects. Column (1) shows the base-
line elements of our regression, that compares individuals living in the same zip code. The expected
number of transactions out-of-home in the sample period increases by 2.2 percentage points for an in-
dividual with one additional transaction.53 In column (2), we interact log age and log income with two
sector characteristics, the average frequency of transactions in a sector, and the CEX expenditure share.
We …nd that these two sector characteristics do not interact signi…cantly with age. We …nd however that
income is a determinant of the geographical composition of trips, and that the role of income varies as a
function of the proxy for storability/durability. Moving from a sector at the 10th percentile of frequency
(Miscellaneous Services), to a sector at the 90th percentile of frequency (Eating and Drinking Places), the
elasticity of the number of out-of-home transactions to a 10% increase in income falls by 2.35 percentage
points. This variation occurs controlling for the CEX expenditure share in the sector. In comparison, a
10th-90th percentile move (from Miscellaneous Services to Eating and Drinking Places) in the CEX share
implies a drop of 1.55 percentage points in the same elasticity.
       The coe¢ cient on these interactions stays stable in columns (3), where we control for individual …xed-
e¤ects absorbing time-invariant person-level characteristics (e.g., wealth, education, precise residence
location, overall use of credit cards); and in column 4, where we additionally interact individual level
variables with the national average size of establishments, a proxy for sector level …xed-costs.
       In unreported results, we have explicitly modeled overdispersion and estimated a Negative Binomial
Model: when we do that, we …nd that the patterns of signi…cance are unchanged. We have also exper-
imented with alternative clusterings of the standard errors: for example, we have split individuals in 5
income quintiles and 5 age quintiles; we then have formed indicators for the 525 combinations of age group
times income group time sector and clustered our standard errors using this alternative categorization.
The estimates of the interaction coe¢ cients maintain the same patterns of signi…cance.

D.2       The E¤ect of Rain
In the section above, we have asked whether individual characteristics shape the geographic distribution
of transactions across sectors. Such an exercise leveraged cross-sectoral variation across individuals,
controlling as possible for individual characteristics. In this section, we consider the same individual under
  53
    In these models, the total number of transactions appears in levels to keep all observations with zero transactions in the
estimation sample.



                                                             57
two travel cost regimes: we examine whether the response of the geographic distribution of transactions
across sectors to a travel cost shock is di¤erent for, say, high income vs. low income individuals.
    To pursue this line of analysis, we turn to daily data on rainfall precipitation from the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration, as described in Menne et al. (2012). For each centroid of a residence
location in our data, we …nd the closest weather station among the roughly twelve thousand disseminated
across the United States. In the transaction data, the median distance between a weather station and
a residence is 7.3 km (mean 8 km). We use this daily data on rainfall to assign a weather status for
each transaction: we create a transaction-level indicator variable that assumes the value of 1 if, during
the transaction day, the associated weather station recorded rain in the residence location. During the
sample period, 34% of transactions have a rain episode so de…ned. A concern could be that most of the
variation in this indicator is geographically concentrated, rather than occurring within residence locations
over time. This is not the case. A regression of the weather status indicator variable on residence-location
…xed e¤ects and transaction-date …xed e¤ects absorbs only 17% of the variation in the transaction level
data, leaving ample residual variation to identify movements in the propensity of purchase outside of one’s
residence.
    We then construct an extended dataset, starting from the analysis in the subsection above, where for
each individual we count outi;s;r , the number of transactions out-of-home by sector during rainy (r = 1)
and non-rainy days (r = 0). Our interest is in a “triple-interaction”variable: we compare the response of,
say, low income individuals and high income individuals to the same travel cost shock, and ask whether
there are di¤erences in the sectoral heterogeneity of their responses.
    In particular, we estimate Poisson models where the mean number of out–of–home transactions for
individual i in sector s under rain conditions r, outi;s;r , takes the general form:

E outi;s;r jr; xi ; fs ; i , s ;   r
                                       = exp     0   +     0;r      Ir=1 +   0       ni;s;r +     0;r Ir=1 ni;s;r +   i   +   s   + Ir=1    s    +
                                                                                 0          0
                                                                                                              o
                                          0              0
                                          0    xi +      0;r       Ir=1 xi +      ~si
                                                                                 1x     +   1;r     Ir=1 x~si

In this expression, ni;s;r is the total number of transactions recorded for account i by sector s and weather
status r; Ir=1 is a dummy equal to 1 for observations pertaining to rainy days and zero otherwise;                                           i
and    s   are individual and sector dummies;                  s   are the same three sector characteristics as above, to be
                                                                                 ~si; are a set of double
interacted with the rain dummy; xi are log age and log income of the individual; x
interactions of individual and sector-level characteristics.
    The results of this analysis are reported in Table D.2, which mimics the structure of Table D.1 above:
all columns include sector …xed e¤ects; Column (1) includes only the level variables and zip code …xed
e¤ects; column (2) includes all the rain-sector-individual double interactions necessary to examine the
role of the frequency of transactions and CEX expenditure; column (3) includes all the relevant triple
interactions; column 4 replaces zip code …xed-e¤ects with individual …xed-e¤ects; and column (5) includes
the triple interactions with our proxy for …xed costs, plus the remaining necessary double interactions.
Again, all standard errors are clustered at individual level. Our coe¢ cient of interests are on rain                                      log
frequency and on the triple interaction between rain, log income, and log frequency of transactions. These
coe¢ cients are fairly stable across speci…cations. The positive coe¢ cient on rain                            log frequency indicates

                                                                      58
that for a relatively low income individual, transactions in low-frequency sectors become relatively more
local than those in high-frequency sectors; this relation, however, becomes ‡atter for higher income people.
   In unreported results, we replicate our robustness exercises described above for a Negative Binomial
Model, and the same alternative clustering of standard errors: signi…cance patterns are preserved.
   These results suggest that the response of the geographic distribution of transactions to a travel cost
shock is di¤erent, across sectors, as a function of individual characteristics. Since the network of suppliers
is stable, and our “cost regimes” comparison keeps individual unobservables …xed, we interpret these
results as further evidence that consumers actively choose the distance traveled in a way that is related
to our proxy for storability/durability.




                                                     59
          Table D.1: The role of individual heterogeneity (poisson regression)
                                                   (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)
Dependent Variable:                                Number of transactions out of residence

Log income                                       -0.067     0.268***
                                                (0.044)      (0.058)
Log age                                          -0.048        0.078
                                                (0.084)      (0.129)
Number of transactions                         0.022***    0.022***    0.023***    0.023***
                                                (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
Log income    log frequency of transactions                -0.177***   -0.173***   -0.174***
                                                             (0.024)     (0.024)     (0.023)
Log age    log frequency of transactions                      -0.031      -0.029      -0.023
                                                             (0.055)     (0.055)     (0.055)
Log income    CEX expenditure share                         -0.629**    -0.614**    -0.639**
                                                             (0.295)     (0.296)     (0.299)
Log age    CEX expenditure share                              -0.952      -0.946      -0.959
                                                             (0.691)     (0.699)     (0.692)
Log income    log of employees per store                                           -0.051***
                                                                                     (0.013)
Log age    log of employees per store                                               0.117***
                                                                                     (0.030)

Observations                                   28,959      28,959     28,959        28,959
Sector …xed e¤ects                              Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
ZIP code …xed e¤ects                            Yes         Yes         No            No
Individual …xed e¤ects                           No          No         Yes          Yes
Pseudo R-Square                                  .74         .74        .74          .74
                Standard errors clustered at account level in parentheses.
                            *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                              60
                        Table D.2: The e¤ect of rain (poisson regression)
                                                              (1)       (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)
Dependent Variable:                                                 Number of transactions out of residence

Log age                                                     -0.016         0.098       0.155
                                                           (0.078)       (0.126)     (0.138)
Log income                                                  -0.059      0.289***    0.268***
                                                           (0.041)       (0.058)     (0.062)
Number of transactions                                    0.034***     0.035***    0.035***    0.036***    0.036***
                                                           (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)
Rain dummy                                                -0.221***    -0.876***      -0.916      -0.966      -1.130
                                                           (0.023)       (0.270)     (0.673)     (0.670)     (0.916)
Rain dummy          log frequency of transactions                      0.358***      0.699**     0.705**     0.765**
                                                                         (0.034)     (0.348)     (0.349)     (0.346)
Rain dummy          log income                                             0.001       0.058       0.059       0.088
                                                                         (0.019)     (0.052)     (0.051)     (0.065)
Rain dummy          log age                                               -0.021      -0.183      -0.172      -0.233
                                                                         (0.037)     (0.127)     (0.127)     (0.169)
Log income      log frequency of transactions                          -0.188***   -0.168***   -0.165***   -0.164***
                                                                         (0.024)     (0.027)     (0.027)     (0.027)
Log age      log frequency of transactions                                -0.052      -0.077      -0.076      -0.064
                                                                         (0.055)     (0.065)     (0.065)     (0.065)
Rain dummy          CEX expenditure share                              1.923***       -5.443      -4.561      -5.088
                                                                         (0.229)     (5.583)     (5.542)     (5.519)
Log age      CEX expenditure share                                        -0.339      -0.568      -0.472      -0.525
                                                                         (0.705)     (0.910)     (0.913)     (0.901)
Log income      CEX expenditure share                                   -0.592**    -0.767**    -0.726**    -0.762**
                                                                         (0.282)     (0.362)     (0.360)     (0.364)
Rain      log income     log frequency of transactions                              -0.054**    -0.053**    -0.058**
                                                                                     (0.026)     (0.026)     (0.026)
Rain      log age     log frequency of transactions                                    0.070       0.069       0.068
                                                                                     (0.072)     (0.072)     (0.072)
Rain      log income     CEX expenditure share                                        0.456       0.424        0.466
                                                                                     (0.388)     (0.386)     (0.385)
Rain      log age     CEX expenditure share                                            0.604       0.458       0.472
                                                                                     (0.924)     (0.926)     (0.912)
Rain dummy          log of employees per store                                                                 0.044
                                                                                                             (0.206)
Log age      log of employees per store                                                                     0.139***
                                                                                                             (0.037)
Log income      log of employees per store                                                                 -0.045***
                                                                                                             (0.015)
Rain      log income     log of employees per store                                                           -0.009
                                                                                                             (0.014)
Rain      log age     log of employees per store                                                               0.021
                                                                                                             (0.040)

Observations                                              57,918      57,918      57,918        57,918        57,918
Sector …xed e¤ects                                          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
ZIP code …xed e¤ects                                        Yes         Yes         Yes           No            No
Individual …xed e¤ects                                      No          No          No           Yes           Yes
Pseudo R-Square                                             .68         .68         .68          .69           .69
                              Standard errors clustered at account level in parentheses.
                                          *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


                                                         61
E     Additional Empirical Results: County-Level Analysis
E.1    Weak Instruments
As an alternative check on the strength of our instrumentation strategy, we estimate the main tables in our
analysis via Limited Information Maximum Likelihood (LIML), rather than Two-Stages Least Squares
(2SLS). LIML estimators are known to have better small sample properties with weak instruments. Swings
in the coe¢ cients or much larger standard errors as compared to 2SLS would be an indication of a
potentially weak instrument.
    Table E.1-E.3 report the corresponding LIML estimates of Tables 6-8. Coe¢ cients are broadly in line,
and standard errors essentially unchanged. These …ndings further help alleviate potential concerns about
weak instruments.

                 Table E.1: Local employment and frequency of purchase (LIML)
                                                                      (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)
      Dependent variable:                                                      county-sector log employment
      Sample years :                                                   07        98        98,07      98,07      98,07
      Log population                                                0.733***   0.884***   0.808***   0.795***   1.208***
                                                                     (0.105)    (0.075)    (0.085)    (0.129)    (0.086)
      Log population      log frequency                             0.130**     0.074*    0.101**    0.090**    0.076**
                                                                     (0.052)    (0.041)    (0.043)    (0.042)    (0.038)
      Log population      CEX expenditure share                      0.828      0.993*    0.922**    0.889**     0.792*
                                                                     (0.530)    (0.513)    (0.458)    (0.451)    (0.438)
      Log income per capita                                         1.643***   1.606***   1.633***   1.785***   1.018***
                                                                     (0.149)    (0.137)    (0.137)    (0.303)    (0.205)
      Log land area                                                 0.103***   0.136***   0.120***   0.185***    -0.023
                                                                     (0.013)    (0.011)    (0.011)    (0.035)    (0.044)
      Sector Fixed E¤ects                                             Yes        Yes        Yes        No         No
      Year Fixed E¤ects                                               No         No         Yes        No         No
      Sector-Year Fixed E¤ects                                        No         No         No         Yes        Yes
      State-Year Fixed E¤ects                                         No         No         No         Yes        No
      Commuting Zone-Year Fixed E¤ects                                No         No         No         No         Yes
      R-square                                                        0.76       0.79       0.78      0.72       0.69
      N                                                              60,413     60,923    121,336    121,336    121,336
      S.W. F stat: Log Population                                    28.03      43.35      37.78      11.92      20.14
      S.W. F stat: Log Population         log frequency              20.44       24.9      25.74      13.43      16.28
      S.W. F stat: Log Population         CEX expenditure share      12.81      15.89      15.29      16.55      14.88
                                  Standard errors clustered at county level in parentheses.
                                               * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01




                                                               62
    Table E.2: Number of establishments and frequency of purchase (LIML)
                                                                (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)
Dependent variable:                                               county-sector log number of establishments
Sample years :                                                  07         98        98,07      98,07     98,07
Log population                                                0.417***   0.556***   0.490***   0.500***   0.771***
                                                               (0.099)    (0.065)    (0.078)    (0.108)    (0.066)
Log population      log frequency                             0.174***   0.105***   0.137***   0.122***   0.117***
                                                               (0.046)    (0.033)    (0.037)    (0.035)    (0.033)
Log population      CEX expenditure share                     1.123***   1.864***   1.501***   1.424***   1.348***
                                                               (0.337)    (0.371)    (0.308)    (0.291)    (0.286)
Log income per capita                                         1.501***   1.389***   1.449***   1.502***   0.955***
                                                               (0.136)    (0.105)    (0.114)    (0.246)    (0.145)
Log land area                                                 0.099***   0.135***   0.118***   0.166***    0.038
                                                               (0.012)    (0.008)    (0.009)    (0.029)    (0.031)
Sector Fixed E¤ects                                             Yes        Yes        Yes        No         No
Year Fixed E¤ects                                               No         No         Yes        No         No
Sector-Year Fixed E¤ects                                        No         No         No         Yes        Yes
State-Year Fixed E¤ects                                         No         No         No         Yes        No
Commuting Zone-Year Fixed E¤ects                                No         No         No         No         Yes
R-square                                                        0.80       0.83       0.82      0.78       0.76
N                                                              60,413     60,923    121,336    121,336    121,336
S.W. F stat: Log Population                                    28.03      43.35      37.78      11.92      20.14
S.W. F stat: Log Population         log frequency              20.44       24.9      25.74      13.43      16.28
S.W. F stat: Log Population         CEX expenditure share      12.81      15.89      15.29      16.55      14.88
                            Standard errors clustered at county level in parentheses.
                                         * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01




                                                         63
Table E.3: Number of employees per establishment and frequency of purchase (LIML)
                                                                   (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)          (5)
   Dependent variable:                                          county-sector log number of employees per establishment
   Sample years :                                                  07         98       98,07      98,07        98,07
   Log population                                               0.286***      0.314***   0.299***   0.269***   0.422***
                                                                    (0.044)    (0.038)    (0.037)    (0.056)    (0.048)
   Log population      log frequency                             -0.031        -0.024     -0.028     -0.026     -0.032
                                                                    (0.026)    (0.026)    (0.023)    (0.024)    (0.023)
   Log population      CEX expenditure share                     -0.245       -0.803**    -0.518     -0.492     -0.506
                                                                    (0.415)    (0.403)    (0.355)    (0.358)    (0.354)
   Log income per capita                                        0.174***      0.228***   0.203***   0.335**     0.075
                                                                    (0.059)    (0.064)    (0.058)    (0.130)    (0.118)
   Log land area                                                    0.004      0.001      0.002      0.024     -0.059**
                                                                    (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.015)    (0.026)
   Sector Fixed E¤ects                                               Yes        Yes        Yes        No         No
   Year Fixed E¤ects                                                 No         No         Yes        No         No
   Sector-Year Fixed E¤ects                                          No         No         No         Yes        Yes
   State-Year Fixed E¤ects                                           No         No         No         Yes        No
   Commuting Zone-Year Fixed E¤ects                                  No         No         No         No         Yes
   R-square                                                       0.26          0.27       0.26      0.23       0.19
   N                                                             60,413        60,923    121,336    121,336    121,336
   S.W. F stat: Log Population                                      28.03      43.35      37.78      11.92      20.14
   S.W. F stat: Log Population         log frequency                20.44       24.9      25.74      13.43      16.28
   S.W. F stat: Log Population         CEX expenditure share        12.81      15.89      15.29      16.55      14.88
                                Standard errors clustered at county level in parentheses.
                                             * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01




                                                               64
E.2    Spillovers into Neighboring Counties
In this section, we report the results of running 2SLS speci…cations of eq. (19) on neigboring counties’
outcome. In particular, for each focal county, we identify the set of counties whose centroid is less than 120
km away from the focal county’s centroid. For this set of counties, we compute total employment, total
number of establishments, employees per establishment, total population, total land area and average
income per capita. Tables E.4-E.6 below then replicate Tables 6-8 with these alternative outcomes.

           Table E.4: Local employment around and frequency of purchase (2SLS)
                                                                        (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)       (5)
      Dependent variable:                                                   neighboring counties-sector log employment
      Sample years :                                                     07         98         98,07       98,07     98,07
      Log population                                               -0.247**       -0.063      -0.169*     -0.169*     0.038*
                                                                       (0.117)    (0.076)     (0.095)     (0.095)     (0.022)
      Log population      log frequency                            -0.080***     -0.078***   -0.079***   -0.079***   -0.087***
                                                                       (0.017)    (0.015)     (0.016)     (0.016)     (0.016)
      Log population      CEX expenditure share                    1.295***      0.738***    1.022***    1.022***    0.954***
                                                                       (0.232)    (0.156)     (0.183)     (0.183)     (0.173)
      Log land area around                                             -0.119      0.026      -0.058      -0.058       0.005
                                                                       (0.107)    (0.071)     (0.087)     (0.087)     (0.015)
      Log income per capita around                                     0.419*    0.822***    0.555**     0.555**     0.904***
                                                                       (0.233)    (0.210)     (0.221)     (0.221)     (0.051)
      Log population around                                        1.218***      1.063***    1.154***    1.154***    1.110***
                                                                       (0.105)    (0.069)     (0.085)     (0.085)     (0.010)
      Log land area                                                0.162**         0.053      0.117*      0.117*       0.001
                                                                       (0.078)    (0.051)     (0.064)     (0.064)     (0.010)
      Log income per capita                                        0.524**         0.175      0.405*      0.405*      -0.051
                                                                       (0.259)    (0.215)     (0.234)     (0.234)     (0.047)
      Sector Fixed E¤ects                                               Yes        Yes         Yes          No          No
      Year Fixed E¤ects                                                 No          No         Yes          No          No
      Sector-Year Fixed E¤ects                                          No          No          No         Yes         Yes
      State-Year Fixed E¤ects                                           No          No          No         Yes          No
      Commuting Zone-Year Fixed E¤ects                                  No          No          No          No         Yes
      R-square                                                          0.93       0.95       0.94        0.94         0.69
      N                                                                60,124     60,644     120,768     120,768     120,768
      S.W. F stat: Log Population                                      11.34       10.49       12.25       12.25        22.7
      S.W. F stat: Log Population         log frequency                22.49        18.8       22.68       22.68       15.36
      S.W. F stat: Log Population         CEX expenditure share        14.82        16.7       16.4        16.4        16.45
                                   Standard errors clustered at county level in parentheses.
                                                * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01




                                                                  65
    Table E.5: Local establishments around and frequency of purchase (2SLS)
                                                                (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)
Dependent variable:                                          neighboring counties-sector log number of establishments
Sample years :                                                   07         98         98,07      98,07        98,07
Log population                                               -0.434***     -0.351***   -0.401***   -0.160***   -0.128***
                                                                 (0.134)    (0.112)     (0.123)     (0.052)     (0.026)
Log population      log frequency                            0.074***      0.057***    0.066***    0.063***    0.064***
                                                                 (0.017)    (0.015)     (0.016)     (0.015)     (0.016)
Log population      CEX expenditure share                    1.161***      1.289***    1.216***    1.209***    1.207***
                                                                 (0.197)    (0.199)     (0.192)     (0.185)     (0.186)
Log land area                                                    0.160*      0.114      0.143*       0.010       0.004
                                                                 (0.092)    (0.078)     (0.085)     (0.028)     (0.007)
Log income per capita                                        0.704**       0.666**     0.707**       0.104      -0.007
                                                                 (0.308)    (0.325)     (0.315)     (0.122)     (0.030)
Log land area around                                             -0.164     -0.085      -0.130     0.107***    0.142***
                                                                 (0.127)    (0.106)     (0.117)     (0.034)     (0.013)
Log income per capita around                                     0.060       0.075       0.039     0.557***    0.602***
                                                                 (0.278)    (0.318)     (0.297)     (0.086)     (0.035)
Log population around                                        1.135***      1.059***    1.105***    0.891***    0.896***
                                                                 (0.124)    (0.105)     (0.114)     (0.036)     (0.008)
Sector Fixed E¤ects                                               Yes        Yes         Yes          No          No
Year Fixed E¤ects                                                 No          No         Yes          No          No
Sector-Year Fixed E¤ects                                          No          No          No         Yes         Yes
State-Year Fixed E¤ects                                           No          No          No         Yes          No
Commuting Zone-Year Fixed E¤ects                                  No          No          No          No         Yes
R-square                                                          0.91       0.93       0.92        0.92        0.68
N                                                                60,124     60,644     120,768     120,768     120,768
S.W. F stat: Log Population                                      11.34       10.49       12.25        9.03       22.7
S.W. F stat: Log Population         log frequency                22.49        18.8       22.68       18.67       15.36
S.W. F stat: Log Population         CEX expenditure share        14.82        16.7       16.4        15.84       16.45
                             Standard errors clustered at county level in parentheses.
                                          * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01




                                                            66
Table E.6: Employees per establishments around and frequency of purchase (2SLS)
                                                                (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)           (5)
 Dependent variable:                                         neighboring counties-sector log number of employees per estab.
 Sample years :                                                  07         98         98,07      98,07         98,07
 Log population                                              0.187***    0.288***    0.232***    0.167***      0.166***
                                                              (0.061)     (0.090)     (0.069)     (0.056)       (0.027)
 Log population      log frequency                           -0.154***   -0.135***   -0.145***   -0.147***    -0.151***
                                                              (0.022)     (0.020)     (0.021)     (0.021)       (0.022)
 Log population      CEX expenditure share                     0.134     -0.551***    -0.194*    -0.227**      -0.253**
                                                              (0.132)     (0.134)     (0.112)     (0.112)       (0.114)
 Log land area around                                          0.045       0.111       0.072     -0.071**     -0.136***
                                                              (0.055)     (0.085)     (0.064)     (0.035)       (0.013)
 Log income per capita around                                0.359***    0.747***    0.516***    0.270***      0.302***
                                                              (0.119)     (0.257)     (0.164)     (0.093)       (0.032)
 Log population around                                         0.082       0.004       0.049     0.159***      0.214***
                                                              (0.053)     (0.084)     (0.063)     (0.039)       (0.007)
 Log land area                                                 0.002      -0.061      -0.026       0.013        -0.003
                                                              (0.040)     (0.062)     (0.047)     (0.030)       (0.008)
 Log income per capita                                        -0.180      -0.491*     -0.302*     -0.110        -0.044
                                                              (0.132)     (0.263)     (0.175)     (0.133)       (0.037)
 Sector Fixed E¤ects                                           Yes         Yes         Yes          No           No
 Year Fixed E¤ects                                              No          No         Yes          No           No
 Sector-Year Fixed E¤ects                                       No          No          No         Yes           Yes
 State-Year Fixed E¤ects                                        No          No          No         Yes           No
 Commuting Zone-Year Fixed E¤ects                               No          No          No          No           Yes
 R-square                                                      0.22        0.11       0.18        0.20          -0.03
 N                                                            60,124      60,644     120,768     120,768       120,768
 S.W. F stat: Log Population                                   11.34       10.49       12.25       9.03          22.7
 S.W. F stat: Log Population         log frequency             22.49        18.8       22.68       18.67        15.36
 S.W. F stat: Log Population         CEX expenditure share     14.82        16.7       16.4        15.84        16.45
                               Standard errors clustered at county level in parentheses.
                                             * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01




                                                              67
E.3    Density and Sorting on Preferences
In this subsection, we examine the role of density and sorting on preferences.
   In Table E.7 we extend our main regressions to control for an interaction between log income and log
frequency of transactions. In this way, we control for the possibility that people with “tastes” for higher
frequency sectors - as proxied by income - are more likely to sort in bigger places. In this table, the
outcome variables are log employment (columns (1) and (2)), log establishment density (columns (3) and
(4)), and log employees per establishment (columns (5) and (6)): within each of the outcomes, we replicate
columns (5) and (6) in our main speci…cation: columns di¤er on whether we control for heterogeneous
state time trends or commuting zone time trends; all columns include sector-year …xed e¤ects. As in
our main speci…cation, a higher income per capita is associated to a higher employment across sectors;
moreover, employment tends to be smaller in high-frequency than in low-frequency sectors as income
grows. The sign of this correlation may re‡ect non-homothetic preferences and possibly capture further
un-modeled equilibrium feedbacks. We do not see this exercise as a way to identify the causal e¤ect
of higher income, but rather as a simple way to control for heterogeneity in individual characteristics.
Importantly, the sign and magnitude of the interaction between population and frequency is little a¤ected.

 Table E.7: Local outcome responses controlling for heterogeneity via income per capita
      Dependent variable:                                          county-sector log       county-sector log      county-sector log
                                                                     employment             establishments       employees per estab.
                                                                    (1)      (2)            (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)
      Log population                                             0.832***    1.236***    0.534***    0.790***    0.298***   0.446***
                                                                  (0.117)     (0.079)     (0.088)     (0.054)     (0.052)    (0.046)
      Log population     log frequency                           0.072**     0.063**     0.122***    0.118***    -0.050**   -0.055***
                                                                  (0.031)     (0.028)     (0.024)     (0.023)     (0.020)    (0.020)
      Log population     CEX expenditure share                    0.702*      0.622*     1.205***    1.143***    -0.503*     -0.521*
                                                                  (0.366)     (0.359)     (0.207)     (0.203)     (0.298)    (0.298)
      Log land area                                              0.184***     -0.026     0.161***      0.033      0.023     -0.059**
                                                                  (0.034)     (0.044)     (0.026)     (0.029)     (0.015)    (0.026)
      Log income per capita                                      2.610***    1.829***    2.263***    1.741***    0.348**      0.088
                                                                  (0.346)     (0.222)     (0.263)     (0.153)     (0.149)    (0.131)
      Log income per capita      log frequency                   -0.770***   -0.757***   -0.676***   -0.670***   -0.094*     -0.087
                                                                  (0.084)     (0.079)     (0.069)     (0.065)     (0.054)    (0.054)
      Log income      CEX expenditure share                       -1.837*     -1.594     -3.215***   -3.015***    1.378*     1.422*
                                                                  (1.003)     (0.978)     (0.582)     (0.563)     (0.814)    (0.814)
      Sector-Year Fixed E¤ects                                     Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
      State-Year Fixed E¤ects                                      Yes          No         Yes          No         Yes         No
      Commuting Zone-Year Fixed E¤ects                              No         Yes          No         Yes         No         Yes
      R-square                                                    0.73        0.70        0.79        0.77        0.23       0.19
      N                                                          121,336     121,336     121,336     121,336     121,336    121,336
      S.W. F stat: Log population                                  25.25       28.65       25.25       28.65      25.25       28.65
      S.W. F stat: Log population        log frequency             24.54        23.6       24.54        23.6      24.54        23.6
      S.W. F stat: Log population        CEX expenditure share     27.69       21.37       27.69       21.37      27.69       21.37
                                     Standard errors clustered at county level in parentheses.
                                                  * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01



   In Table E.8, we directly examine the role of density, again on log employment (columns (1) and (2)),
log establishment density (columns (3) and (4)), and log employees per establishment (columns (5) and

                                                                    68
(6)). The structure of the table mimics the one of Table E.7. The main regressors now include log income
per capita, log density (computed as log population less log land area), an interaction of log density with
log frequency, and the main object of our analysis, log population times log frequency. We now have …ve
endogenous variables: log density, its interaction with log frequency and CEX expenditure share, and the
interaction of population with frequency and CEX expenditure share: as instruments, we use the county
composition of consolidated and semi-consolidated aquifers (…rst set of instrument), their interaction with
frequency and CEX share (second and third set of instruments), and their interaction with county land
size times frequency, or times CEX shares (fourth and …fth set of instruments). These regressions are
essentially “…xing” a density level and compare, say, a small sprawling place to a large sprawling place.
We …nd that, controlling for density, an increase in population is signi…cantly associated to a larger
employment increase in high-frequency sectors than in low-frequency sectors. The point estimate of the
interaction e¤ect is much larger. The reason can be traced to the interaction of density and frequency.
We …nd that as we increase density, employment in high-frequency sectors falls relative to employment
in low-frequency sectors. This is consistent with our results in Figure 5 in the main text, that shows
that adding denser counties to the estimation sample tends to pull the interaction coe¢ cient down and
towards zero.

                            Table E.8: Local outcome responses controlling for density
      Dependent variable:                                            county-sector log       county-sector log       county-sector log
                                                                       employment             establishments       employees per estab.
                                                                      (1)      (2)            (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)
      Log density                                                   0.373***   0.668***    0.230***    0.417***    0.143***    0.250***
                                                                     (0.114)    (0.088)     (0.087)     (0.067)     (0.039)     (0.037)
      Log density         log frequency                            -0.272***   -0.268***   -0.171***   -0.162***   -0.101***   -0.107***
                                                                     (0.042)    (0.034)     (0.032)     (0.025)     (0.015)     (0.014)
      Log density         CEX expenditure share                    -1.347***   -1.352***   -0.955***   -0.931***   -0.392***   -0.421***
                                                                     (0.269)    (0.226)     (0.194)     (0.159)     (0.129)     (0.122)
      Log population           log frequency                        0.611***   0.582***    0.449***    0.415***    0.162***    0.167***
                                                                     (0.037)    (0.041)     (0.027)     (0.028)     (0.019)     (0.021)
      Log population           CEX expenditure share                3.897***   3.757***    3.472***    3.289***      0.425       0.468
                                                                     (0.441)    (0.441)     (0.252)     (0.263)     (0.303)     (0.300)
      Log income per capita                                         1.936***   1.608***    1.586***    1.395***    0.349***    0.213**
                                                                     (0.306)    (0.235)     (0.232)     (0.182)     (0.115)     (0.108)
      Sector-Year Fixed E¤ects                                        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
      State-Year Fixed E¤ects                                         Yes         No          Yes         No         Yes          No
      Commuting Zone-Year Fixed E¤ects                                No         Yes          No         Yes          No         Yes
      R-square                                                       0.65       0.60        0.70        0.66        0.20         0.17
      N                                                             121,336    121,336     121,336     121,336     121,336     121,336
      S.W.   F   stat:   Log   density                                27.84      34.79       27.84       34.79       27.84       34.79
      S.W.   F   stat:   Log   density log frequency                 314.34     294.45      314.34      294.45      314.34      294.45
      S.W.   F   stat:   Log   density CEX expenditure share         231.95     224.27      231.95      224.27      231.95      224.27
      S.W.   F   stat:   Log   population log frequency               13.58      18.25       13.58      18.25        13.58       18.25
      S.W.   F   stat:   Log   population CEX expenditure share       16.57      20.02      16.57       20.02       16.57       20.02
                                           Standard errors clustered at county level in parentheses.
                                                       * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01




                                                                        69
E.4    Controlling for …xed costs
In this section we control for the interaction between a measure of …xed costs and frequency of transactions.
A reasonable proxy is the economy-wide ratio of total employment to total establishments in a sector-year,
i.e., the average establishment size: if …xed costs are high, increasing returns to scale tend to be important,
and we should expect a higher employees-to-establishment ratio. In what follows, we will refer to this ratio
simply as “…xed costs”. We compute this ratio as the simple average of the employees per establishment
in 1998 and 2007, our two sample years. Table E.9 replicates the most conservative speci…cations in
columns (5) and (6) for Tables 6-8: all the unreported columns behave similarly. Columns (1) and (2)
replicate Table 6, where the dependent variable is employment. The coe¢ cient on the interaction between
frequency and population stays positive and of very similar magnitude. Moreover, in response to larger
population, sectoral employment does not seem to change di¤erentially as a function of …xed costs. The
remaining 4 columns look at the margins of these changes: columns (3) and (4) replicate columns (5) and
(6) of Table 7, where the dependent variable is the log number of establishments; columns (5) and (6)
replicate the last two columns of Table 8, which consider employees per store. We …nd that controlling for
…xed costs tilt these interactions slightly towards zero; the interaction with …xed costs are not estimated to
be signi…cant per se. Overall, we read these results as further evidence that consumers’mobility impacts
local economic outcomes.

                          Table E.9: Local outcome responses controlling for …xed costs
      Dependent variable:                                                              county-sector log     county-sector log     county-sector log
                                                                                         employment           establishments      employees per estab.
                                                                                        (1)      (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
      Log population                                                                  0.709***   1.121***   0.493***   0.758***   0.216**   0.362***
                                                                                       (0.128)    (0.118)    (0.131)    (0.097)   (0.084)    (0.100)
      Log population           log frequency                                          0.091**    0.077**    0.110***   0.102***   -0.019     -0.026
                                                                                       (0.041)    (0.038)    (0.031)    (0.029)   (0.023)    (0.023)
      Log population           CEX expenditure share                                   0.765*     0.677     1.392***   1.321***   -0.627*    -0.644*
                                                                                       (0.458)    (0.443)    (0.263)    (0.256)   (0.365)    (0.363)
      Log population           log avg. employees per establishment                    0.038      0.036      0.015      0.012      0.022      0.024
                                                                                       (0.032)    (0.031)    (0.023)    (0.023)   (0.034)    (0.034)
      Log land area                                                                   0.183***    -0.024    0.161***    0.036      0.023    -0.060**
                                                                                       (0.034)    (0.043)    (0.026)    (0.028)   (0.015)    (0.026)
      Log income per capita                                                           1.766***   1.013***   1.444***   0.945***   0.323**     0.068
                                                                                       (0.294)    (0.202)    (0.216)    (0.133)   (0.125)    (0.118)
      Sector-Year Fixed E¤ects                                                          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes
      State-Year Fixed E¤ects                                                           Yes        No         Yes        No        Yes         No
      Commuting Zone-Year Fixed E¤ects                                                  No         Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes
      R-square                                                                         0.73       0.69       0.78        0.76      0.23       0.20
      N                                                                               121,336    121,336    121,336    121,336    121,336    121,336
      S.W.   F   stat:   Log   population                                              19.07      24.57      19.07      24.57      19.07      24.57
      S.W.   F   stat:   Log   population      log frequency                           23.24      24.46      23.24      24.46      23.24      24.46
      S.W.   F   stat:   Log   population      CEX expenditure share                   21.41      22.62      21.41      22.62      21.41      22.62
      S.W.   F   stat:   Log   population      log avg. employees per establishment    23.42      23.05      23.42      23.05      23.42      23.05
                                                Standard errors clustered at county level in parentheses.
                                                             * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01




                                                                                 70
