NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES IT MATTER HOW AND HOW MUCH POLITICIANS ARE PAID?
Duha T. Altindag
Elif S. Filiz
Erdal Tekin
Working Paper 23613
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23613

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2017

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Duha T. Altindag, Elif S. Filiz, and Erdal Tekin. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does It Matter How and How Much Politicians are Paid?
Duha T. Altindag, Elif S. Filiz, and Erdal Tekin
NBER Working Paper No. 23613
July 2017
JEL No. J22,J26,J33,J45
ABSTRACT
An important question in representative democracies is how to ensure that politicians behave in
the best interest of citizens rather than their own private interests. Aside from elections, one of the
few institutional devices available to regulate the actions of politicians is their pay structure. In
this paper, we provide fresh insights into the impact of politician salaries on their performance
using a unique law change implemented in 2012 in Turkey. Specifically, the members of the
parliament (MPs) in Turkey who are retired from their pre-political career jobs earn a pension
bonus on top of their MP salaries. The law change in 2012 significantly increased the pension
bonus by pegging it to 18 percent of the salary of the President of Turkey, while keeping the
salaries of non-retired MPs unchanged. By exploiting the variation in total salaries caused by the
new law in a difference-in-differences framework, we find that the salary increase had a negative
impact on the performance of the retired MPs. In particular, the overall performance of these MPs
was lowered by 12.3 percent of a standard deviation as a result of the increase in salary caused by
the new law. This finding is robust to numerous specification tests. Furthermore, results obtained
from an auxiliary analysis suggest that one of the mechanisms through which MPs reduce their
performance is absenteeism.
Duha T. Altindag
Auburn University
Department of Economics
0334 Haley Center
Auburn AL, 36849
altindag@auburn.edu
Elif S. Filiz
Department of Political Science,
International Development & International Affairs
Liberal Arts Building 425,
University of Southern Mississippi
Hattiesburg, MS 39406
Elif.Filiz@usm.edu

Erdal Tekin
School of Public Affairs
American University
4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20016-8070
and IZA
and also NBER
tekin@american.edu

1. Introduction
Members of the parliament (MPs) play a fundamental role in representative democracies.
They are the political actors who hold the powers of sovereignty delegated to them by citizens and
are expected to use these powers for the benefit of the citizens whom they represent. However, the
tools that are available to ensure that MPs act in the best interest of their constituents rather than
pursuing their own private interests are limited. In most democracies, regular elections are the
primary and often the only mechanism for citizens to hold MPs accountable for their performance
by enabling the removal of those who are under-performing. 1 Of fundamental interest in this
context is the understanding of the factors that determine the willingness of MPs to conduct their
political activities in a way that is expected of them by their voters. One institutional factor that is
likely to affect the performance of MPs is their pay. Theoretically, the question of whether a higher
pay would lead MPs to perform better is ambiguous. On the one hand, a higher pay can attract
better-skilled MPs, who can also perform better for the benefit of citizens. A higher pay can also
compel the existing MPs to run for re-election, which may then induce them to work harder on
behalf of their constituents (e.g., Caselli and Morelli 2004; Besley 2004). On the other hand, if
high-ability individuals are driven into politics because they are intrinsically motivated to serve
the public, then a higher pay could lower the average quality of those who seek office (e.g., Besley
2004; Kotakorpi and Poutvaara 2011; Gagliarducci et al. 2013; Mattozzi and Merlo 2008).
The empirical investigations of the impact of politician pay on performance have equally
produced mixed results. For example, Ferraz and Finan (2009) and Gagliarducci and Nannicini
(2013) study the impact of wages on the performance of local legislators in Brazil and mayors in

1

Specifically, retrospective voting is suggested as a tool for disciplining politicians (e.g., Barro 1973; Persson et al.
1997). Several studies test this hypothesis by estimating the impact of past macroeconomic conditions on the votes
captured by incumbent politicians. These studies provide varying degrees of support for the idea of retrospective
voting as an effective tool to improve performance (for example, see Brender and Drazen 2008 and Fair 1978).

2

Italy, respectively, by using a regression discontinuity design that exploits sharp changes in wages.
Both papers find a positive impact of a wage increase on the quality and the performance of elected
officials. Kotakorpi and Poutvaara (2011) examine the impact of an increase in the salaries of MPs
in Finland on their quality proxied by their education. This study too employs a difference-indifferences research design, in which the authors use candidates in municipal elections as a control
group. The paper finds that higher salary increases the fraction of candidates with higher education,
but only among females. In a study of the impact of salary on U.S. state legislators and governors,
Hoffman and Lyons (2013) find no evidence that a higher salary influences legislative productivity
using a spatial discontinuity design.
Most recently, Braendle (2015), Fisman et al. (2015), and Mocan and Altindag (2013)
examine the impact of politician salary on their behavior including work effort, drawing on the
same source of identification, i.e., a law change that generated wide variation in the salaries of the
Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) from 27 member states. Despite using the same
institutional context and the same identification strategy, these studies also appear to differ in their
findings. For example, Mocan and Altindag (2013) show that the salary increase led to a rise in
absenteeism. However, their evidence on performance was rather mixed with the findings of a
negative impact on the number of questions posed by MEPs and no impact on other work effort
measures, including the number of speeches delivered, motions filed, and reports written. Braendle
(2015) documents that while the salary increase had a positive impact on effort proxied by the
number of speeches, written declarations, and reports drafted, it also increased absenteeism.
Finally, Fisman et al. (2015) find no discernable impact of the salary increase on a composite
performance measure derived from individual measures of questions, motions for resolutions,
reports, written declarations, and speeches in plenary. While Fisman et al. (2015) show that

3

average quality measured by education was reduced as a result of the salary reform, Braendle
(2015) finds that it remained unchanged.
In this paper, we provide a fresh contribution to the growing literature on the impact of
salary on the productivity and quality of politicians. In particular, we examine the impact of
salaries of MPs on their performance in Turkey exploiting an arguably exogenous variation in
salaries caused by a new law implemented in 2012. In addition to earning a base salary, Turkish
MPs who are retired from the jobs that they held prior to becoming an elected official can collect
a bonus, which is equal to their retirement pension.2 Note that MPs earn their salaries including
the bonuses regardless of their performance and participation in the parliamentary sessions. While
the main salary portion of compensation for MPs is contingent upon being an MP, the bonus
portion tied to retirement represents a permanent income that the retired MPs collect for the rest
of their lives. Before January 2012, the retirement pension of an MP was no different from an
otherwise similar worker who was not an MP. The retirement pensions, and therefore the bonuses
earned by the retired MPs, were about 5,000 TL/month in 2011. In January 2012, the Turkish
Parliament enacted Law No. 6270, which pegged the pensions of the retired MPs to 18 percent of
the salary of the President of Turkey.3 As a result, the bonus, and therefore the total salaries, earned
by the retired MPs have increased significantly, while the salaries of non-retired MPs have
remained the same. It is this variation in the total compensation between retired and non-retired
MPs generated by the law change that we exploit in a difference-in-differences framework to study

2

In 2011, this base salary was about 9,200 TL (Turkish Lira) per month, which was equivalent to about $5,500 using
the average exchange rate of 1.67 TL/$ in 2011).
3
The Law No. 6262 introduced on December 23rd, 2011 increased the salaries of retired MP from 42 percent of the
President’s salary to 60 percent until 2020. However, the President vetoed the law and sent it back to the parliament
for re-discussion. After further discussion, on January 17th, 2012, the parliament approved the change to be 45 percent
of the 40 percent of the President’s salary until a further regulation is proposed, which is equivalent to the 18 percent
of the salary of the President of Turkey.

4

the impact of salary on the performance of MPs.4 To implement our analysis, we use monthly data
on several performance measures of all Turkish MPs who served in the parliament between 2007
and 2015. Note that we do not observe in our data whether an MP who is retirement eligible is
actually retired from his/her pre-MP job. Therefore, we obtain reduced form estimates of the
impact of salary increase on the performance of retirement eligible MPs, which essentially
amounts to estimating intent-to-treat effects. We provide more detail on the implications of this
assumption for our analysis in the discussion of our results later. Throughout the paper, we use
“retired” and “retirement eligible” interchangeably.
There are several factors that motivate our study. Despite a number of recent investigations
relying on credible identification strategies, the lack of an agreement in the literature regarding the
impact of politician pay on performance can be regarded as a call for additional research on the
subject. But even if there were a consensus in the literature, it is not clear whether the evidence
obtained from one particular context can serve as a reliable guide for the implications of salary
changes in other settings due to a variety of factors, including institutional, legislative, and
economic differences across countries. In fact, one of the questions raised by the aforementioned
studies is the extent to which their findings could carry over to other countries and other levels of
government.5 Relatedly, all of the published studies focus on contexts from developed countries
such as the U.S., Italy, Finland, and other European Union states. To our knowledge, with the
exception of a working paper, i.e., Ferraz and Finan (2009), which focuses on Brazil, there are no
investigations focused on developing countries, at least, using a credible identification strategy. It

4

In our difference-in-differences design, the treatment (control) group consists of retired (non-retired) MPs. Note that
we observe within-MP variation in the retirement eligibility over time. This is because some MPs complete the age
and work requirements for retirement while they are serving as an MP.
5
For example, this is explicitly stated as a suggested goal for future research in Fisman et al. (2015) (see page 903).

5

is also important to emphasize that Ferraz and Finan (2009) consider the behavior of local
legislators, while we examine the performance of politicians at the national level in this paper.
There are also other differences that set our analysis apart from the existing studies. For
example, we use relatively high-frequency longitudinal data at the monthly level that covers a
period of nine years with a large sample size and significant variation in MP measures that capture
performance.6 Importantly, because the law change affected only the bonus portion of the total
salaries of retired MPs, the rise in salary in our context is akin to an increase in non-labor income,
which is expected to reduce labor supply. Moreover, the additional bonus paid to retired MPs
represents a permanent income that they would earn for the rest of their lives as opposed to a
typical salary increase, which can only be collected until the individual ceases to serve as an MP.
This is a difference between our analysis and the rest of the literature with potentially important
implications. For instance, in contrast to previous studies, there is no compelling reason for retired
MPs to re-run for office caused by the law change in our setting since the bonus is not tied to being
an MP. Therefore, unlike previous studies, the additional pay that MPs earn does not play an
efficiency wage role in our context. Accordingly, we are able to control for any change in
performance that may be attributable to the MPs’ willingness to re-run for office. Finally, in
addition to using previously utilized measures of performance including the number of speeches,
motions, drafting law proposals, we employ an additional measure defined by the number of words
spoken by MPs in speeches on the parliament floor, which is positively correlated with other
measures of effort and highly responsive to the law change of 2012. Similar to Dal Bo and Rossi
(2011) and Fisman et al. (2015), our main outcome of performance is a composite measure derived
by the sum of normalized measures of individual proxies of work effort.

We observe performance of all of the 550 MPs in both (the 23rd term spanning 2007-2011 and the 24th term spanning
2011-2015) parliamentary terms.

6

6

We find that the salary increase caused by the law change led to a significant reduction in
the overall performance of Turkish MPs. According to our estimates, the composite performance
of MPs decreased by 12.3 percent of a standard deviation as a result of the law change. The results
on the individual measures of performance also corroborate this finding. In particular, all four
estimates are negative and, with the exception of motions, statistically significant, pointing to a
negative causal relationship between salary and performance. Our results are robust to a large
number of sensitivity checks. Furthermore, the results obtained from an auxiliary analysis show
that one of the mechanisms through which MPs reduce their performance is absenteeism. Finally,
with the exception of freshman status, the pattern between salary and performance we obtain in
our analysis is not influenced by characteristics of MPs including gender, education, rank, voting
in favor or against the law change that led to the salary increase, and being a member of the ruling
Justice and Development Party, also known as AKP. The retired MPs who are serving their initial
term in the parliament do not appear to be responsive to the salary increase, possibly due to lack
of experience or being under closer public scrutiny. Our results can be explained within a labor
supply framework that models the trade-off between leisure and consumption. In this framework,
if MPs allocate their limited time to working (participating in the parliamentary discussions or
other legislative activities) and other activities (leisure), then a permanent increase in non-labor
income would result in a decrease in parliamentary activities.
The rest of our paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a description of the
institutional setting. Section 3 introduces the data, and Section 4 describes the empirical strategy.
Section 5 presents our results, and Section 6 concludes the paper.

7

2. Institutional Setting
2.1. Salaries of MPs
MPs in the Turkish Parliament collect a monthly earning equal to the salary of the highest
ranked civil servant, i.e., the Undersecretary of the Prime Minister’s Office, whose compensation
is adjusted upwards periodically. 7 At the beginning of the 23rd parliamentary term in June 2007,
MPs earned a base salary of approximately 7,000 Turkish Liras (TL), which is equivalent to
$5,400.8 The MP salaries were increased to 9,250 TL in December 2011 and again to 15,250 TL
in April 2015.
An MP who is retired from the workforce earns a retirement pension in addition to his/her
base salary. The amount of the pension is determined by the MP’s salary at the last job he/she held
before retirement, tenure in that job, and his/her age. These pensions were approximately 3,700
TL in June 2007, and were increased to about 5,000 TL in December 2011. A law enacted in
January 2012 altered the pensions of the retired MPs. Specifically, starting in January 2012, a
retired MP began earning, in addition to their base salary, a bonus equal to 18 percent of the salary
of the President of Turkey.9 The motivation behind the law change was to eliminate the inequalities
in retirement benefits among MPs. Since MPs come from a wide variety of professional
backgrounds, the retirement benefits associated with these professions also varied widely for those
MPs who were retired from their pre-MP jobs. This variation is eliminated with the law enacted in

7

The MP salary is regulated by Pension Fund Law No. 5434 for the MPs started serving before 10/15/2008 and by
the Social Security Law No. 5510 for the MPs serving thereafter.
8
During our sample period 2007-2015, the exchange rate (TL per dollar) gradually increased from 1.3 (in 2007) and
2.7 (in 2015). The exchange rates in 2007, 2011 and 2015 were 1.3, 1.7 and 2.7, respectively. The average exchange
rate in our sample period is 1.8 TL/$.
9
In 2012, the President’s monthly salary was 33,500 TL. As a result, starting in January 2012, retired MPs earned a
bonus of 6,030 TL per month in addition to their monthly base salaries. By 2015, the monthly salary of the President
increased to 43,750 TL, raising the bonus to about 8,000 TL.

8

January 2012. While eliminating this inequality, the MPs who participated in the voting also took
the opportunity to raise the level of pension bonus significantly (Arici 2013).
The change in the bonuses of the retired MPs is not trivial. Specifically, the difference in
monthly earnings between the retired versus non-retired MPs is about 2,500 TL (in real terms) in
December 2011. This difference corresponds to approximately 50 percent of the earnings of the
non-retired MPs. In January 2012, when the retired MPs’ bonus is increased, the difference
between retired and non-retired MPs increases to 3,000 TL, 60 percent of the monthly pay of nonretired MPs. Put differently, because of the law change in January 2012, retired MPs experienced
a positive shock to their overall salaries. Figure 1 summarizes the sharp increase in the monthly
earnings of retired MPs. Specifically, in Figure 1 we depict the difference in monthly pays (in real
terms) of retired versus non-retired MPs over our sample period. The vertical line represents
January 2012, the month in which bonuses of the retired MPs increase due to the law change. As
evident in Figure 1, retired MPs began earning a much greater salary compared to their non-retired
counterparts starting with January 2012.

2.2. The Laws that Determine Retirement Eligibility
Currently, the rules and regulations determining eligibility for retirement for Turkish
workers are governed by Law No. 5434. According to this law, individuals who reach a certain
age and have worked (and paid retirement contributions) for a certain number of years are eligible
for retirement. The conditions for age and years of service have changed over the years. More
specifically, individuals face different age and years of service requirements depending on whether
they started working before September 1999, between September 1999 and April 2008, and after
April 2008.

9

Among those who started working before September 1999, a fe(male) worker can retire
when s(he) completes the age of 38 (43) and works for a total of 20 (25) years. There are two
exceptions to this rule. First, a fe(male) worker who is over 50 years of age as of May 1999 can
retire when s/he completes 60 years of age and a total of 10 years of work. The second exception
is due to a change in the law in 2002. According to this change, a fe(male) worker can retire when
s(he) completes 20 (25) years of work and reach a certain age ranging between 40 and 58 (44 and
60) depending on the number of years s(he) worked as of May 2002. If a worker started working
between September 1999 and April 2008, in order to retire, s(he) must (i) be older than 58 (60)
years old, and (ii) have completed 25 years of work. Alternatively, a fe(male) worker who complete
15 years of work can retire if s(he) is 61 years old or older. Alternatively, a worker who complete
15 years of work can retire after reaching age 61. Finally, the workers who start working after
April 2008 can retire when they are older than 65 and when they complete 25 years of work,
regardless of their gender.

3. Data
Our analysis period covers the parliamentary terms of 23 (2007-2011) and 24 (2011-2015).
Our measure of legislative performance or productivity is derived from four parliamentary
activities on MPs including (i) Speeches (the number of times MPs participated in parliamentary
discussions), (ii) Words (the number of words spoken in the speeches delivered by MPs)10, (iii)
Motions (the number of proposals for inquiry, or assembly to discuss or investigate certain issues
in the parliament submitted by MPs), and (iv) Law drafts (the number of law drafts sponsored or
co-sponsored by MPs). We compile Speeches and Words from an official publication called the

10

Regarding the number of words delivered by MPs, all speeches during parliamentary sessions are recorded by the
stenographers according to the guidelines outlined in the Manual of Minute Writing.

10

Journal of Minutes of the Turkish Parliament (JoM). Motions and Law drafts are obtained from
the personal profiles of the MPs in the parliament website. Following Dal Bo and Rossi (2011)
and Fisman et al. (2015), we normalize each of these four measures by subtracting the mean and
dividing by the standard deviation and create a composite measure of legislative effort defined by
the sum of standardized values of the four individual outcomes (Performance).
Our variable of interest, Retired, is an indicator for whether an MP is eligible for retirement.
We construct this variable based on the information on personal characteristics of the MPs derived
from their profiles on the Turkish Parliament website and the requirements for retirement
eligibility that are determined by law (Law No. 5434).11 Specifically, an individual must have
reached a certain age and met certain years of work in order to be eligible for retirement. There are
several changes in the retirement law over the years.12 One factor determining retirement eligibility
is the date at which an individual starts working. Unfortunately, we do not have this information
in our data. Instead, we impute work-start date by using the birthday of MPs and their education,
and assuming that they start working immediately after obtaining their terminal degree.13
We control for several time-varying characteristics of the MPs in our empirical analysis,
including age measured in months, a binary indicator for whether the MP is also a member of the
cabinet, rank of the MP on their party’s ticket, and the share of votes the MP’s party obtained in
the most recent elections in the election district that MP is representing.14 In a supplementary

11

https://www.tbmm.gov.tr/develop/owa/milletvekillerimiz_sd.liste.
See section 2.2 for the details.
13
As an example, consider an hypothetical MP, who is a male, was born in 1967, and has a college degree. Assume
that this MP starts school in 1974 (in the calendar year he turns age seven), and remains in school for 15 years since
a typical college degree takes 15 years of schooling. In 1989, he graduates from college, and we assume that he
immediately starts working. Because thois MP starts working before 1999, he is eligible for retirement when he
completes 25 years of work and be older than 43. That is, this MP can retire in 2014 after which he will earn a salary
bonus. We determine the retirement eligibility for each MP in our sample using his age, education and the approprite
algorithm.
14
In Turkish elections, several political parties compete for multiple seats in 81 provinces. Prior to an election, all
parties nominate their candidates for each province. For example, if a province is represented by N seats in the
12

11

analysis, we examine whether the impact of salary increase on performance is affected by several
observable characteristics of the MPs by estimating our models separately by gender, freshman
status, education, and rank.
The summary statistics and basic descriptions of the variables used in the analysis are
presented in Table 1. On average, an MP submits about 2 motions, co-signs 0.3 law proposals,
gives 6.5 speeches in which he/she delivers about 633 words every month.15 Approximately 72
percent of MPs are retirement-eligible (or retired) over our sample period. The average age of MPs
in our sample is 631 months or approximately 53 years. About 12 percent of the MPs in our sample
are female, and 35 percent hold a graduate degree.
In Table 2, we present outcome means by retirement status and between pre- and post-2012
periods. As shown in the table, the average performance measures among the retired MPs appear
to be lower than those of non-retired MPs. Moreover, this pattern appears to hold for both the pre2012 and post-2012 periods. What is more interesting in Table 2 is the information revealed by a
comparison between columns 3 and 6, which gives us a sense of the differences in the performance
measures between retired and non-retired MPs from pre- to post-treatment periods. As shown in
column 7, these raw difference-in-differences measures are negative for all four outcome variables
and statistically significant for the composite legislative effort (Performance), Speeches, Words,
and Law Drafts.

Parliament, each party nominates N candidates for that province. We refer to this list of candidates as the party’s
ticket. Parties additionally announce the ranking of their candidates on their ticket within each province. Candidates
are elected in the order of the rank in which they are nominated. For example, a first ranked candidate is elected before
their second-ranked party mate. Therefore, the rank of an MP in the ticket within a province is one of the most
important determinants of winning the election and therefore becoming a MP. Rank may also capture other
characteristics of the MP. For example, MPs who are in the party leadership, MPs who are more influential within the
party or those who are more loyal to the party’s cause are also more likely to be ranked higher. This information is
obtained from the Official Gazette (Resmi Gazete).
15
In order to guard against the potentially confounding impact of outliers, we exclude the observations where the
number of performance measures is above the 99th percentile of the distribution. That being said, our results are not
sensitive to the exclusion of these observations.

12

In addition to the descriptive evidence presented in Table 2, we further motivate our
analysis with a set of visual exercises, in which we illustrate the trends in our performance
outcomes over time separately for the treatment and control groups. In Figure 2, we display the
smoothed monthly averages of MPs’ composite legislative effort separately by periods leading up
and following January 2012. As shown in the figure, the measure of composite legislative effort
between retired and non-retired MPs overlap fairly closely up until around January 2012 and
deviate from each other afterwards with a clear decline in the effort of retired MPs relative to their
non-retired counterparts. As shown in Figure 3, similar patterns are observed for individual
measures of performance, most notably for Speeches, Words, and Law drafts and to a lesser extent
for Motions. While the statistics in Table 2 along with the patterns presented in Figures 2 and 3
are indicative of a causal relationship between the law change of January 2012 and the MP
performance, we next turn to the description of our formal empirical strategy that essentially
adjusts the raw difference-in-differences estimates by accounting for any permanent and timevariant differences in a multivariate regression framework.

4. Empirical Strategy
Our approach to obtaining the impact of salary increase caused by the 2012 law change on
the performance of MPs is to implement a difference-in-differences estimation method, taking
advantage of the fact the law only affected the salaries of retirement eligible MPs. Specifically, the
treatment group consists of the MPs who are retirement eligible, and the MPs who are not eligible
for retirement form our control group. To operationalize our empirical strategy, we estimate an
equation expressed in the following form:

13

(1)

!"#$%#&'()"*+,- = /0 + 2 /3 4"56#"7*+,- + /8 4"56#"7*+,- ×!%:52012,- +

>*+,- /? + @* + !+ + A, + "- + 2 B*+,- ,
where !"#$%#&'()"*+,- represents our measure of composite performance for MP 6 who
represents legislative district 7 in a month & and year t. The indicator Retiredidmt takes on the value
of one if the MP is eligible for retirement, and zero otherwise. Note that this variable switches
from zero to one for some MPs as they become eligible for retirement during the analysis period.
!%:52012mt indicates the post-treatment period. It is equal to zero for all month-year observations
prior to January 2012 and one starting with January 2012. 16 The vector Xidmt includes several timevarying MP characteristics that are likely to serve as determinants of performance including age
in months, rank of the MP on his/her party’s ticket as well as the share of votes MP’s party acquired
in the most recent general election, and an indicator variable for whether the MP is a member of
the cabinet. To the extent that these variables are uncorrelated with the law change in 2012,
inclusion of them in equation (1) should only serve to reduce the sampling variation in the error
term. The @* represents MP fixed effects that would account for any permanent differences across
MPs. While most MPs are nominated from the same legislative district between elections, there
are some MPs who switch jurisdictions. To capture any tendencies on the part of retired MPs to
switch to districts that are safer in terms of their chances of getting re-elected in the post 2012
period, we also include district fixed effects in equation (1), which are denoted by !+ .17 The A,
and "- are month and year fixed effects, respectively, which would capture seasonal effects due to

The law that increased the retirement pensions of the MPs became effective on January 17th, 2012. Our results are
robust to coding the month of January 2012 as part of pre-treatment period.
17
There are 85 election districts, which represent the 81 provinces of Turkey (Istanbul is divided into three electoral
districts whereas Ankara and İzmir are divided into two each because of their large populations, and accordingly the
large number of parliamentary seats that represent them).
16

14

legislative holidays, annual budget discussions, or other idiosyncratic national or international
developments that may require MPs to deviate from their usual levels of engagement. Finally, the
B*+,- 2is the random error term. The unit of observation in equation (1) is MP-month-year. The
parameter of interest is the coefficient of the interaction between Retiredidmt and !%:52012mt, /8 ,
which represents the difference-in-differences estimate. The standard errors in equation (1) are
clustered at the MP level.

5. Results
Table 3 presents the difference-in-differences estimates for the impact of salary increase
on the composite measure of MP performance obtained from the estimation of equation (1) over
the period of 2007-2015. Recall that Retired indicates whether the MP is retirement eligible
(treatment group), and Post2012 stands for the post-treatment period (January 2012 or later when
the Retired MPs receive a salary bonus). The interaction term, Retired×Post2012, presents the
difference-in-differences estimate. In other words, the coefficient of the interaction term reveals
the differential change in the performance of MPs who are retired vs. those who are not retired
before and after January 2012.
In column (1) of Table 3, we present estimates from a specification that includes only the
indicator of Retired, and its interaction with the Post2012 dummy along with month and year fixed
effects. The point estimate on the interaction term between Retired and Post2012 variables is 0.182, which is statistically significant at the 10 percent level. As shown in column (2), the
difference-in-differences estimate is robust to controlling for differences across legislative
districts. However, the estimate on the interaction term becomes larger in absolute value and more
precisely estimated when we account for permanent differences across MPs by controlling for MP

15

fixed effects in column (3). Given that the standard deviation of the composite legislative
performance is 2.5 in the full sample, the point estimate of -0.338 indicates that the exogenous
salary increase triggered by the law change in January 2012 caused the overall legislative
performance to decrease by about 13.5 percent of a standard deviation. Finally, column (4) presents
estimates from our most comprehensive specification, which, in addition to the fixed effects in the
first three columns, includes several time-variant MP characteristics. The point estimate on the
interaction term remains robust to controlling for these characteristics. This is not surprising since
these characteristics are unlikely to be correlated in any meaningful way with the salary increase
associated with the law change in 2012, especially after accounting for permanent differences
between MPs. According to the point estimate in column (4), the 2012 law change caused the
overall legislative performance to go down by 12.3 percent of a standard deviation. Note that the
estimate on the indicator of Retired is negative, suggesting that retired MPs exert less effort in
general compared to their non-retired counterparts, though the estimate is small in magnitude and
statistically insignificant in all four specifications.
With respect to the estimates on other variables, age, rank, and being a cabinet member,
all appear to have a positive influence on performance, although only the coefficients on age and
cabinet member are estimated with statistical precision. This pattern is not surprising since older
MPs are likely to be more experienced, and therefore more likely to hold additional roles in the
parliament, such as memberships in legislative committees and specific policy commissions,
which might require them to exert additional effort. Similarly, MPs who are members of the
cabinet are required to perform various additional duties as top leaders of the executive branch
while also serving as sitting legislators.

16

Note that the causal interpretation of the difference-in-differences estimates presented in
Table 3 hinges on the “parallel trends” assumption, i.e., the performances of retired and non-retired
MPs would have trended in a parallel fashion in the absence of the law change in January 2012. A
simple test for this assumption can be done by performing an event-study analysis (e.g., Cesur et
al. 2017a, 2017b; Hoynes 2015). The event-study analysis would allow us to trace out the trends
in performance levels separately for retired and non-retired MPs, for the periods leading up to and
following the point of the law change that led to an increase in the salaries of retired MPs.
Formally, one way to implement this analysis is to augment equation (1) to allow the treatment to
have an impact in the years prior to the law change. If these placebo effects are statistically
significant, particularly in the year before the law change, then we would worry that the “parallel
trends” assumption fails and that the estimates in Table 3 might be spuriously driven by changes
in pre-existing differences in performances between retired and non-retired MPs. The results from
the event-study analysis are most clearly presented graphically, so we plot the estimates on the
interaction variable between year indicators and Retired for each period along with their 95 percent
confidence intervals in Figure 4. As illustrated in the figure, the estimates representing the periods
prior to the law change are all statistically insignificant, suggesting no apparent evidence of any
differences in pre-existing trends in performance levels between retired and non-retired MPs. But
there is a clear pattern of a statistically significant divergence in performance levels between the
two groups in the post-2012 period, which remains fairly constant after 2012. In particular, the
performance of retired MPs is lower in all years in the post-2012 period, and the effects become
larger in absolute value over time. Furthermore, the estimates are statistically significant in 2013
and afterwards.

17

One explanation for the gradual pattern in the decline of performance may have to do with
the fact that the treatment intensity is not constant, but rather increasing in the post-January 2012
period. In particular, the size of the retirement bonus earned by the retired MPs continues to
increase after the law change in January 2012 in parallel with the salary of the President of Turkey.
Additionally, it would not be surprising if some MPs may behave cautiously and do not reduce
their performance right away to avoid any backlash from their constituents or the party leadership.
Alternatively, ongoing commitments at parliamentary committees and commissions might
preclude them from changing their behavior immediately following the law change. These
explanations may also account for the small and insignificant decrease in performance in 2012
shown in Figure 4. Overall, we interpret the results from the event-study analysis as reassuring in
the sense that the estimates shown in Table 3 are likely to represent the causal effects of the 2012
law change on the performance of retired MPs.

5.1. Robustness Checks
The law, which raised the bonus earned by the retired MPs, Law No. 6270, was enacted
with 217 “yes” votes in the parliament. Of these yes votes, 216 were cast by the members of the
AKP. As the governing party, AKP controlled 327 of the 550 seats in the parliament at the time.
Only one member from one of the opposition parties voted in favor of this law. The remaining
members of the parliament either did not support the law or did not attend the parliamentary session
when the voting took place.18
Our results in the previous sections show that the performance of MPs during the meetings
of the parliament is reduced in response to the increased salary. One potential concern against the

18

In Turkish Parliament, a law is enacted if the majority of MPs who attend the session votes in favor of it. The
quorum for a session is one third of 550, the total number of seats in the Parliament.

18

reliability of this result could be the way in which those MPs who voted in favor have been
selected. For example, the MPs who voted in support of this law in the 24th parliamentary term
could be shirkers. Under this scenario, the negative relationship between salaries and performance
may be observed simply because those MPs who voted “yes” for the law would have reduced their
effort during the parliamentary sessions regardless of the outcome of the vote. To investigate this
possibility, we estimated whether the law has a differential impact over the MPs who voted yes
versus no. As shown columns (1) and (2) of Table 4, the estimate on the interaction term between
Retired and Post2012 are -0.212 among those who voted yes and -0.298 among those who voted
no to the law change. If anything, it appears like those who were opposed to the increase in the
bonus payment had a larger reduction in performance than those who supported the law, though
the difference between the two estimates is not statistically significant. In columns (3) and (4) of
Table 4, we present estimates separately between MPs affiliated with AKP and all opposition
parties. Again, the two estimates are very similar, suggesting no significant difference in the
reaction to the law change between the MPs of the ruling party versus the opposition parties. These
patterns are not surprising since any MP specific time-invariant attribute would be captured by MP
fixed effects. Taken together, the results obtained from this analysis suggest that the impact of the
2012 law change is similar for members of all parties, regardless of whether the law was supported
by their party or not.
Another potential threat to the validity of our results is the possibility that the salary reform
in 2012 might have changed the composition of the parliament in a way that is correlated with the
performance of MPs. For example, the anticipation of a substantial salary increase in the 24th
parliamentary term might have increased the willingness of retired MPs in the 23rd term to run for
re-election for another term. After all, the chance of an MP’s earning a bonus for the rest of his/her

19

life hinges upon getting re-elected for the 24th term. Note that this is slightly different from the
contexts considered in other studies, most notably, the one in Fisman et al. (2015), who find that
higher salaries increase the likelihood that the members of the European Parliament run for reelection. The law change in Turkey entails a permanent increase in part of the overall salaries of
retired MPs, i.e., these MPs would continue to earn the bonus without being subject to any
reduction and regardless of whether they are re-elected into the parliament or not. Therefore, it
could have only created an incentive to serve again among those incumbents who served in the
23rd parliamentary term and who would have become eligible for retirement by the beginning of
the 24th term. Otherwise, the law change could not have served as a pecuniary incentive to run for
re-election among MPs who are already retired MP in the 24th term. That being said, we have two
pieces of evidence to speak against the possibility of an increased motivation for re-election among
retired MPs in the Turkish context. First, the elections for the 24th parliamentary term were held in
June 2011, whereas the law change that led to an increase in the salaries of retired MPs took place
in January 2012. However, the political parties submitted the list of their candidates in April 2011.
Therefore, selection of this type would involve a foresight of policies eight months into the future,
which is unlikely.
Second, we estimate whether being retired in the 23rd term increased the probability of
running for re-election for the 24th term. That is, we limit our analysis to those MPs who served in
the 23rd parliamentary term and use as the outcome variable an indicator for whether the MP ran
for re-election for the 24th term. In the regression, we include an indicator for whether the MP is
retired as of the last month of the 23rd term in addition to the full set of control variables in Table
3 as well as several time-invariant characteristics of MPs including indicators for gender, having

20

a graduate degree, and party fixed effects.19 The results presented in column 1 of Table 5 show
that retired MPs’ probability of running for re-election for the 24th term is statistically no different
from that of the non-retired MPs. We also estimate whether retired MPs are more likely to be reelected to the 24th parliament conditional on running for election. The results of this regression are
presented in column 2 of Table 5. These estimates again reveal that retired and non-retired MPs
are equally likely to be re-elected once they run for re-election.
Another concern along similar lines is the possibility that the anticipation of an increase in
the pension bonus might have attracted some individuals who are retired or near retirement age to
enter into the competition to run for office for the 24th term. Such a change in the composition of
the MPs between 23rd and 24th terms would likely lower the average performance of MPs in the
24th term, especially if individuals with high ability and non-pecuniary motives self-select
themselves into politics, in which case higher salaries would lead to negative selection (Mattozzi
and Merlo 2008; Gagliarducci et al. 2010; Fisman et al. 2015). Although we control for MP fixed
effects in our models, this type of selection can still explain our results, at least partially, if the 24th
parliament has a large fraction of new MPs with low levels of performance. As we describe above,
the timing of the law change makes this type of an incentive highly unlikely. We provide two
additional pieces of evidence against this possibility. First, we directly compare the observable
attributes of the MPs in the 23rd term to those in the 24th term. We find that MPs in the 23rd term
are very similar to MPs in the 24th term. For example, we compare the number of months (during
the terms) in which MPs were retired in terms 23 and 24. There are no statistically significant
difference (p-value>0.10) between the two groups. Furthermore, other personal attributes such as
age, rank, membership in the cabinet and education are also similar between MPs in 23rd and 24th

19

Note that MP fixed effects cannot be included this regression.

21

terms. The only statistically significant compositional difference between terms 23 and 24 is the
number of female MPs which increased from 50 to 79. Later in the paper, we show that the
responsiveness of female MPs to the 2012 law is no different from that of the male MPs. Second,
we estimate our model in equation (1) over the subsamples of MPs who served in both the 23rd
and 24th terms and again to those who served in 24th term but not in the 23rd terms. As shown in
Table 6, the estimates on the interaction term between Retired and Post2012 are not only very
close to each other between columns (1) and (2), they are also nearly identical to our main estimate
of -0.308 in column (4) of Table 3. Based on this exercise, we can rule out the possibility of our
results driven by a change in the composition of MPs between the 23rd and 24th terms.

5.2. Extensions
5.2.1. Individual Components of Composite Performance
As described in Section 4, our outcome measure of performance is based on the
standardized values of Speeches, Words, Motions, and Law Drafts by each MP. The justification
behind constructing a composite measure is that while none of these individual measures may
capture an MP’s overall performance perfectly, each must be a contributor to it. As expected, the
pairwise correlations among these four individual measures are all positive (Appendix Table 1).
Furthermore, the pairwise correlations between these individual measures and the composite
performance measure are also all positive. This finding suggests that each of these different
activities are related to each other, presumably because, they all proxy for a different aspect of an
MP’s performance.20

20

Further scrutiny of the speeches delivered by MPs on the parliament floor reveals that the 2012 law primarily
impacted the length and the content of these speeches. This analysis is explained in Appendix A and the results are
presented in Appendix Table 2. Briefly, we find that the 2012 law reduced the number of long speeches and the
speeches related to the parliamentary agenda.

22

If our composite performance measure does a good job in capturing the overall
performance of an MP, then the four individual components are expected to behave in the same
manner in which the law change of 2012 influences overall performance measure. While the
preliminary evidence in support of this is already presented graphically in Figure 3, we provide
further empirical support by estimating the specification in equation (1) for each of these four
individual measures of performance. The results from these estimations are shown in Table 7. The
difference-in-differences estimates for the number of Speeches, Words, Motions, and Law Drafts
are all negative and statistically significant in all cases except for Motions. Based on the point
estimates, the salary increase caused by the law change led to reductions in the number of speeches,
words spoken in speeches, and the number of law proposals sponsored by 5.6 percent, 8.7 percent,
and 9 percent of a standard deviation, respectively. Additionally, we also estimate a model using
the first principal component of the four individual metrics of performance as the outcome in
equation (1). The principal component analysis suggests that factor loadings that contribute to the
first principal components are largest for Speeches and Words. The results in the last column of
Table 7 shows that the difference-in-differences estimate in this regression is also negative and
statistically significant.

5.2.2. Holding Extra-Parliamentary Jobs
It is important to note that the results presented in Tables 3 and 7 essentially reflect the
effect of salary increase on the performance of MPs who are retirement eligible, not necessarily
those who are actually retired.21 To the extent that some retirement-eligible MPs choose not to
21

That is, we are estimating the “intention-to-treat” effect rather than the average treatment effect. To see this, consider
the instrumental variable setting, where retirement eligibility is used as an instrument for whether the MP is actually
retired. Because only the retirement eligible MPs can retire, the local average treatment effect in this setting is the
F(HIJKLJ,MNOI|FQ3)SF(HIJKLJ,MNOI|FQ0)
=
average
treatment
effect
(ATE),
i.e.,
CDE =
F(T|FQ3)SF(T|FQ0)

23

retire, these results would be a lower bound for the impact of salary increase on the performance
of MPs. However, we have several reasons to believe that there is close-to-perfect compliance in
our case, i.e., most retirement eligible MPs are actually retired from the jobs they held prior to
getting elected. First, an individual who is serving as an MP has a strong incentive to retire when
he/she becomes retirement eligible since retirement increases his/her salary. Specifically, an MP
typically raises his/her salary by about 50-60 percent by retiring from his/her job. Second, we
compared the number of retirement-eligible MPs to the number of retired MPs reported in major
media outlets. In particular, we calculated that 415 MPs in October 2014 were retirement eligible.
According to a major daily newspaper, the number of MPs who were retired as of October 2014
was 411 out of a total of 550 MPs in the parliament.22 Finally, MPs who held certain jobs such as
school teacher or university professor, judge, or public servant have to step down from these
positions once they become elected officials. Since carrying out an extra-parliamentary job is not
an option for these MPs, there is no incentive for them to postpone retirement when they meet the
necessary requirements. Therefore, the law change could not have possibly encouraged these MPs
to retire. It turns out that 40 percent of the MPs served in the 23rd and 24th terms in the parliament
come from these occupations. As an additional robustness analysis, we estimate the specification
in equation (1), limiting the sample to MPs who are unlikely to carry out the jobs that they held
prior to getting elected to the parliament. These include the MPs who declared their job as an
attorney, teacher, academician or public servant and those MPs who explicitly stated they were

F(HIJKLJ,MNOI|FQ3)SF(HIJKLJ,MNOI|FQ0)
F(T|FQ3)

, where 4 is an indicator for whether an MP is retired, and E is an indicator for

whether the MP is retirement eligible. The numerator in this expression is the difference in legislative performance of
MPs who are retirement eligible versus those who are not. This is analogous to the “intention-to-treat” estimate. If the
numerator, E(4|E = 1), is equal to one, then the intention-to-treat effect is same as the treatment effect. In other
words, if there is perfect compliance where all retirement eligible MPs choose to retire, then our estimate represents
the treatment effect on the treated.
22
http://www.haberturk.com/ekonomi/is-yasam/haber/1000940-iste-emekli-vekilin-yeni-maasi

24

retired or out of the labor force. 23 The results of this analysis are presented in Table 8. As shown
in the first column, the difference-in-differences estimate for the composite performance model is
negative and statistically significant (p<0.01). Furthermore, the point estimate is larger in absolute
value than the one presented in Table 3, which is consistent with the notion that the estimates
shown in Table 3 are intent-to-treat effects and therefore constitute a lower bound. We present
estimates for the individual outcome models in columns 2-5 of Table 8. Consistent with Table 7,
the estimates are negative for all four outcomes and statistically significant for Speeches, Words,
and Law drafts. Furthermore, these estimates are larger in magnitude than those shown in Table 7,
again supporting the argument of the earlier results representing intent-to-treat effects.
Additionally, the members of the parliament in many countries are legally allowed to
perform sideline jobs in addition to their political mandate, and Turkey is no exception. Then it is
possible that some MPs continue to carry out the jobs that they held prior to getting elected into
the parliament and even take up new extra-parliamentary positions in the private sector through
paid speaking arrangements, public lectures, and media appearances. It is important to note that
the possibility of making outside earnings only influences the external validity of our findings.
This issue is similar to the one faced by Gagliarducci and Nannicini (2013) who study the impact
of a wage increase on the quality and performance among mayors in Italy. In the cases of their
analysis and ours, we are estimating the effect of an increase in salary in a situation where being
an elected official is compatible with performing outside work, as opposed to the alternative in
which it is not. Also to the extent that some retirement-eligible MPs who perform outside work
may cut back from these external business engagements rather than lowering their performance in

23

By law, MPs are not allowed to work as an attorney or as a public servant. MPs are also not allowed to work in
public institutions. Majority of teachers and academicians work in public institutions.

25

the parliament, our results would again represent a lower bound for a situation where outside work
is not allowed.

5.2.3. Labor Supply of Politicians
One potential mechanism through which MP salaries may affect performance could be
through their attendance at parliamentary sessions. Specifically, within a labor supply framework
that models the trade-off between leisure and consumption, an increase in the non-labor portion of
income would lead to an increase in the demand for leisure. Because MPs earn their salaries
regardless of whether they attend meetings, an increase in MP salaries in our context is similar to
an increase in non-labor income. As a result, the MPs whose salaries increase could also be less
likely to attend the parliamentary sessions. Unfortunately, we cannot test this hypothesis directly
since we do not have data on actual attendance. Instead, we make use of an alternative measure
defined by the MPs presence on the days of parliamentary sessions when MPs cast votes on law
proposals. MPs have the options to participate by voting “Yes,” “No” or “Abstain.” Since we have
data on the voting record of MPs, we can construct a measure that captures the number of voting
days that an MP attends per month. Note that the average number of voting days in a month is
3.74, and an MP participates in 1.76 of them on average. Note that our measure of Attendance is
positively correlated with the composite measure of performance. 24
Results obtained from estimating equation (1) with Attendance as the outcome variable are
presented in Table 9. The difference-in-differences estimate in column 1 indicates that retired MPs

24

Note that we have the information on voting record only until October 2013. On voting days, there could be more
than one vote on different issues. We used the first vote of the day when constructing the Attendance variable. We
regressed our composite performance variable on attendance and other control variables as in equation (1). The
coefficient of Attendance was 0.108 (standard error of 0.07), indicating that MPs exert more effort in a month if they
cast a vote on the voting days.

26

who enjoy higher salaries in the post-2012 period attend fewer parliamentary meetings to vote.
According to the point estimate, these MPs attend about 0.39 fewer voting sessions per month
compared to others, which translates into an effect size of 22 percent calculated at the sample
mean. In column 2, we present estimates from a slightly different specification in which we control
for the number of voting days per month. This specification is intended to account for the
possibility that some MPs might influence the legislative agenda in a way to ensure that fewer law
proposals arrive at the parliament floor for discussion and voting. The estimate on the interaction
between Retired and Post2012 is still negative and significant at the one percent level. Holding the
number of voting days constant, a retired MP attends about 0.22 fewer (about 13 percent) voting
sessions per month than other MPs in the post-2012 period. The results presented in Table 9
indicate that attendance at parliamentary sessions could be an important mechanism through which
MPs’ work effort decreases in response to an exogenous salary increase.

5.2.4. The Role of MP Characteristics
We next investigate whether the impact of the law change on performance differs by
various attributes of MPs. To do so, we estimate equation (1) separately by gender, freshman
status, education, and rank of MPs. The results of this analysis are presented in Table 10. Columns
1 and 2 show results obtained over the samples of female and male MPs, respectively. Note that
50 (36 retired) and 79 (66 retired) out of 550 seats are occupied by female MPs in the 23rd and 24th
parliamentary terms, respectively. The difference-in-differences estimates are both statistically
significant and nearly identical to each other, suggesting that the salary increase has an equally
negative impact on the overall performance of female and male MPs.

27

The freshman MPs are those who are serving as an MP for the first time, while seasoned
or experienced MPs have served in the parliament in an earlier parliamentary term. The estimates
shown in columns 3 and 4 of Table 10 reveal that it is only the seasoned retired MPs who are
responsive to the salary increase. It is possible that MPs who are serving their first term in the
parliament may more likely to exercise extra caution as they may be under closer public eye or
they may be less resourceful in terms of their ability to reduce their efforts as they are new to the
parliament.
In columns 5 and 6 of Table 10, we provide estimates separately between MPs with at least
a graduate degree and those with a college degree or less. It is possible that more educated MPs
may be more likely to engage in extra-parliamentary businesses as they are likely to have income
generating opportunities in addition to their political mandate, such as memberships in the board
of directors of firms, paid speaking arrangements, or journalism. If that is the case, then the
performance of these MPs in the parliament may be less affected than their less educated
counterparts if salary increase also has a negative effect on the likelihood of moonlighting.
However, the estimates in Table 10 show no evidence of a discordant effect between MPs with an
advanced degree and those with a college degree or less. Both MPs with high (who hold a graduate
degree) and relatively low educational attainment (with a college degree or less) reduce their work
effort in response to an increase in their salaries. The coefficient estimates are not statistically
different from one another between these two groups.
Political parties announce the rankings of their candidates within each district ballot one
month before the elections. MPs who are ranked lower (those who have high values on the rank
variable) face a lower likelihood of getting elected, as higher ranked candidates are elected before
the lower ranked candidates. The rank of an MP is usually a proxy of seniority or status within the

28

party hierarchy. Since each district has a fixed number of MPs to elect for the parliament, the MPs
with a lower rank typically have to spend a lot more resources and campaign more extensively to
get elected. Accordingly, these MPs may, in general, have stronger preferences for public service
or may be more motivated to perform at a high level in the parliament to secure a better rank in
the following election. In that case, they may be influenced by the law change to a lesser degree.
To answer this question empirically, we estimate our main specification between the samples of
MPs whose ranks are one or two versus 3 or higher over these samples, separately. As shown in
columns 7 and 8 of Table 10, these two groups of MPs appear to react very similarly to the law
change.

5.3. Elasticity of Performance with Respect to the Salary of MPs
Since we know the size of the increase in salary caused by the 2012 law change, we can
obtain an estimate of the elasticity of composite performance with respect to the salary of MPs. In
order to do this, we estimate an augmented version of equation (1) in which we replace our
difference-in-differences indicator with the logarithm of Salary. That is, instead of the interaction
of Retired and Post2012 in equation (1), we include Log(Salary) in the regression. Note that there
are two sources of variation in salary across MPs over time. The first source of variation stems
from changes in the rate of inflation and periodical adjustments, which are gauged by time fixed
effects. The second source of variation is due to the law change of 2012. This is also the exogenous
source of variation that further sets apart the salaries between retired and non-retired MPs from
each other. The estimate of the impact of log(Salary) on the composite measure of performance
from this analysis is -3.976 (p<0.01), suggesting an elasticity of about 0.04. That is, when MP
salaries increase by 10 percent (which is approximately equivalent to the increase in the salaries

29

of the retired MPs in the 24th term), their effort decreases by 0.4 standard deviation (or 16 percent
of one standard deviation).

6. Conclusions
A central tenet in representative democracies is that citizens collectively delegate their
power to selected representatives, who then use this power to maximize the welfare of those who
elect them. However, it is not straightforward how to ensure that these representatives use their
authority to promote the benefits of their voters rather than pursuing their own interests due to a
moral hazard problem. One of the few institutional tools that can be tailored to incentivize
politicians to act in the interest of voters is their salary. In this paper, we provide a fresh look at
the relationship between the salaries of MPs and their performance using a unique law change
implemented in 2012 in Turkey. Turkish MPs who are retired from their previous jobs as well as
those who became retired during their service as MPs earn a base salary as well as their retirement
pensions while the non-retired MPs only earn the base salary. The 2012 law change resulted in a
sharp increase in the pension payments of retired MPs while keeping the salaries of non-retired
MPs unchanged. By using this exogenous variation in a difference-in-differences framework, we
show that the salary increase had a negative impact on the performance of MPs. In particular, the
salary increase caused by the law change lowered the composite performance of MPs by 12.3
percent of a standard deviation. We also find that individual components of the composite measure
represented by the number of Speeches, Words, and Law drafts are negatively influenced by the
law change. These findings are robust to numerous specification tests and hold independent of MP
characteristics except for freshman MPs, for whom we find no significant impact. Furthermore, in

30

an auxiliary analysis, we show that one of the mechanisms through which MPs reduce their
performance is absenteeism.
Our findings are consistent with a labor supply model in which an increase in non-labor
income is predicted to reduce labor supply. Since MPs earn their salaries regardless of whether or
not they participate in the parliamentary discussions, an increase in their salaries in this context is
akin to an increase in the non-labor income. If MPs allocate their time between working
(participating in the parliamentary discussions or other legislative activities) and other activities
(leisure), then a permanent increase in non-labor income would be expected to result in a decrease
in parliamentary activities (Mocan and Altindag 2013).
Taken together, our findings indicate that policy changes intended to raise the incomes of
politicians can have far reaching ramifications that extend beyond their well-being. Higher pay is
often regarded as a motivating factor for better performance. However, policies indented to
improve the overall salaries of politicians may actually come at the expense of reduced welfare
among citizens if they are not supported with measures that would discourage them from lowering
their work effort.

31

References
Arıcı, K. 2013. “Türkiye’de Milletvekillerinin Sosyal Güvenliği Meselesi.” (in Turkish). Gazi
Üniversitesi Hukuk Fakültesi Dergisi XVII (1-2), pp.77-121.
Barro, R. 1973. “The Control of Politicians.” Public Choice 14(1), pp. 19-42.
Besley, T. 2004. "Paying Politicians: Theory and Evidence." Journal of the European Economic
Association 2(2–3), pp. 193–215.
Braendle, T. 2015. “Does Remuneration Affect the Discipline and the Selection of Politicians?
Evidence from Pay Harmonization in the European Parliament.” Public Choice 162(1), pp. 1-24.
Brender, A., and A. Drazen. 2008. “How Do Budget Deficits and Economic Growth Affect
Reelection Prospects? Evidence from a Large Panel of Countries.” American Economic Review
98(5), pp. 2203-2220.
Caselli, F. and M. Morelli. 2004. "Bad Politicians." Journal of Public Economics 88(3–4), pp.
759–82.
Cesur, R., E. Tekin, and A. Ulker. 2017a. “Air Pollution and Infant Mortality: Evidence from the
Penetration of Natural Gas.” The Economic Journal 127(600), pp. 330-362.
Cesur, R., Güneş, P.M., Tekin, E. and Ulker, A., 2017b. The Value of Socialized Medicine: The
Impact of Universal Primary Healthcare Provision on Mortality Rates in Turkey. Journal of
Public Economics, 150, pp.75-93.
Dal Bó, E., and M. Rossi. 2011. “Term Length and the Effort of Politicians.” The Review of
Economic Studies 78(4), pp. 1237-1263
Fair, R. 1978. “The Effect of Economic Events on Votes for President.” The Review of
Economics and Statistics 60(2), pp. 159-173.
Ferraz, C. and F. Finan. 2009. "Motivating Politicians: The Impacts of Monetary Incentives on
Quality and Performance." NBER Working Paper No. 14906
Fisman, R., N. Harmon, E. Kamenica, I Munk. 2015. “Labor Supply of Politicians.” Journal of
the European Economic Association 13(5), pp. 871-905.
Gagliarducci, S., and T. Nannicini. 2013. "Do Better Paid Politicians Perform Better?
Disentangling Incentives from Selection." Journal of the European Economic Association 11(2),
pp.369-398.
Hoffman, Mitchell and Lyons, Elizabeth. Do Higher Salaries Lead to Higher Performance?
Evidence from State Politicians (October 23, 2013). Rotman School of Management Working

32

Paper No. 2345085. Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2345085 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2345085
Hoynes, H., Miller, D. and Simon, D., 2015. “Income, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and Infant
Health.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(1), pp.172-211.
Kotakorpi, K., and P. Poutvaara. 2011. “Pay for Politicians and Candidate Selection: An
Empirical Analysis.” Journal of Public Economics 95(7-8), pp.877-885.
Mattozzi, A., and A. Merlo. 2008. “Political Careers or Career Politicians?” Journal of Public
Economics 92(3-4), pp. 597-608.
Mocan, N., and D. Altindag. 2013. "Salaries and Work Effort: An Analysis of the European
Union Parliamentarians." The Economic Journal 123, pp. 1130-1167.
Persson, T., G. Roland, and G. Tabellini. 1997. “Separation of Powers and Political
Accountability.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4), pp. 1163-1202.

33

Appendix A: The Impact of Salary on the Content and the Length of Speeches Delivered on
the Parliament Floor
The results that are shown in Table 7 suggest that an increase in the MP salaries reduces
the number of words they deliver on the parliament floor. If the MPs reduce the number of speeches
unrelated to the parliamentary agenda, then the decrease in the number of words delivered as a
response to an increase in salaries need not necessarily reflect a reduction in their work effort. To
address this concern, we measured whether the MPs’ speeches are really about topics related to
the parliamentary agenda. The items on the parliamentary agenda in each day are included in the
table of contents in the Journal of Minutes (JoM). We first identified keywords from the table of
contents using the term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) metric. This statistic
measures how important a word in a document is compared to the rest of the documents in a
collection. Higher values of TF-IDF indicate greater importance. Specifically, TF-IDF of word U
that appears in the table of contents in JoM of day 7 is measured using the equation depicted as:
DVWXVY+ = DVY+ ×log2(WXVY )
where DVY+ stands for the term frequency, and it measures how important the word U in agenda
of day 7. Basically, more important words appear more often. DVY+ is computed by the ratio of
the number of times word U appears in the table of contents to the total number of words in the
table of contents in day 7. WXVY is the inverse document frequency of word U. It is the inverse of
the ratio of the number of days, agenda of which included the word U, to the total number of days.
This component increases the weight of more rare words.
Consider the following hypothetical example. Suppose that there is a total of 1,000 days of
parliamentary meetings. The words “tax” and “law” appear 5 and 10 times in the table of contents
of day 1, respectively. There are 100 words in total in day 1’s agenda description. Also suppose

34

there are 5 and 100 days in which “tax” and “law” are included on the parliamentary agenda,
respectively. Then, the TF-IDF value for the word “tax” in day 1 is DVWXV-M],3 =
_
300

×`%a

3000
_

= 0.115. The TF-IDF for “law” is DVWXVdMY,3 =

30
300

×`%a

3000
300

= 0.1.

These values suggest that the word “tax” is more important than “law” in day 1’s agenda, since
DVWXV-M],3 > DVWXVdMY,3 .
We compute TF-IDF statistic for every word in each day’s agenda and sort the words
according to TF-IDF in descending order within each session. We used the top 100 keywords. We
then searched for these keywords in MPs’ speeches and identified speeches, in which the MP used
at least one keyword versus the speeches in which none of the keywords were used.25 We call the
former and the latter as Speeches Related to the Agenda and Speeches Unrelated to the Agenda,
respectively. We then estimated equation (1) using the number of words MP delivers in these types
of speeches separately.
The results are presented in Appendix Table 2. In columns 1 and 3, the outcome variable
is the number of words in MP’s speeches that are not related to the parliamentary agenda (i.e. none
of the identified keywords appeared in the speech). The difference-in-differences estimate is not
statistically significant. On the other hand, columns 2 and 4 shows that the salary increase leads to
a reduction in the number of words MP delivered in speeches related to the agenda.
Additionally, we perform another test making use of the rules about speaking on the
parliament floor. Specifically, according to the internal regulations of the parliament, the Chair of
the parliamentary meetings oversees the discussions. S/he invites MPs to give their speech and
decides how long the speech is going to last. Speeches related to parliamentary agenda are allowed
a longer time, typically five minutes or more. Other speeches are allowed a shorter time, generally

25

We did not include verbs in our list of keywords.

35

less than five minutes.26 Because longer speeches are more likely to be related to the parliamentary
agenda, the number of words delivered in such speeches could be a better proxy for the work effort
of the politicians. Therefore, if the increase in salaries reduces the work effort, then we should see
a larger impact of salary on the number of words pitched in longer speeches versus in shorter
speeches.
To test this hypothesis, we measured the duration of each speech on the parliament floor.
On average, in our sample, a speech consisting of 100 words lasts about one minute.27 Using this
rule, we counted the number of words delivered in speeches that last less than 5 minutes and at
least 5 minutes separately. We then used these variables as the outcomes in equation (1). The
results are presented in columns 3-6 of Appendix Table 2, respectively. In column 3, the outcome
variable is the number of words in speeches that lasted less than 5 minutes. The difference-indifferences estimate in this column is statistically insignificant. In column 4, the outcome is the
number of words in speeches duration of which is at least 5 minutes. The difference-in-differences
estimate in this specification is -109, and it is statistically significant at the 1 percent level. Finally,
in columns 5 and 6, we use the number of speeches that lasted less than and at least 5 minutes as
the outcome, respectively. Again results indicate that the salary increase reduced the long speeches
while it did not have an impact on the number of short speeches. These two exercises suggest that
higher salaries lead to fewer content-related words delivered by the MPs on the parliament floor.

26

For example, suppose that the agenda of the day includes the discussion of a law proposal by party A. Then the
representative of party A is allowed 10 minutes to explain why the law is needed. Then the chair invites the members
of other parties and MPs to express their opinions on the proposal, and s/he allocates 5 minutes for their speeches. In
some other cases, MPs ask permission to speak about an issue off-topic, unrelated to the agenda. For example, an MP
could ask permission to talk about a problem related to his/her constituency, or he/she may want to note the
significance of a specific day such as the International Women’s Day on March 8th or Worker’s Day on May 1st. For
those off-topic speeches, MPs are allowed less time.
27
To obtain this number, we first calculated total duration of each session in minutes and the total number of words
delivered in each session. We then computed the ratio of total number of words to total duration. The average of this
ratio is about 100 words per minute.

36

Figure 1: Over Time Variation in Bonuses of the Retired MPs

Notes: All MPs in the parliament earn a monthly base salary. Also, MPs who are retired from
their previous jobs earn a bonus equivalent to their retirement pensions. The figure presents the
bonus earned by the Retired MPs (difference in real monthly earnings between Retired MPs
versus non-retired MPs) in our sample period. The vertical line in January 2012 marks the
beginning of the post-treatment period.

37

Figure 2: Composite Performance over Time

Notes: Figure depicts smoothed monthly averages of MPs’ Performance. We applied LOWESS
smoothing with bandwidth 0.7. Solid and dashed smoothed lines represent retired and non-retired
MPs, respectively. The vertical line in January 2012 marks the post-treatment period.

38

Figure 3: Components of Performance over Time

Notes: Figure depicts smoothed monthly averages of components of MPs’ Performance. These
components are Speeches (Number of times MP participated in discussions on the parliament
floor), Words (Number of words delivered by the MP during their speeches), Motions (Number
of times MP proposed for inquiry, investigation or assembly on a particular topic), and Law
Drafts (Number of law drafts MP co-sponsored). We use the standardized values of these
variables. We applied LOWESS smoothing with bandwidth 0.7. Solid and dashed smoothed
lines represent retired and non-retired MPs, respectively. The vertical line in January 2012 marks
the post-treatment period.

39

Figure 4: Event Study Analysis

Notes: To produce the figure, we estimated the following regression: !"#$%#&'()"*- =
803_
803_
fQ800i /f 1(g"'#- = h) + fQ800i Af 4"56#"7*- ×1(g"'#- = h) + j>*- + @* + k- + B*- , where
E$$%#5*- is the Legislative Effort of MP 6 in month 5. 4"56#"7*- takes on the value of one if the
MP is retirement eligible and zero otherwise. 1(g"'#- = h) are the dummies for years. >*includes the full set of control variables. @* and k- are MP fixed effects and month dummies. The
bars represent the point estimates of the interaction of the year dummies with 4"56#"7*- . The
lines are 95 percent confidence intervals. The omitted year is 2011.

40

Table 1: Summary Statistics and Descriptions of the Variables
Variable
Description
Mean Std. Dev.
Performance
The sum of standardized values of
0.000
2.479
Speeches, Words, Motions and Law
drafts
Speeches - Standardized
0.000
1.000
Words - Standardized
0.000
1.000
Motions - Standardized
0.000
1.000
Law Drafts - Standardized
0.000
1.000
Speeches
The number of times MP
6.450
25.407
participated in discussions on the
parliament floor.
Words
The number of words MP delivered 633.263 1637.854
during their speeches.
Motions
The number of proposals for
2.217
6.094
inquiry, investigation or assembly.
Law Drafts
The number of law drafts MP co0.322
0.962
signed.
Retired
=1 if MP is retirement eligible.
0.719
0.449
Post2012
=1 if 2012 or later.
0.457
0.498
Log(Salary)
The natural logarithm of the real
8.821
0.207
monthly salary of the MP.
Age
Age of the MP in months
630.730 105.780
Rank
Rank of the MP on their party’s
3.021
2.655
ticket in the most recent elections.
Cabinet Member
=1 if the MP is also a member of
0.065
0.246
the cabinet.
Party's Vote Share
The share of votes obtained by the
0.425
0.167
MP’s party in the most recent
elections in the district that MP
represents.
MA/PhD
=1 if the MP has a graduate degree.
0.349
0.477
Female
=1 if MP is female.
0.118
0.323
Notes: Unit of observation is an MP-month. There are 44,550 observations in total.

41

Table 2: Means in Pre- and Post-Treatment Periods
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Retired MPs
Non-Retired MPs
Variable
Pre-2012
Post-2012 Over Time Pre-2012 Post-2012 Over Time
Difference in
(N=17,668) (N=14,371) Difference (N=6,532) (N=5,979) Difference
Differences
(col. 2-1)
(col. 5-4)
(col. 3-6)
Performance
-0.042
-0.055
-0.013
0.024
0.231
0.206
-0.219***
Speeches
-0.001
0.001
0.002
-0.022
0.025
0.047
-0.044**
Words
-0.010
-0.007
0.003
0.001
0.045
0.043
-0.040*
Motions
-0.007
-0.033
-0.026
0.051
0.043
-0.009
-0.018
Law Drafts
-0.024
-0.016
0.008
-0.007
0.118
0.125
-0.117***
Notes: Performance: The sum of the standardized values of MP’s speeches, words, motions and law drafts. Speeches: Number of
times MP participated in discussions on the parliament floor. Words: Number of words delivered by the MP during their speeches.
Motions: Number of times MP proposed for inquiry, investigation or assembly on a particular topic. Law Drafts: Number of law drafts
MP co-sponsored. We use the standardized values of these variables. Entries are sample means. Columns 1 and 2 (5 and 6) pertain to
the retired MPs (non-retired MPs) before and after 2012, respectively. Column 3 (6) shows the difference in pre-2012 vs. post-2012
means for the retired MPs (non-retired MPs). Column 7 presents the unconditional difference-in-differences estimates. *, **, ***
indicate statistical significance at 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent levels, respectively

42

Table 3: Effect of 2012 Salary Increase on MPs’ Performance
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Retired
-0.085
-0.078
-0.001
-0.028
(0.067)
(0.066)
(0.085)
(0.085)
Retired×Post2012
-0.182*
-0.191*
-0.338*** -0.308***
(0.103)
(0.101)
(0.079)
(0.080)
Age
0.023***
(0.008)
Rank
0.035
(0.026)
Cabinet Member
0.478**
(0.225)
Party's Vote Share
-1.500
in the district
(1.038)
Month & Year Dummies
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
District Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
MP Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Observations
44,104
44,104
44,104
44,026
Notes: Outcome variable is Performance which is the sum of the standardized values of MP’s
speeches, words, motions and law drafts. Unit of observation is an MP-month-year. Standard
errors are clustered at the MP level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at 10 percent, 5
percent and 1 percent levels.

43

Table 4: Robustness Analysis: The Role of MPs who are in favor of and opposed to the Law
Change & MPs who are from AKP and Opposition Parties
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
MPs Who Voted MPs Who Voted
AKP MPs
Opposition Party
Yes
No
MPs
Retired
0.034
-0.058
-0.014
-0.100
(0.125)
(0.148)
(0.085)
(0.181)
Retired*Post2012
-0.212*
-0.298**
-0.287***
-0.322*
(0.108)
(0.122)
(0.089)
(0.167)
Age
0.022
0.039***
0.020***
0.058***
(0.028)
(0.010)
(0.008)
(0.006)
Rank
0.008
0.039
0.028
0.121
(0.039)
(0.038)
(0.019)
(0.216)
Cabinet Member
0.537
0.469*
0.446*
(0.415)
(0.258)
(0.240)
Party's Vote Share
-3.821
-1.430
-2.456*
-2.117
in the district
(3.338)
(1.144)
(1.467)
(2.057)
Observations
11,559
19,050
26,743
17,283
Notes: Outcome variable is the Performance which is the sum of the standardized values of
MP’s speeches, words, motions and law drafts. In columns (1) and (2) MPs who voted in support
of the 2012 law and those who voted no or did not cast a vote enter into the regressions,
respectively. In columns (3) and (4) MPs who are members of the AKP (the governing party in
our sample period) and MPs who are members of opposition parties, MHP or CHP, or MPs
without a party affiliation enter into the regressions, respectively. Unit of observation is an MPmonth-year. All regressions include the whole set of control variables as in column (4) of Table
3 (time-varying MP characteristics, MP fixed effects, month and year dummies, district
dummies). Standard errors are clustered at the MP level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical
significance at 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent levels.

44

Table 5: Robustness Analysis: The Importance of Running and Getting Re-Elected for the
24th Parliamentary Term
(1)
(2)
th
Ran for Re-Election for 24
Re-Elected to the 24th
Term
Term
Retired as of the End
0.055
-0.097
of the 23rd term
(0.076)
(0.100)
Age
-0.001***
-0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
Rank
-0.035***
-0.025
(0.013)
(0.015)
Cabinet Member
0.268***
0.075
(0.094)
(0.073)
Party's Vote Share
0.486*
0.103
in the District
(0.273)
(0.369)
Female
0.009
0.074
(0.091)
(0.085)
MA/PhD
0.028
0.136**
(0.053)
(0.060)
Observations
549
257
Notes: Unit of observation is an MP. We include the MPs who served in the 23rd term in the
regressions. Retired as of the End of the 23rd Term is equal to one if the MP was retirement
eligible as of the last month of the 23rd term (April 2011). The outcome variable in column 1 is
an indicator for whether the MP ran for re-election to the 24th term. The outcome in column 2 is
a dummy that is equal to one if the MP is re-elected to the 24th term. In column 2, only the MPs
who ran for re-election for the 24th term are included. Standard errors are clustered at the MP
level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent levels.
All regressions include district and party fixed effects.

45

Table 6: Robustness Analysis: MPs in 23rd and/or 24th Terms
(1)
(2)
rd
th
Both in 23 and
In 24 Term but not in 23rd
th
24 Terms
Retired
-0.058
0.219
(0.133)
(0.142)
Retired×Post2012
-0.316**
-0.314***
(0.125)
(0.095)
Age
0.026**
0.011**
(0.013)
(0.005)
Rank
0.021
(0.025)
Cabinet Member
0.455**
(0.211)
Party's Vote Share
-0.725
in the district
(1.047)
Observations
16,209
14,400
Notes: Outcome variable is the Performance which is the sum of the standardized values of
MP’s speeches, words, motions and law drafts. Unit of observation is an MP-month. Standard
errors are clustered at the MP level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at 10 percent, 5
percent and 1 percent levels. All regressions include MP fixed effects, month and year fixed
effects and District Fixed Effects. In column 1, we include only the MPs who served in both 23rd
and 24th terms. In columns 2 and 3, only the MPs who served in the 23rd and 24th) terms are
included in the analysis, respectively.

46

Table 7: Effect of 2012 Salary Reform and Salary on Individual Components of
Performance
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
st
Speeches
Words
Motions
Law Drafts 1 Principal
Component
Retired
0.015
0.003
-0.050*
0.016
-0.008
(0.027)
(0.029)
(0.030)
(0.030)
(0.047)
Retired×Post2012
-0.056*
-0.087***
-0.003
-0.090***
-0.144***
(0.029)
(0.029)
(0.026)
(0.027)
(0.046)
Age
-0.000
-0.004
0.029***
0.008
0.004
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.009)
(0.007)
(0.004)
Rank
0.006
0.017***
-0.005
0.016*
0.019*
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.011)
Cabinet Member
0.204*** 0.297***
-0.044
-0.126*
0.527***
(0.073)
(0.088)
(0.031)
(0.066)
(0.136)
Party's Vote Share
-0.222
0.004
0.031
-0.716**
-0.681
in the district
(0.331)
(0.372)
(0.382)
(0.309)
(0.609)
Observations
44,022
44,023
43,863
44,021
43,584
Notes: Speeches: Number of times MP participated in discussions on the parliament floor.
Words: Number of words delivered by the MP during their speeches. Motions: Number of times
MP proposed for inquiry, investigation or assembly on a particular topic. Law Drafts: Number of
law drafts MP co-sponsored. We use the standardized values of these variables in the
regressions. 1st Principal Component in column (5) is the first principal component of the four
effort measures. Unit of observation is an MP-month-year. All regressions include the whole set
of control variables as in column 4 of Table 3 (time-varying MP characteristics, MP fixed
effects, month and year dummies, district dummies). Standard errors are clustered at the MP
level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent levels,
respectively.

47

Table 8: Effect of Salary Increase on Performance among Retired MPs
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Performance
Speeches
Words
Motions
Law Drafts
Retired
0.012
0.084
-0.014
-0.110*
0.051
(0.153)
(0.054)
(0.072)
(0.060)
(0.056)
Retired×Post2012
-0.437***
-0.124*
-0.103*
-0.030
-0.180***
(0.140)
(0.067)
(0.054)
(0.050)
(0.049)
Age
0.016
-0.007
-0.009* 0.037***
-0.006
(0.013)
(0.008)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.004)
Rank
0.056
0.026
0.015
-0.017
0.032*
(0.084)
(0.052)
(0.022)
(0.020)
(0.020)
Cabinet Member
0.305
-0.028
0.564**
-0.110*
-0.121
(0.622)
(0.238)
(0.272)
(0.061)
(0.140)
Party’s Vote Share
-1.826
-0.244
-0.553
0.225
-1.254*
In the District
(1.763)
(0.580)
(0.691)
(0.527)
(0.642)
Observations
17,706
17,706
17,706
17,706
17,706
Notes: Outcome variable is the Performance which is the sum of the standardized values of
MP’s speeches, words, motions and law drafts. Speeches: Number of times MP participated in
discussions on the parliament floor. Words: Number of words delivered by the MP during their
speeches. Motions: Number of times MP proposed for inquiry, investigation or assembly on a
particular topic. Law Drafts: Number of law drafts MP co-sponsored. We use the standardized
values of these variables. Unit of observation is an MP-month-year. We include the MPs who
declared that their jobs as Attorney, Teacher, Academician or Public Servant, and those MPs
who declared they are Retired or Out of Labor Force. All regressions include the whole set of
control variables as in Table 3 (time-varying MP characteristics, MP fixed effects, month and
year dummies, district dummies). Standard errors are clustered at the MP level. *, ** and ***
indicate statistical significance at 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent levels.

48

Table 9: Effect of Salary Increase on Attendance
(1)
(2)
Attendance
Attendance
Retired
-0.066
-0.005
(0.083)
(0.074)
Retired×Post2012
-0.389***
-0.216***
(0.070)
(0.060)
Voting Days
0.448***
(0.011)
Age
-0.064**
-0.043
(0.025)
(0.038)
Rank
0.075***
0.031*
(0.021)
(0.016)
Cabinet Member
-0.264
-0.286
(0.236)
(0.179)
Party's Vote Share
-2.525**
0.075
in the district
(1.071)
(0.552)
Observations
33,824
33,824
Notes: On certain days of parliamentary meetings, MPs cast votes on law proposals. Voting Days
measure the number of days of a month in which a vote is held. The average number of Voting
Days in a month is 3.74. MPs have options to participate by voting “Yes,” “No” or “Abstain.”
The outcome variable in columns 1-2, Attendance, is the number of days in which an MP
participated in the voting. The mean of this variable is 1.76. The attendance data are available
only until October 2013. The outcome variable in column 3 is the ratio of Attendance to Voting
Days. Unit of observation is an MP-month. All regressions include the whole set of control
variables as in Table 3 (time-varying MP characteristics, MP fixed effects, month and year
dummies, district dummies). Standard errors are clustered at the MP level. *, ** and *** indicate
statistical significance at 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent levels.

49

Table 10: Effect of 2012 Salary Increase on MPs’ Performance: Estimates from Various Sub-samples
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(6)
(7)
(8)
st
nd
MPs
1 or 2
Female
Freshman Seasoned MPs with with BA
MPs with
Ranked
MPs
MPs
MPs
MA/PhD
Rank 3+
Male MPs
or Less
MPs
Retired
0.013
-0.038
-0.108
0.117
0.050
-0.068
-0.104
0.148
(0.212)
(0.094)
(0.102)
(0.127)
(0.136)
(0.109)
(0.112)
(0.090)
Retired×Post2012
-0.318**
-0.309***
-0.116
-0.289** -0.362*** -0.299** -0.296** -0.328***
(0.150)
(0.088)
(0.092)
(0.141)
(0.105)
(0.121)
(0.116)
(0.089)
Observations
5256
38770
23440
20586
15346
28680
25470
18556
Notes: Outcome variable is the Performance which is the sum of the standardized values of MP’s speeches, words, motions and law
drafts. Unit of observation is an MP-month-year. All regressions include the whole set of control variables as in column 4 of Table 3
(time-varying MP characteristics, MP fixed effects, month and year dummies, district dummies). Standard errors are clustered at the
MP level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent levels.
Subsamples:
Freshman MPs vs. Seasoned MPs: MPs who are serving their first term in the parliament vs. MPs who have served before.
MPs with MA/Ph.D. vs. MPs with BA or Less: MPs who hold a graduate degree vs. MPs who have a college degree or less.
1st or 2nd Ranked MPs vs. MPs with Rank 3+: MPs who were ranked first or second in their party’s ticket in the elections vs. MPs who
were ranked 3rd, 4th, and so on.

50

(5)

Appendix Table 1: Correlations among Matrix for the Proxies of Effort
Performance Speeches
Words Motions Law Proposals
Performance
1
Speeches
0.7267
1
Words
0.7313
0.6658
1
Motions
0.4966
0.0403
0.0662
1
Law Proposals
0.5251
0.0958
0.0814
0.1248
1
Notes: Sample correlations. Performance is the sum of the standardized values of MP’s
speeches, words, proposals and law drafts. Speeches: Number of times MP participated in
discussions on the parliament floor. Words: Number of words delivered by the MP during
their speeches. Motions: Number of times MP proposed for inquiry, investigation or assembly
on a particular topic. Law Drafts: Number of law drafts MP co-sponsored.

51

Appendix Table 2: Length and Content
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
No. words in
No. words in
No. words in
No. words in
No. Speeches No. Speeches
speeches that are speeches that are
speeches that
speeches that
that lasted
that lasted at
not related to the
related to the
lasted less than 5
lasted at least 5
less than 5
least 5
parliamentary
parliamentary
minutes
minutes
minutes
minutes
agenda
agenda
Retired
56.728
27.390
94.052*
-4.513
4.424**
0.013
(34.530)
(56.970)
(56.343)
(37.339)
(1.969)
(0.042)
Retired×Post2012
-21.055
-137.005**
-53.913
-109.229***
-2.766
-0.110**
(28.697)
(53.096)
(50.443)
(38.771)
(1.713)
(0.043)
Age
-2.917
-4.157
-1.056
-7.655**
-0.159
-0.010***
(4.074)
(4.027)
(3.758)
(3.051)
(0.179)
(0.003)
Rank
5.627
9.157
10.512
6.595
0.200
0.009
(6.104)
(11.688)
(11.004)
(7.980)
(0.423)
(0.008)
Cabinet Member
143.392**
270.506**
173.091*
267.912***
3.308
0.191**
(62.798)
(122.185)
(97.719)
(88.592)
(3.663)
(0.080)
Party's Vote Share
-95.923
-48.619
412.389
-689.907
8.931
-0.404
in the district
(538.036)
(748.514)
(859.266)
(443.743)
(26.153)
(0.556)
Observations
44,100
44,100
44,469
44,469
44,469
44,469
MPs deliver 100 words per minute on average. We computed this by dividing the total number of words delivered in the parliamentary
meetings to the duration of the meetings. That is, a 5-minute speech consists of 500 words. The outcome variables in columns 1 and 2
measure the number of words MP delivered in speeches that lasted less than 5 minutes and at least 5 minutes, respectively. Outcomes
in columns 3 and 4 are the numbers of speeches that lasted less than and at least 5 minutes, respectively. The outcome variables in
columns 5 and 6 are the numbers of words MP delivered in speeches that are unrelated and related to the parliamentary agenda,
respectively. Speeches are related to the agenda if the MP mentioned at least one keyword that we identify as important using the
procedure in Appendix A. Unit of observation is an MP-month. All regressions include the whole set of control variables as in Table 3
(time-varying MP characteristics, MP fixed effects, month and year dummies, district dummies). Standard errors are clustered at the
MP level. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent levels.

52

