                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


      A RISK-CENTRIC MODEL OF DEMAND RECESSIONS AND SPECULATION

                                      Ricardo J. Caballero
                                          Alp Simsek

                                      Working Paper 23614
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23614


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           July 2017, Revised February 2020



A previous version of the paper was circulated under the title, “A Risk-centric Model of Demand
Recessions and Macroprudential Policy.” We thank four anonymous referees and the editor,
Andrei Shleifer, for their constructive comments. Chris Ackerman, Masao Fukui, Jeremy
Majerovitz, Andrea Manera, Zilu Pan, Olivier Wang, and Nathan Zorzi provided excellent
research assistance. We also thank Marios Angeletos, Jaroslav Borovicka, Eduardo Davila,
Emmanuel Farhi, Kristin Forbes, Mark Gertler, Zhiguo He, Yueran Ma, Plamen Nenov,
Matthew Rognlie, Martin Schneider, Larry Summers, Jaume Ventura, Ivan Werning, and seminar
participants at Yale University, Columbia University, Boston College, MIT, Princeton University,
the EIEF, Paris School of Economics, the BIS, the Bank of Spain, the Fed Board, the Boston
Fed, UNC at Chapel Hill, Northwestern University, Brown University, The University of
Chicago, London School of Economics, Bocconi University; as well as conference participants at
the CCBS Conference hosted by the Bank of England and MacCalm, the Wharton Conference
on Liquidity and Financial Fragility, the Harvard/MIT Financial Economics Workshop, Cowles
Conference on General Equilibrium and Applications, NBER meetings (EFG, AP, and SI Impulse
and Propagation Mechanisms), AEA annual meetings (2018 and 2019), CEBRA annual meeting,
the Barcelona GSE Conference on Asset Pricing and Macroeconomics, the Sciences Po Summer
Workshop in International and Macro Finance for their comments. Caballero and Simsek
acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant Numbers
SES-1848857 and SES-1455319, respectively. First draft: May 11, 2017. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Ricardo J. Caballero and Alp Simsek. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Risk-centric Model of Demand Recessions and Speculation
Ricardo J. Caballero and Alp Simsek
NBER Working Paper No. 23614
July 2017, Revised February 2020
JEL No. E00,E12,E21,E22,E30,E40,G00,G01,G11

                                             ABSTRACT

We provide a continuous-time “risk-centric” representation of the New Keynesian model, which we
use to analyze the interactions between asset prices, financial speculation, and macro- economic outcomes
when output is determined by aggregate demand. In principle, interest rate policy is highly effective
in dealing with shocks to asset valuations. However, in practice monetary policy faces a wide range
of constraints. If these constraints are severe, a decline in risky asset valuations generates a demand
recession. This reduces earnings and generates a negative feedback loop between asset prices and aggregate
demand. In the recession phase, average beliefs matter not only because they affect asset valuations
but also because they determine the strength of the amplification mechanism. In the ex-ante boom
phase, belief disagreements (or heterogeneous asset valuations) matter because they induce investors
to speculate. This speculation exacerbates the crash by reducing high-valuation investors’ wealth when
the economy transitions to recession, which depresses (wealth-weighted) average beliefs. Macroprudential
policy that restricts speculation in the boom can Pareto improve welfare by increasing asset prices
and aggregate demand in the recession.


Ricardo J. Caballero
Department of Economics, E52-528
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
caball@mit.edu

Alp Simsek
Department of Economics, E52-552
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
asimsek@mit.edu




A nontechnical summary is available at
http://voxeu.org/article/risk-intolerance-and-global-economy
                                      I. Introduction
Prices of risky assets, such as stocks and houses, ‡uctuate considerably without meaningful changes
in the underlying payo¤s. These ‡uctuations, which are due to a host of rational and behavioral
mechanisms, are generically described as the result of a “time-varying risk premium”(see Cochrane
(2011); Shiller (2014) and Campbell (2014) for recent reviews). While ‡uctuations in risky asset
prices a¤ect the macroeconomy in a multitude of ways, a growing empirical literature suggests
that aggregate demand plays a central role and therefore interest rate policy can mitigate the
macroeconomic impact of asset price shocks. P‡ueger et al. (2018) show that prices of volatile
stocks have high predictive power for interest rates and economic activity, and Cieslak and Vissing-
Jorgensen (2017) argue that the Fed pays attention to stock prices and cuts interest rates after
stock price declines (“the Fed put”). However, the ability of interest policy to quickly respond to
asset price shocks is limited by a host of practical concerns such as exchange rate volatility, balance
sheet fragilities, decision lags and transmission lags. An important current concern is that, with
interest rates close to their e¤ective lower bound in much of the developed world, interest rate
policy will be unable to respond to large negative asset price shocks.
    This connection between risky asset prices and aggregate demand suggests that speculation— a
pervasive feature of …nancial markets driven by heterogeneous asset valuations— can lead to more
severe downturns. There is in fact an old tradition in macroeconomics that emphasizes speculation
as a central feature of asset prices in boom-bust cycles (see, e.g., Minsky (1977); Kindleberger
(1978)). In recent empirical work, Mian and Su… (2018) argue that speculation also has played a
key role in the U.S. housing cycle. However, speculation and its interaction with aggregate demand
are largely missing from the modern macroeconomic theory connecting asset prices with economic
activity, which mostly focuses on …nancial frictions (see Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010) for a review).
This omission is especially important in the current low interest rate environment, as monetary
policy has even less space than usual to mop up a sharp decline in risky asset prices following a
speculative episode.
    In this paper, we build a risk-centric macroeconomic model — that is, a model in which risky
asset prices are at the core of the analysis— with the two key features highlighted above. First, we
explore the role of the aggregate demand channel and interest rate frictions in causing recessions
driven by a rise in the “risk premium”— our catchall phrase for shocks to asset valuations. Second,
we study the impact of …nancial speculation on the severity of these recessions and derive the
implications for macroprudential policy. In order to isolate our insights, we remove all …nancial
frictions.
    Our analysis relies on the standard aggregate demand mechanism present in the New Keynesian
model, but formulated in terms of a risk-centric decomposition (as opposed to the usual Euler-
equation based approach). Speci…cally, we decompose the demand block of the equilibrium into
two relations: an output-asset price relation that captures the positive association between asset
prices and aggregate demand through a wealth e¤ect on consumption (and a marginal-Q e¤ect on


                                                  1
investment when we add investment); and a risk balance condition that describes asset prices given
risks, risk attitudes, beliefs, and the interest rate. This decomposition isolates the characterization
of asset prices from the “macroeconomics” side of the model. Therefore, it facilitates the study
of a variety of forces that a¤ect asset prices— including …nancial speculation— in a macroeconomic
environment. Our decomposition also highlights that the interest rate policy in‡uences aggregate
demand through its impact on …nancial markets and asset prices (whereas the New Keynesian
literature typically emphasizes intertemporal substitution considerations).1
       Our model is set in continuous time with di¤usion productivity shocks and Poisson shocks that
move the economy between high and low risk premium states. The supply side is a stochastic
endowment economy with sticky prices (which we extend to an endogenous growth model when
we add investment). The demand side has risk-averse consumer-investors who demand goods and
risky assets. We focus on “interest rate frictions” and “…nancial speculation.” By interest rate
frictions, we mean factors that might constrain or delay the adjustment of the risk-free interest
rate to shocks. For concreteness, we work with a zero lower bound on the policy interest rate, but
our mechanism is also applicable with other interest rate constraints such as a currency union, a
…xed exchange rate, or delays in the monetary policy reaction. By …nancial speculation, we mean
the trading of risky …nancial assets among investors that have heterogeneous valuations for these
assets. We capture speculation by allowing investors to have belief disagreements (with respect to
the transition probabilities between high and low risk premium states), but our results also apply
if speculation is driven by other sources of heterogeneous valuations. In particular, optimists in our
model can also capture more risk tolerant investors (e.g., banks or institutional investors), whereas
pessimists can capture less risk tolerant investors (e.g., households or retail investors).
       To …x ideas, consider an increase in perceived volatility (equivalently, a decrease in optimism).
This is a “risk premium shock” that exerts downward pressure on risky asset prices without a
change in current productivity (the supply-determined output level). Consequently, monetary
policy responds by reducing the interest rate, which stabilizes asset prices and aggregate demand.
However, if the interest rate is constrained, the rise in the risk premium reduces asset prices and
generates a demand recession.
       Dynamics play a crucial role in this environment, as the recession is exacerbated by feedback
mechanisms. When investors expect the higher risk premium to persist, the decline in future
demand lowers expected earnings, which exerts further downward pressure on asset prices. With
endogenous investment, there is a second mechanism, as the decline in investment lowers the growth
of potential output, which further reduces expected earnings and asset prices. In turn, the decline
in asset prices feeds back into current consumption and investment, generating scope for severe
spirals in asset prices and output. Figure I illustrates these dynamic mechanisms. The feedbacks
are especially powerful when investors are pessimistic and think the higher risk premium will persist.
Hence, average beliefs matter in our economy not only because they have a direct impact on asset
   1
    Our decomposition (and its implications for the transmission of monetary policy) matches the reasoning in actual
central banks’ statements when dealing with the risk-o¤ events that have plagued the world economy over the last
few decades (see, e.g., Cieslak and Vissing-Jorgensen (2017)).


                                                         2
        Figure I: Output-asset price feedbacks during a risk-centric demand recession.


prices but also because they determine the strength of the ampli…cation mechanism.
   In this environment, belief disagreements (or heterogeneous asset valuations) matter in two
important ways. First, asset prices depend on the wealth-weighted average belief among optimists
and pessimists. Therefore, in the recession, greater wealth in the hands of optimists increases
asset prices as well as aggregate demand and output. This result highlights that wealth distribution
matters for aggregate demand not only because of …nancial frictions (e.g., Bernanke et al. (1999))
or heterogeneous marginal propensities to consume (MPC) (e.g., Auclert (2019)), as emphasized by
the previous macroeconomics literature, but also because of heterogeneous asset valuations. In fact,
in our model there are no …nancial frictions, and optimists and pessimists have the same MPCs.
Increasing optimists’wealth share in the recession raises aggregate spending, not because optimists
spend more than pessimists, but because they raise asset valuations and induce all consumer-
investors to spend more (while also increasing aggregate investment when we add investment).
   Second, belief disagreements create speculation, which ampli…es the ‡uctuations in asset valu-
ations and aggregate demand. Investors take speculative positions that re‡ect their beliefs. This
speculation makes the wealth-weighted belief extrapolate recent realizations— even though individ-
ual investors have …xed beliefs and do not extrapolate. In particular, good realizations vindicate
optimists and increase their wealth share, which makes the wealth-weighted belief more optimistic.
Conversely, bad realizations increase pessimists’wealth share and make the wealth-weighted belief
more pessimistic. Therefore, speculation ampli…es the ‡uctuations in asset prices. When the in-
terest rate is constrained, speculation also ampli…es demand-driven boom-bust cycles and worsens
macroeconomic outcomes.



                                                 3
   Speci…cally, we …nd that speculation during the low risk premium phase (boom) exacerbates
the recession when there is a transition to the high risk premium phase (bust). During the boom,
optimists take on risk by selling insurance contracts to pessimists that enrich optimists if the boom
persists but reduce their wealth share when there is a transition to recession. This reallocation of
wealth in the recession lowers asset prices and leads to a more severe recession.
   These e¤ects motivate macroprudential policy that restricts speculation during the boom. We
show that macroprudential policy that makes optimistic investors behave as-if they were more
pessimistic (implemented via portfolio risk limits) can generate a Pareto improvement in social
welfare. This result is not driven by paternalistic concerns— the planner respects investors’ own
beliefs, and the result does not depend on whether optimists or pessimists are closer to the truth.
Rather, the planner improves welfare by internalizing aggregate demand externalities. During the
recession, the economy bene…ts from wealthy optimists (or high valuation investors) since they raise
asset prices and aggregate demand. However, optimists that take on speculative positions during
the boom (and pessimists that take the opposite side of those positions) do not internalize the
e¤ect of their risk taking on asset prices and aggregate demand during the recession. This leads
to excessive risk taking by optimists that can be o¤set by macroprudential policy. Therefore, our
model supports a variety of policies used in practice— such as a leverage limit or a risk limit— that
preserve optimists’ (or high valuation investors’) wealth for the recession state. Moreover, our
model supports procyclical macroprudential policy. While macroprudential policy can be useful
during the recession, these bene…ts can be outweighed by its immediate negative impact on asset
prices. This adverse price impact is not a concern during the boom, as it is o¤set by the interest rate
policy, but it lowers asset prices and output in the recession since the interest rate is constrained.

   While there is an extensive empirical literature supporting the components of our model (see
Section VII for a brief summary), we present additional empirical evidence consistent with our
results. We focus on three implications. First, our model predicts that shocks to asset valuations
generate a more severe demand recession when the interest rate is constrained. Second, the recession
reduces …rms’earnings and leads to a further decline in asset prices. Third, the recession is more
severe when the shock takes place in an environment with more speculation.
   To investigate these predictions, we assemble a quarterly panel data set of 20 advanced countries
between 1990 and 2017, and divide the panel into countries that are part of the Eurozone or the
European Exchange Rate Mechanism (the Euro/ERM sample) and those that have their own
currencies (the non-Euro/ERM sample). Countries in the …rst group have a constrained interest
rate with respect to local asset price shocks, since they share a common monetary policy. The
second group has a less constrained interest rate. We …nd that a negative house price shock in
a non-Euro/ERM country is associated with an initial decline in economic activity, followed by
a decline in the policy interest rate and output stabilization. In contrast, a similar shock in a
Euro/ERM country is not associated with an interest rate response (compared to other Euro/ERM
countries), and is followed by a more persistent and larger decline in economic activity. We also …nd
that the house price shock is followed by a larger decline in earnings and stock prices of publicly


                                                  4
traded …rms in the Euro/ERM sample (although the standard errors are larger for these results).
Finally, we …nd that past bank credit expansion— which we use as a proxy for speculation on house
prices— is associated with more severe outcomes following the house price shock in the Euro/ERM
sample (but not in the other sample).

    Literature review. Our paper is related to three main literatures: two in macroeconomics and
one in …nance. On the macroeconomics side, several recent papers within the New-Keynesian
literature emphasize demand shocks that might drive business cycles while also a¤ecting asset
prices, such as “news shocks” (Beaudry and Portier (2006)), “noise shocks” (Lorenzoni (2009);
Blanchard et al. (2013)), “con…dence shocks” (Ilut and Schneider (2014)), “uncertainty shocks”
(Basu and Bundick (2017); Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2015)), and “disaster shocks” (Isoré and
Szczerbowicz (2017)). Our …rst contribution to this literature is to reformulate the standard New
Keynesian model in terms of a risk-centric decomposition. With this decomposition at hand,
we provide an integrated treatment of these demand shocks. We refer to these demand shocks
as “risk premium shocks” to emphasize their close connection with asset prices and the …nance
literature on time-varying risk premia.2 Our second contribution to this literature is to show that
heterogeneity in asset valuation matters in these environments. Among other things, heterogeneous
valuations lead to speculation that exacerbates demand recessions and provides a distinct rationale
for macroprudential regulation.
    Another important macroeconomic literature focuses on uncertainty and its role in driving
macroeconomic ‡uctuations (e.g., Bloom (2009); Baker et al. (2016, 2019); Bloom et al. (2018)).
We contribute to this literature by showing how uncertainty a¤ects aggregate activity through asset
prices and their impact on aggregate demand. We also illustrate that, in our model, uncertainty
shocks have stronger e¤ects when monetary policy is constrained, consistent with recent empirical
evidence (e.g., Plante et al. (2018)). Finally, we show that ex-ante …nancial speculation ampli…es
the damage from uncertainty shocks.
    On the …nance side, a large literature emphasizes investors’ beliefs as a key driver of …nan-
cial boom-bust cycles (see, e.g., Gennaioli and Shleifer (2018) for the role of beliefs in the recent
crisis). A strand of this literature argues that heterogeneity in the degree of optimism combined
with short-selling constraints can lead to speculative asset price bubbles that substantially amplify
the …nancial cycle (e.g., Harrison and Kreps (1978); Scheinkman and Xiong (2003); Geanakoplos
(2010); Simsek (2013a); Barberis et al. (2018)). Related contributions emphasize that disagree-
ments exacerbate asset price ‡uctuations more broadly— even without short-selling constraints or
bubbles— because they create endogenous ‡uctuations in agents’ wealth distribution (e.g., Basak
(2000, 2005); Detemple and Murthy (1994); Zapatero (1998); Cao (2017); Xiong and Yan (2010);
Kubler and Schmedders (2012); Korinek and Nowak (2016)). Our paper features similar forces but
   2
     See Galí (2018) for an OLG variant of the New-Keynesian model with rational bubbles (see also Biswas et al.
(2018)), which also highlights the role of asset prices on aggregate demand. However, his analysis does not focus on
the risk-balance condition, which is a key block in our analysis. Also, there is a large body of work that emphasizes
the links between asset prices and macroeconomic outcomes through …nancial frictions (e.g., Kiyotaki and Moore
(1997)). Our model removes all these …nancial frictions for clarity.



                                                         5
explores them in an environment where output is not necessarily at its supply-determined level.3
    There are …ve additional connections worth highlighting. In our setting, speculation generates
macroeconomic outcomes as if there is a representative agent with extrapolative beliefs. This relates
our paper to a growing literature that emphasizes extrapolation as a key driver of asset prices and
business cycles (see, e.g., Bordalo et al. (2018, 2019)). While the two mechanisms are likely to
reinforce each other, speculation makes distinct predictions for trading volume and heterogeneity
in asset positions (see Remark 8).
    The interactions between heterogeneous valuations, risk-premia, and interest rate lower bounds
are central themes of the literature on structural safe asset shortages and safety traps (see, for
instance, Caballero and Farhi (2018); Caballero et al. (2017b)). We contribute to this literature
by considering a broader set of factors that can drive the risk premium (in addition to safe asset
scarcity) and, more importantly, by focusing on dynamics. We analyze the connections between
boom and recession phases of recurrent business cycles driven by risk premium shocks. We show
that speculation between “optimists”and “pessimists”during the boom exacerbates a future risk-
centric demand recession, and we derive the implications for macroprudential policy. In contrast,
Caballero and Farhi (2018) show how “pessimists” can create a demand recession in otherwise
normal times and derive the implications for …scal policy and unconventional monetary policy.4
    At a methodological level, our paper belongs to the new continuous-time macro…nance literature
started by the work of Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014, 2016a) and summarized in Brunnermeier
and Sannikov (2016b) (see also Basak and Cuoco (1998); Adrian and Boyarchenko (2012); He and
Krishnamurthy (2012, 2013); Di Tella (2017, 2019); Moreira and Savov (2017); Silva (2016); Di Tella
and Hall (2019)). This literature highlights the full macroeconomic dynamics induced by …nancial
frictions. While the structure of our economy shares many features with theirs, our model has
no …nancial frictions, and the macroeconomic dynamics stem not from the supply side (relative
productivity) but from the aggregate demand side.
    Our results on macroprudential policy are related to recent work that analyzes the implications
of aggregate demand externalities for the optimal regulation of …nancial markets. For instance,
Korinek and Simsek (2016) show that, in the run-up to deleveraging episodes that coincide with a
zero-lower-bound on the interest rate, policies targeted at reducing household leverage can improve
welfare (see also Farhi and Werning (2017)). In these papers, macroprudential policy reallocates
wealth across agents and states so that agents with a higher MPC hold relatively more wealth when
the economy is depressed due to de…cient demand. The mechanism in our paper is di¤erent and
   3
     With respect to these papers, we show that speculation during the boom not only worsens the asset price bust but
also exacerbates the demand recession. Consequently, and unlike much of this literature, macroprudential policy that
restricts speculation can improve welfare even if the planner is not paternalistic and respects investors’(heterogeneous
and possibly over-optimistic) beliefs. Adding paternalistic concerns reinforces our normative conclusions (see Section
VI). More broadly, our paper is part of a large …nance literature that investigates the e¤ect of belief disagreements
and speculation on …nancial markets (e.g., Lintner (1969); Miller (1977); Varian (1989); Harris and Raviv (1993);
Chen et al. (2002); Fostel and Geanakoplos (2008); Simsek (2013b); Iachan et al. (2015)).
   4
     Our paper is also related to an extensive literature on liquidity traps that has exploded since the Great Recession
(see, for instance, Tobin (1975); Krugman (1998); Eggertsson and Woodford (2006); Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2017);
Hall (2011); Christiano et al. (2015); Rognlie et al. (2018); Midrigan et al. (2016); Bacchetta et al. (2016)).



                                                           6
works through heterogeneous asset valuations (instead of heterogenous MPCs).5
       The macroprudential literature beyond aggregate demand externalities is mostly motivated by
the presence of pecuniary externalities that make the competitive equilibrium constrained ine¢ cient
(e.g., Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2003); Lorenzoni (2008); Bianchi and Mendoza (2018); Jeanne
and Korinek (2018)). The friction in this literature is market incompleteness or collateral constraints
that depend on asset prices (see Davila and Korinek (2016) for a detailed exposition). We show
that a decline in asset prices is damaging not only for the reasons emphasized in this literature,
but also because it lowers aggregate demand.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II we present an example that illus-
trates the main mechanism and motivates the rest of our analysis. Section III presents the general
environment and de…nes the equilibrium. Section IV characterizes the equilibrium in a benchmark
setting with common beliefs. This section shows how risk premium shocks can lower asset prices
and induce a demand recession, and how feedback loops between asset prices and aggregate de-
mand exacerbate the recession. Section V characterizes the equilibrium with belief disagreements
and heterogeneous asset valuations. This section illustrates how a greater optimists’wealth share
increases asset valuations and mitigates the recession, and how speculation ampli…es asset price
‡uctuations and worsens the recession. Section VI shows the aggregate demand externalities as-
sociated with optimists’risk taking and establishes our results on macroprudential policy. Section
VII presents our empirical analysis and summarizes supporting evidence from the related literature.
Section VIII concludes. The (online) appendices contain the omitted derivations and proofs as well
as the details of our empirical analysis.


                     II. A stepping-stone risk-centric example
Here we present a simple, largely static example that serves as a stepping stone to our main dynamic
model. We start with a representative agent setup and characterize the standard aggregate demand
mechanism in the New Keynesian model, but formulated in terms of our risk-centric decomposition.
We use this decomposition to illustrate how “risk premium shocks” generate a demand recession
when the interest rate is constrained. We then consider heterogeneous valuations and illustrate
how speculation a¤ects demand recessions.

A two-period risk-centric aggregate demand model.                       Consider an economy with two dates,
t 2 f0; 1g, a single consumption good, and a single factor of production— capital. For simplicity,
capital is …xed and normalized to one. Potential output is equal to capital’s productivity, zt , but
actual output can be below this level due to a shortage of aggregate demand, yt                zt . For simplicity,
we assume output is equal to its potential at the last date, y1 = z1 , and focus on the endogenous
determination of output at the previous date, y0              z0 . We assume the productivity at date 1 is
   5
    See Farhi and Werning (2016) for a synthesis of some of the key mechanisms that justify macroprudential policies
in models that exhibit aggregate demand externalities.



                                                         7
uncertain and log-normally distributed,
                                                                     2
                                                                             2
(1)                                 log y1 = log z1    N     g           ;       .
                                                                     2

We also normalize the initial productivity to one, z0 = 1, so that g captures the (log) expected
growth rate of productivity, and       captures its volatility.
      There are two types of assets. There is a “market portfolio”that represents claims to the output
at date 1 (which accrue to production …rms as earnings), and a risk-free asset in zero net supply.
We denote the price of the market portfolio with Q, and its log return with

                                                              z1
(2)                                          rm (z1 ) = log      .
                                                              Q

We denote the log risk-free interest rate with rf .
      For now, the demand side is characterized by a representative investor, who is endowed with
the initial output as well as the market portfolio. At date 0, she chooses how much to consume, c0 ,
and what fraction of her wealth to allocate to the market portfolio, ! m , with the residual fraction
invested in the risk-free asset. When asset markets are in equilibrium, she will allocate all of her
wealth to the market portfolio, ! m = 1, and her portfolio demand will determine the risk premium.
      We assume the investor has Epstein-Zin preferences with discount factor e          and relative risk
aversion coe¢ cient (RRA)        . For simplicity, we set the elasticity of intertemporal substitution
(EIS) equal to one. Allowing for a more general EIS leaves our results qualitatively unchanged (see
Remark 2).
      The supply side of the economy is described by New-Keynesian …rms that have …xed nominal
prices (see Remark 1 below for the role of this assumption and Online Appendix Section B.1.3 for
details). These …rms meet the available demand at these prices as long as prices are higher than
their marginal cost. These features imply that output is determined by the aggregate demand for
goods (consumption) up to the capacity constraint,

(3)                                              y0 = c0    z0 .

      Since prices are fully sticky, the real interest rate is equal to the nominal interest rate, which is
controlled by the central bank. We assume that the interest rate policy attempts to replicate the
supply-determined output level. However, there is a lower bound constraint on the interest rate,
rf      0. Thus, the interest rate policy is described by rf = max rf ; 0 , where rf is the natural
interest rate that ensures output is at its potential, y0 = z0 .
      To characterize the equilibrium, …rst note that there is a tight relationship between output and
asset prices. Speci…cally, the assumption on the EIS isolates the consumption wealth e¤ect: the
investor consumes a fraction of her lifetime income in the …rst period,

                                                   1
(4)                                       c0 =             (y0 + Q) .
                                                 1+e

                                                       8
Combining this expression with Eq. (3), we obtain the following equation:

(5)                                                y0 = e Q:

We refer to this equation as the output-asset price relation— generally, it is obtained by combining
the consumption function (and when there is investment, also the investment function) with goods
market clearing. The condition says that asset prices increase aggregate wealth and consumption,
which in turn leads to greater output.
      Next, note that asset prices must also be consistent with equilibrium in risk markets. In Online
Appendix Section A.1, we show that, up to a local approximation, the investor’s optimal weight on
the market portfolio is determined by
                                                                       2
                                        m       1 E [rm (z1 )] +   2           rf
(6)                                 !       '                                       .

In words, the optimal portfolio risk (left side) is proportional to “the Sharpe ratio” on the market
portfolio (right side). The Sharpe ratio captures the reward per risk, where the reward is determined
by the risk premium: the (log) expected return in excess of the (log) risk free rate. This is the
standard risk-taking condition for mean-variance portfolio optimization. It applies approximately
in the two-period model, and the approximation becomes exact when there is a representative
household and the asset markets are in equilibrium (! m = 1).
      Substituting the asset market clearing condition, ! m = 1, and the expected return on the
market portfolio from Eqs. (1) and (2), we obtain the following equation:

                                                 1g     log Q      rf
(7)                                         =                              .

We refer to this equation as the risk balance condition— generally, it is obtained by combining
investors’ optimal portfolio allocations with asset market clearing and the equilibrium return on
the market portfolio. The equilibrium level of the Sharpe ratio on the market portfolio (right side)
needs to be large enough to convince investors to hold the risk generated by the productive capacity
(left side).
      Next, consider the supply-determined equilibrium in which output is equal to its potential,
y0 = z0 = 1. Eq. (5) reveals that this requires the asset price to be at a particular level, Q = e   .
Combining this with Eq. (7), the interest rate also needs to be at a particular level,

(8)                                         rf = g +               2
                                                                       :

Intuitively, the monetary policy needs to set the interest rate low enough to induce su¢ ciently high
asset prices and aggregate demand to clear the goods market.
      Now suppose the initial parameters are such that rf > 0, so the equilibrium features Q ; rf
and supply-determined output, y0 = z0 = 1. Consider a “risk premium shock” that raises the


                                                       9
volatility, , or risk aversion, . The immediate impact of this shock is to create an imbalance in
the risk balance condition (7). The economy produces too much risk (left side) relative to what
investors are willing to absorb (right side). In response, the monetary policy lowers the risk-free
interest rate (captured by the decline in rf ), which increases the risk premium and equilibrates
the risk balance condition (7). Intuitively, the central bank lowers the opportunity cost of risky
investment and induces investors to absorb more risk.
      Next suppose the shock is large enough that the natural interest rate becomes negative, rf < 0,
and the actual interest rate becomes constrained, rf = 0. In this case, the risk balance condition
is re-established via a decline in the price of the market portfolio, Q. This decline in asset prices
increases the expected return on risky investment, which induces investors to absorb risk. However,
the decline in Q reduces aggregate wealth and induces a demand-driven recession. Formally, we
combine Eqs. (5) and (7) to obtain

                                                                                              2
(9)                              log y0 =          + log Q;    where log Q = g                    .

Note that, in the constrained region, asset prices and output are sensitive to beliefs about fu-
ture prospects. For instance, a decrease in the expected growth rate, g (pessimism)— rational or
otherwise— decreases asset prices and worsens the recession. In fact, while we considered shocks
that raise           or , Eqs. (8) and (9) reveal that shocks that lower g lead to the same e¤ects. The
key point for our risk-centric perspective is that g still operates by reducing the expected return
on risky assets and hence creating an imbalance in risk markets.

Heterogeneous valuations and speculation.                           We next consider heterogeneous asset valua-
tions and investigate how speculation a¤ects demand recessions. We capture heterogeneous val-
uations with belief disagreements about productivity growth. Speci…cally, there are two types
of investors, optimists and pessimists, that believe log z1 is distributed according to, respectively,
             2                         2
N go        2    ;   2   and N g p     2   ;   2   . We assume g o > g p so that optimists perceive greater growth.
Beliefs are dogmatic— that is, investors know each others’beliefs and they agree to disagree. Opti-
mists are endowed with a fraction                   of the market portfolio and of date 0 output (and pessimists
are endowed with the remaining fraction). Hence,                      denotes the wealth share of optimists. The
rest of the model is unchanged.
      Following similar steps to those in the baseline case, we solve for “rstar”as (see Online Appendix
Section A.3),

(10)                                       rf ' g o + (1           ) gp +      2
                                                                                   .

When rf < 0, the interest rate is constrained and rf = 0, so we have a demand recession with

(11)                        log y0 =   + log Q, where log Q ' g o + (1                 ) gp            2
                                                                                                           .

Hence equilibrium prices and output depend on optimists’wealth share,                                 . During the recession,

                                                              10
increasing   improves outcomes because optimists increase asset prices, which increases aggregate
wealth and everyone’s spending. In our dynamic model,            is endogenous because investors (ex-
ante) speculate on their di¤erent beliefs. Moreover, speculation reduces           during the recession
because optimists think the risk premium shock is unlikely. This exacerbates the recession and
motivates macroprudential policy.
Remark 1 (Role of nominal price rigidity). In our model (as well as in other New Keynesian
models), nominal price rigidity plays two roles. First, and most importantly, it creates a real
interest rate rigidity. To see this, consider an alternative economy in which prices are fully ‡exible
and the nominal interest rate is at a lower bound. How would this economy react to a risk premium
shock that requires a decline in the real interest rate? By de…nition, the real rate is equal to the
nominal interest rate minus expected in‡ation in nominal prices. Since the nominal interest rate is
constrained, the economy must generate expected in‡ation: either the current nominal prices must
decline or the future nominal prices must increase (or a combination of the two). Nominal price
rigidity hinders such an adjustment and translates into real interest rate rigidity. As our analysis
illustrates, this rigidity reduces real asset prices in …nancial markets, which in turn reduces aggregate
demand in goods markets. Nominal price rigidity plays a second role by making …rms respond to
the decline in aggregate demand by cutting production— instead of cutting their nominal price to
increase the demand for their goods (see Online Appendix Section B.1.3 for a formalization and
Remark 3 for a discussion of how partial price ‡exibility a¤ects our results).
Remark 2 (More general EIS). In Online Appendix Section A.2, we extend the baseline two-period
model (without disagreements) to cases where the EIS is di¤erent from one. In these cases, a risk
premium shock a¤ects output through two channels. As before, it exerts a downward in‡uence
on asset prices and consumption through a wealth e¤ect. But it also reduces the attractiveness of
investment opportunities, which further a¤ects consumption depending on the balance of income
and substitution e¤ects. When the EIS is greater than one, the second channel works against
the wealth e¤ect because investors substitute toward consumption. When the EIS is less than
one, the second channel reinforces the wealth e¤ect. Importantly, we show that the wealth e¤ect
dominates regardless of the EIS. When the interest rate is constrained, a risk premium shock reduces
equilibrium output as well as the asset price. When the EIS is greater than one, the substitution
e¤ect dampens these declines but it does not overturn them.


                 III. Dynamic environment and equilibrium
In this section we introduce our general dynamic environment and de…ne the equilibrium. We
then partially characterize the equilibrium. In subsequent sections we further characterize this
equilibrium in various special cases of interest. Throughout, we simplify the analysis by abstracting
away from investment. In Online Appendix Section D, we extend the environment to introduce
investment and endogenous growth. We discuss additional results related to investment at the end
of Section IV.

                                                   11
Potential output and risk premium shocks.                       The economy is set in in…nite continuous time,
t 2 [0; 1), with a single consumption good and a single factor of production, capital. Let kt;s
denote the capital stock at time t and in the aggregate state s 2 S. Suppose that, when fully
utilized, kt;s units of capital produce Akt;s units of the consumption good. Hence, Akt;s denotes
the potential output in this economy. Capital follows the process

                                                dkt;s
(12)                                                  = gdt +      s dZt .
                                                kt;s

Here, g denotes the expected productivity growth, which is an exogenous parameter in the main
text (we endogenize it in Online Appendix Section D). The term dZt denotes the standard Brownian
motion, which captures “aggregate productivity shocks.”6
         The states, s 2 S, di¤er only in terms of the volatility of aggregate productivity,                     s.   For
simplicity, there are only two states, s 2 f1; 2g, with                1     <   2.   State s = 1 corresponds to a
low-volatility state, whereas state s = 2 corresponds to a high-volatility state. At each instant, the
economy in state s transitions into the other state s0 6= s according to a Poisson process. We use
these volatility shocks to capture the time variation in the risk premium due to various unmodeled
factors (see Section II for an illustration of how risk, risk aversion, and beliefs play a similar role
in our analysis).

Investor types. There is a …nite number of investor types denoted by i 2 I. Investor types are
identical in all respects except for their beliefs about state transitions. Each type consists of a
continuum of identical investors with mass normalized to one. We focus on symmetric equilibria
in which investors within a type choose identical allocations.

                                                                                       i
Transition probabilities and belief disagreements. We let                              s   > 0 denote the perceived
Poisson transition probability in state s (into the other state) according to type i investors. These
probabilities capture the degree of investors’(relative) optimism or pessimism. For instance, greater
 i
 2   corresponds to greater optimism because investors expect the high-risk-premium conditions to
                                                i
end relatively soon. Likewise, smaller          1   corresponds to greater optimism because investors expect
the low-risk-premium conditions to persist longer. We …rst analyze the special case with common
beliefs (Section IV) and then investigate belief disagreements and speculation (Section V). When
investors disagree, they know each others’beliefs and they agree to disagree.

Menu of …nancial assets. There are three types of …nancial assets. First, there is a market
portfolio that represents a claim on all output. We let Qt;s kt;s denote the price of the market
                                                                  m denote the instantaneous expected
portfolio, so Qt;s denotes the price per unit of capital. We let rt;s
     6
    Note that ‡uctuations in kt;s generate ‡uctuations in potential output, Akt;s . We introduce Brownian shocks to
capital, kt;s , as opposed to total factor productivity, A, since this leads to a slightly more tractable analysis when we
extend the model to include investment (see Online Appendix Section D). In the main text, we could equivalently
introduce shocks to A and conduct the analysis by normalizing all relevant variables with At;s as opposed to kt;s .



                                                           12
return on the market portfolio conditional on no transition. Second, there is a risk-free asset in
                                                        f
zero net supply. We denote its instantaneous return by rt;s . Third, in each state s, there is a
                                                                                                            0
contingent Arrow-Debreu security that trades at the (endogenous) price pst;s and pays 1 unit of the
consumption good if the economy transitions into the other state s0 6= s. This security is also in
zero net supply and it ensures that …nancial markets are dynamically complete.

Price and return of the market portfolio.                           Absent transitions, the price of the market port-
folio per unit of capital follows an endogenous di¤usion process,

                                  dQt;s         Q              Q
(13)                                    =       t;s dt   +     t;s dZt      for s 2 f1; 2g .
                                  Qt;s

Combining Eqs. (12) and (13), the price of the market portfolio (absent transition) follows

                          d (Qt;s kt;s )                 Q            Q                       Q
(14)                                     = g+            t;s   +    s t;s   dt +    s   +     t;s       dZt .
                            Qt;s kt;s

The expected return and the volatility of the market portfolio (absent transition) are then given by

                        m        yt;s               Q                Q                  m                       Q
(15)                   rt;s =             +g+       t;s    +       s t;s    and         t;s   =     s   +       t;s .
                                Qt;s kt;s
                                                                               m captures the
Here, yt;s denotes the endogenous level of output at time t. The …rst term in rt;s
“dividend yield” component of return. The remaining terms capture the (expected) capital gain
conditional on no transition, which re‡ects the expected growth of capital, of the price per unit of
capital, and of their stochastic interaction.
    Eqs. (13     15) describe the prices and returns conditional on no state transition. If there is a
transition at time t from state s into state s0 6= s, then the price per unit of capital jumps from Qt;s
to a potentially di¤erent level, Qt;s0 . Therefore, investors that hold the market portfolio experience
instantaneous capital gains or losses.

Consumption and portfolio choice. Investors continuously make consumption and portfolio
allocation decisions. Speci…cally, at any time t and state s, each type i investor has some …nan-
cial wealth denoted by ait;s . She chooses her consumption rate, cit;s ; the fraction of her wealth to
allocate to the market portfolio, ! m;i
                                    t;s ; and the fraction of her wealth to allocate to the contingent
             0                                                      0
security, ! st;s;i . The residual fraction, 1     ! m;i
                                                    t;s        ! st;s;i , is invested in the risk-free asset. For analytical
tractability, we assume the investor has log utility. In particular, we set the RRA and the EIS
equal to one (see Remark 6 in Section IV for a discussion of how a more general RRA a¤ects our
results). The investor then solves a standard portfolio problem that we formally state in Online
Appendix Section B.1.1.




                                                                   13
Equilibrium in asset markets.                 Asset markets clear when the total wealth held by investors is
equal to the value of the market portfolio before and after the portfolio allocation decisions,
                             X                                            X
(16)                              ait;s = Qt;s kt;s       and                       ! m;i  i
                                                                                      t;s at;s = Qt;s kt;s :
                              i                                                i

Contingent securities are in zero net supply, which implies
                                                    X           0
(17)                                                      ! st;s;i ait;s = 0.
                                                      i

The market clearing condition for the risk-free asset (which is also in zero net supply) holds when
conditions (16) and (17) are satis…ed.

Nominal rigidities and the equilibrium in goods markets.                                               The supply side of our model
features nominal rigidities similar to the standard New Keynesian model. We relegate the details to
Online Appendix Section B.1.3. There is a continuum of monopolistically competitive production
…rms that own the capital stock and produce intermediate goods (which are then converted into the
…nal good). For simplicity, these production …rms have pre-set nominal prices that never change
(see Remark 3 below for a discussion of the case with partial price ‡exibility). The …rms choose
their capital utilization rate,      t;s   2 [0; 1], which leads to output yt;s =                              t;s Akt;s .   We assume …rms
can increase factor utilization for free until            t;s   = 1 and they cannot increase it beyond this level.
    As we show in the online appendix, these features imply that output is determined by aggregate
demand for goods up to the capacity constraint. Combining this with market clearing in goods,
output is determined by aggregate consumption (up to the capacity constraint),
                                                          X
(18)                          yt;s =       t;s Akt;s =          cit;s ,            where    t;s   2 [0; 1] .
                                                          i


Moreover, all output accrues to production …rms in the form of earnings.7 Hence, the market
portfolio can be thought of as a claim on all production …rms.

Interest rate rigidity and monetary policy.                               Our assumption that production …rms do not
change their prices implies that the aggregate nominal price level is …xed. The real risk-free interest
rate, then, is equal to the nominal risk-free interest rate, which is determined by the interest rate
policy of the central bank. We assume there is a lower bound on the nominal interest rate, which
we set at zero for convenience,

                                                           f
(19)                                                      rt;s            0.
   7
     In this model, …rms own the capital so the division of earnings is indeterminate. Since there is no investment,
this division is inconsequential. When we introduce investment in Online Appendix Section D, we make additional
assumptions to determine how earnings are divided between returns to capital and monopoly pro…ts.




                                                                    14
The zero lower bound is motivated by the presence of cash in circulation (which we leave unmodeled
for simplicity).
    We assume that the interest rate policy aims to replicate the level of output that would obtain
without nominal rigidities subject to the constraint in (19). Without nominal rigidities, capital is
fully utilized,    t;s   = 1 (see Online Appendix Section B.1.3). Thus, we assume that the interest rate
policy follows the rule

                                 f             f;
(20)                            rt;s = max 0; rt;s    for each t   0 and s 2 S.

       f;
Here, rt;s is recursively de…ned as the instantaneous natural interest rate that obtains when    t;s   =1
and monetary policy follows the rule in (20) at all future times and states.

De…nition 1. The equilibrium is a collection of processes for allocations, prices, and returns such
that capital and its price evolve according to (12) and (13), the instantaneous return and the
volatility of the market portfolio are given by (15), investors maximize expected utility (cf. Online
Appendix Section B.1.1), asset markets clear (cf. Eqs. (16) and (17)), production …rms maximize
earnings (cf. Online Appendix Section B.1.3), goods markets clear (cf. Eq. (18)), and the interest
rate policy follows the rule in (20).

Remark 3 (Partial price ‡exibility). Our assumption of …xed nominal prices is extreme. However,
allowing some nominal price ‡exibility does not necessarily circumvent the lower bound in (19).
In fact, if monetary policy follows an in‡ation targeting policy regime, partial price ‡exibility
leads to expected price de‡ation during a demand recession— the opposite of what the economy
needs to circumvent the lower bound on the nominal interest rate (see Remark 1). Intuitively,
individual …rms respond to the recession by cutting their individual nominal prices, which increases
their individual demand given aggregate demand. However, the decline in nominal prices does not
necessarily stabilize aggregate demand— whether or not this happens depends on monetary policy.
In an in‡ation targeting regime, nominal prices decline during the recession and get stabilized at a
lower level once the economy exits the recession. This creates expected de‡ation that strengthens
the bound in (19) and exacerbates the recession (see Werning (2012); Korinek and Simsek (2016);
Caballero and Farhi (2018) for further discussion).

    In the rest of this section, we provide a partial characterization of the equilibrium. In subse-
quent sections, we use this characterization to describe the equilibrium for various speci…cations of
investors’beliefs.


III.A. Equilibrium in the goods market
First consider the goods market. The following result establishes that there is a tight relationship
between output and asset prices as in the two period model.




                                                      15
Lemma 1 (Output-asset price relation). The equilibrium level of output (per capital) satis…es

                                             yt;s
(21)                                              =A              t;s   = Qt;s .
                                             kt;s

The equilibrium return and the volatility of the market portfolio (absent transition) are given by

                             m               Q                 Q                   m                 Q
(22)                        rt;s =     +g+   t;s   +         s t;s       and       t;s   =   s   +   t;s .


   As before, the output-asset price relation in (21) follows from the wealth e¤ect. In view of log
utility, each investor optimally consumes a constant fraction of her wealth (see Online Appendix
Section B.1.1)

(23)                                                     cit;s = ait;s .

This implies that aggregate consumption is a constant fraction of aggregate wealth [cf. (16)],
                                              X
(24)                                                     cit;s = Qt;s kt;s :
                                                   i

Combining this with Eq. (18), we obtain the relation in (21). Substituting this into Eq. (15),
we further obtain Eq. (22). In view of the output-asset price relation, the dividend yield on the
market portfolio is equal to the consumption rate .
   As before, the output-asset price relation implies that full factor utilization,                           t;s   = 1, obtains
                                                                                         A
only if the price per unit of capital is at a particular level Q                             . This is the e¢ cient price level
that ensures the implied consumption clears the goods market. Likewise, the economy features a
demand recession,     t;s   < 1, only if the price per unit of capital is strictly below Q . Combining
these observations with the interest rate policy in (20), we also summarize the goods market with

                                 f
(25)              Qt;s      Q ; rt;s    0,   where at least one condition is an equality.

The equilibrium at any time and state takes one of two forms. If the natural interest rate is
nonnegative, then the interest rate policy ensures that the price per unit of capital is at the e¢ cient
level, Qt;s = Q , capital is fully utilized,           t;s   = 1, and output is equal to its potential, yt;s = Akt;s .
                                              f
Otherwise, the interest rate is constrained, rt;s = 0, the price is lower, Qt;s < Q , and output is
determined by aggregate demand according to Eq. (21).


III.B. Equilibrium in asset markets
Next consider asset markets. The equilibrium in these markets depends on investors’ relative
wealth. We de…ne type i investors’wealth share as

                                                        i
                                                                    ait;s
(26)                                                    t;s   =             .
                                                                  kt;s Qt;s

                                                                  16
                                                                    P              i
By de…nition, the wealth shares sum to one,                                i       t;s     = 1 [cf. (16)]. These wealth shares matter
because they determine the wealth-weighted average belief for the transition probability, de…ned as
                                                                      X
                                                                                       i   i
(27)                                                        t;s                        t;s s .
                                                                           i

We will show that asset prices are determined as-if there is a representative investor that has the
wealth-weighted average belief. However, the wealth-weighted average belief is not constant over
time because investors have speculative portfolios that a¤ect their wealth shares. Therefore, we
start by characterizing investors’optimal portfolios and the resulting wealth dynamics. We use the
                                                                                                             d    i
notation x_ to denote the time derivative of variable x, i.e., _ it;s =                                           t;s
                                                                                                                 dt     denotes the drift in type i
investors’wealth share.

Lemma 2 (Wealth-share dynamics). Investors hold identical positions on the market portfolio,

(28)                                                    ! m;i
                                                          t;s = 1              for each i.

They hold possibly heterogeneous positions on the contingent security given by
                                                                0
(29)                                                      ! st;s;i =           i
                                                                               s           t;s .


Type i investors’ wealth share evolves according to

                      _ it;s              0
                       i       =    ! st;s;i =    t;s
                                                            i
                                                            s,             if there is no state change,
                       t;s
(30)                   i             i
                       t;s0
                        i       =    s
                                          ,                                if there is a state change to s0 .
                        t;s         t;s



    Eq. (28) says that investors’ belief disagreements do not a¤ect their positions on the market
portfolio. In contrast, Eq. (29) shows that belief disagreements do a¤ect investors’positions on the
contingent security, and Eq. (30) describes the resulting wealth dynamics. When type i investors
                                                                                   i
assign a relatively large probability to transition,                               s    >      t;s ,   they purchase the contingent security
                                        0
that pays if there is a transition, ! st;s;i > 0. As long                          as the economy remains in the same state, their
wealth share drifts downward, _ it;s < 0. However,                                 if there is a transition to the other state, then
                                                                    i
                                                                    t;s0
their wealth share makes an upward jump,                             i         > 1. Conversely, when type i investors assign a
                                                                     t;s
relatively small probability to transition, they sell the contingent security. This ensures that their
wealth share drifts upward if the economy remains in the same state, and it makes a downward
jump if there is a transition. These dynamics are important for our main result (see Section V).
    We provide a sketch proof of Lemma 2, which is useful for developing further intuition and ob-
taining additional results. We derive investors’portfolio optimality conditions in Online Appendix
Section B.1.1. A type i investor’s portfolio weight on the market portfolio is determined by
                                                                                                                        !
                                                  1                                        1=ait;s0 Qt;s0 Qt;s
(31)                           ! m;i m
                                 t;s t;s      =   m
                                                          m
                                                         rt;s        f
                                                                    rt;s       +       i
                                                                                       s                                    .
                                                  t;s                                      1=ait;s      Qt;s

                                                                       17
That is, she invests in the market portfolio until the risk of her portfolio (left side) is equal to the
“Sharpe ratio”of the market portfolio (right side). This is similar to the optimality condition in the
two period model (cf. Eq. (6)), but the dynamic model also features state transitions. Our notion
of the Sharpe ratio accounts for potential revaluation gains or losses from transitions (the term
Qt;s0 Qt;s                                                                                                   1=ait;s0
   Qt;s    )   and the adjustment of marginal utility in case there is a transition (the term                1=ait;s
                                                                                                                        ).8
    Likewise, the investor’s optimal portfolio allocation to the contingent securities implies
                                                            0
                                                      pst;s         1=ait;s0
(32)                                                      i
                                                                =              .
                                                          s         1=ait;s

                             0
The portfolio weight, ! st;s;i , is implicitly determined as the level that ensures this equality. The
investor buys contingent securities until the perceived price-to-probability ratio of a state (or the
state price) is equal to the investor’s relative marginal utility in that state.
    Substituting (32) into (31) shows that di¤erent investor types allocate identical portfolio weights
to the market portfolio, ! m;i     m
                           t;s = ! t;s . Together with market clearing [cf. (16)], this implies Eq. (28).
    To establish the remaining results in the lemma, we rewrite (32) in terms of wealth shares to
obtain [cf. (26)]

                                   i          i   i   1                                       0    Qt;s0
(33)                               t;s0   =   t;s s         ;       where          t;s   = pst;s         .
                                                      t;s                                          Qt;s

Here,     is a variable that depends on asset prices but that is common across investor types.
         t;s
                                                              P
Aggregating this equation across all investor types, and using i it;s0 = 1, we obtain the second
part of Eq. (30). In Online Appendix Section B.1.2, we further derive Eq. (29) and the …rst part
of Eq. (30) by combining Eq. (33) with investors’budget constraints.

Remark 4 (Deterministic wealth dynamics within a state). Lemma 2 shows that investors’wealth
shares follow deterministic dynamics absent state transitions. This property is driven by Eq. (28),
which ensures that investors’relative wealth shares are not in‡uenced by dZt . As our proof illus-
trates, Eq. (28) is driven by complete markets and constant RRA preferences. Complete markets
ensure disagreements per se do not induce investors to trade the market portfolio. Intuitively, since
investors disagree about transition risk, they settle these disagreements by trading the contingent
security for the corresponding risk instead of the market portfolio. Constant (and common) RRA
preferences ensure risk sharing considerations do not generate trade on the market portfolio either.

Remark 5 (Separability of wealth dynamics and asset prices). Lemma 2 also implies that in-
vestors’wealth shares follow the same dynamics regardless of asset prices or monetary policy. This
separability property comes from assuming complete markets and log utility. As we discuss in the
previous remark, these assumptions imply that investors do not trade the market portfolio— such
trade would make asset prices relevant for wealth shares (see Caballero and Simsek (2019)). Log
  8
    The presence of state transitions makes the Sharpe ratio in our model slightly di¤erent from its common de…nition,
which corresponds to the expected return in excess of the risk-free rate normalized by volatility.


                                                                18
utility (which features RRA equal to one) is also necessary because, as captured by Eq. (33), it
ensures that investors’marginal utility depends only on their wealth. In particular, investors do not
have dynamic hedging motives— these motives would make asset prices relevant for wealth shares
(see Remark 6 and Online Appendix Section E for further discussion of the case with more general
RRA).

       The separability property is convenient because it breaks the analysis with belief disagreements
into two steps. We …rst use Lemma 2 to characterize investors’wealth dynamics and the evolution
of the wealth-weighted average belief in (27). We then characterize equilibrium asset prices. The
following lemma facilitates the second step by establishing the equilibrium conditions for asset
prices given the wealth-weighted average belief. The proof follows from Eqs. (31                                                                33) and is
relegated to Online Appendix Section B.1.2.

Lemma 3 (Risk balance condition). The equilibrium price of the market portfolio satis…es

                         m            1      m            f                         Qt;s
(34)                     t;s    =     m     rt;s         rt;s +     t;s     1                       ,
                                      t;s                                           Qt;s0
                         m                         Q              Q                       m                     Q
             where      rt;s =        +g+          t;s   +      s t;s       and           t;s   =       s   +   t;s      [cf. Lemma 1].

The equilibrium price of the contingent security satis…es

                                                                0               1=Qt;s0
(35)                                                         pst;s =      t;s           :
                                                                                1=Qt;s

Eqs. (34        35) are identical to their counterparts in an alternative economy in which a representa-
tive investor has the wealth-weighted average belief                              t;s .

       Lemma 3 shows that asset prices are determined as-if there is a representative investor that has
the wealth-weighted average belief. Eq. (34) is the risk balance condition: the dynamic counterpart
to Eq. (7) in the two-period model. In each state, the total risk in the economy (the left side) is
equal to the Sharpe ratio according to the wealth-weighted average belief (the right side). Note that
the Sharpe ratio accounts for the fact that the aggregate wealth and (aggregate) marginal utility
will change if there is a state transition.9 Likewise, Eq. (35) shows that the equilibrium price of
the contingent security re‡ects the wealth-weighted average belief and the change in (aggregate)
marginal utility after transition.

First-best equilibrium. For future reference, we derive the …rst-best equilibrium without inter-
est rate rigidities. In this case, there is no lower bound constraint on the interest rate, so the price
per unit of capital is at its e¢ cient level at all times and states, Qt;s = Q . Combining this with
   9                                        Qt;s0        Qt;s                               1=Qt;s0 Qt;s0       Qt;s             Qt;s0   Qt;s
       To see this, observe that the term      Qt;s0
                                                                is actually equal to        1=Qt;s          Qt;s
                                                                                                                       . Here,      Qt;s
                                                                                                                                                denotes the
                     1=Qt;s0
capital gains and    1=Qt;s
                               denotes the aggregate marginal utility adjustment.




                                                                          19
Eq. (34), we solve for “rstar” as

(36)                                            rsf =       +g          2
                                                                        s     for each s 2 f1; 2g .

Hence, in the …rst-best equilibrium the risk premium shocks are fully absorbed by the interest
rate. Note also that, by Lemma 2, investors’ wealth shares do ‡uctuate when there are belief
disagreements. In the …rst-best equilibrium, these wealth-share ‡uctuations a¤ect the equilibrium
price of the contingent security [cf. Eqs. (35)] but not the equilibrium price of capital, aggregate
demand, or the interest rate. Next, we characterize the equilibrium with interest rate rigidities.


             IV. Common belief benchmark and ampli…cation
In this section, we analyze the equilibrium in a benchmark case with a single investor type with
                                     i
belief denoted by          s         s.   We use this benchmark to illustrate how the spirals between asset prices
and output exacerbate the recession, and how pessimism ampli…es these spirals.
   Since the model is linear, we focus on equilibria in which the price per capital and the interest
                                                   f
rate remain constant within states, Qt;s = Qs and rt;s = rsf . In particular, there is no price drift or
                                          Q         Q
volatility within a state,                t;s   =   t;s   = 0. Combining this with Eq. (34), we obtain the risk balance
conditions

                                                +g+        s   1       Qs
                                                                       Qs0        rsf
(37)                                 s   =                                                    for each s 2 f1; 2g .
                                                                   s


The equilibrium is then characterized by …nding four unknowns,                                            Q1 ; r1f ; Q2 ; r2f , that solve the
two equations in (37) together with the two goods market equilibrium conditions in (25). We solve
these equations under the following parametric restriction.

Assumption 1.              2   >         +g >       2.
                           2                        1

In view of this restriction, the low-risk-premium state 1 features positive interest rates, e¢ cient
asset prices, and full factor utilization, r1f > 0; Q1 = Q and                                           1   = 1, whereas the high-risk-
premium state 2 features zero interest rates, lower asset prices, and imperfect factor utilization,
r2f = 0; Q2 < Q and              2   < 1. In particular, the analysis with common beliefs reduces to …nding two
unknowns,       Q2 ; r1f       , that solve the two risk balance equations in (37) (after substituting Q1 = Q
and r2f = 0).

Equilibrium in the high-risk-premium state.                                               After substituting r2f = 0, the risk balance
equation (37) for the high-risk-premium state s = 2 can be written as

                                                                                              Q2
                                                                       +g+        2       1   Q
(38)                                                       2   =                                   .
                                                                                      2



                                                                             20
If the price were at its e¢ cient level, Q2 = Q , the risk (the left side) would exceed the Sharpe ratio
(the right side). As in the two period model, the economy generates more risk than investors are
willing to absorb at the constrained interest rate. As before, the price per unit of capital, Q2 , must
fall to equilibrate the risk markets. Rearranging the expression, we obtain a closed form solution,
                                                                  2   ( + g)
                                                                  2
(39)                                        Q2 = Q       1                       .
                                                                       2

As this expression illustrates, we require a minimum degree of optimism to ensure an equilibrium
with positive price and output.

Assumption 2.           >   2   ( + g).
                    2       2

This requirement is a manifestation of an ampli…cation mechanism that we describe next.

Ampli…cation from endogenous output and earnings.                                In the two period model of Section
II, the future payo¤ from the market portfolio is exogenous (z1 ). Therefore, a decline in the price
                                                                                                   z1
of capital (Q) increases the dividend yield and the market return, rm (z1 ) =                      Q    [cf. Eq. (2)]. In
contrast, in the current model the instantaneous payo¤ from the market portfolio is endogenous
and given by yt;2 = Q2 kt;2 . Therefore, a decline in the price of the market portfolio does not
                                y
a¤ect the dividend yield ( Q2t;2
                             kt;2 = ) and leaves the market return absent transitions unchanged,
 m = +g [cf. Eq. (22)]. Unlike in the two period model, a decline in asset prices does not increase
rt;2
the market return (aside from state transitions). The intuition is that a lower price reduces output
and economic activity, which reduces …rms’earnings and leaves the dividend yield constant. Thus,
asset price declines no longer play a stabilizing role through the dividend yield, leaving the economy
susceptible to a spiraling decline.
   In view of this ampli…cation mechanism, one might wonder how the risk market ever reaches
equilibrium once the price, Q2 , falls below its e¢ cient level, Q . The stabilizing force is captured
                                               Q2
by the last term in Eq. (38),       2   1      Q     . A decline in the price increases the expected capital gain
from transition into the recovery state s = 1, which increases the expected return to capital and the
Sharpe ratio. The stabilizing force is stronger when investors are more optimistic and perceive a
higher transition probability into the recovery state,                2.   Assumption 2 ensures that the stabilizing
force is su¢ ciently strong to counter the impact of the risk premium shock. If this assumption
were violated, a risk premium shock would trigger a downward price spiral that would lead to an
equilibrium with zero asset prices and zero output.
   Finally, consider the comparative statics of the equilibrium price with respect to the exogenous
                                    2                                                  d(Q2 =Q )          1
shifter of the risk premium,        2   [cf. (36)]. Using Eq. (39), we obtain             d 22
                                                                                                   =      2
                                                                                                              . Hence, risk
premium shocks reduce asset prices and output by a greater magnitude when investors are more
pessimistic about recovery (lower            2 ).   These observations illustrate that average beliefs matter in
this environment not only because they have a direct impact on asset prices but also because they
determine the strength of the ampli…cation mechanism.



                                                             21
Equilibrium in the low-risk-premium state.                           Following similar steps for the low-risk-premium
state s = 1, we also obtain a closed form solution for the interest rate in this state,

                                                                          Q
(40)                                       r1f =      +g       2
                                                               1      1              1 .
                                                                          Q2

Intuitively, given the expected return on capital the interest rate adjusts to ensure that the risk
balance condition is satis…ed at the e¢ cient price level, Q1 = Q . For our conjectured equilibrium,
we also assume an upper bound on                 1;   which ensures that the implied interest rate is positive.
                                +g   2
                                                   Q
Assumption 3.           1   <   Q
                                     1
                                         , where   Q2     is given by Eq. (39).
                                Q2
                                     1

Note that Eq. (40) implies r1f is decreasing in the transition probability,                          1,   as well as in the asset
                                                   Q
price drop conditional on transition,              Q2 .    Interest rates are kept relatively low because investors
fear a recession triggered by an increase in the risk premium when the interest rate is constrained.
The following result summarizes the equilibrium characterization in this section.

Proposition 1. Consider the model with a single belief type and Assumptions 1–3. There is an
equilibrium in which the price per capital and the interest rate are constant within each state,
               f
Qt;s = Qs and rt;s = rsf . The low-risk-premium state 1 features a positive interest rate, e¢ cient
asset prices and full factor utilization, r1f > 0; Q1 = Q and                         1   = 1. The high-risk-premium state
2 features zero interest rate, lower asset prices, and a demand-driven recession, r2f = 0; Q2 < Q ,
                                                                          ct;2       yt;2
and      2   < 1, as well as lower consumption and output,                kt;2   =   kt;2    = Q2 . The price in state 2 and
the interest rate in state 1 are given by Eqs. (39) and (40).

Equilibrium with investment and endogenous growth.                                           In Online Appendix Section D,
we extend the baseline environment to incorporate investment. This leads to two main changes.
                                                                                                                     it;s
First, the growth rate in (12) becomes endogenous, gt;s = ' (                        t;s )     , where     t;s   =   kt;s   denotes the
investment rate per capital, ' ( ) denotes a neoclassical production technology for capital, and
denotes the depreciation rate. Second, under the simplifying assumption that output accrues to
agents as returns to capital (i.e., no monopoly pro…ts), optimal investment is an increasing function
of the price per unit of capital, Qt;s .10 Moreover, using a convenient functional form for ' ( ), we
obtain a linear relation between the investment rate and the price, (Qt;s ) =                                (Qt;s          1) for some
  > 0.
       In this setting, aggregate demand is the sum of consumption and investment. Using the expres-
sion for optimal investment, we generalize the output-asset price relation (21) to

(41)                                         A     t;s   = Qt;s +     (Qt;s      1) .
  10
    Without this assumption, investment would be a function of Q  ~ t;s Qt;s , which represents a claim on the rental
rate of capital in future periods (excluding monopoly pro…ts). The di¤erence, Qt;s Q     ~ t;s , captures the price of a
claim on monopoly pro…ts. Hence, allowing for pro…ts would have a quantitative impact on investment, though we
believe it would leave our qualitative results unchanged. We leave an investigation of this issue for future research.




                                                                22
Hence, output is increasing in asset prices not only because asset prices generate a wealth e¤ect on
consumption but also because they increase investment through a marginal-Q channel. Substituting
optimal investment into the endogenous growth expression, we further obtain

(42)                         gt;s = qt;s    ,   where    qt;s = log Qt;s :

Hence, this setting also features a growth-asset price relation: lower asset prices reduce investment,
which translates into lower endogenous growth and lower potential output in future periods. The
rest of the model is unchanged (see Online Appendix Section D for details).
   In the online appendix, we characterize the equilibrium in this extended environment and gen-
eralize Proposition 1. We …nd that risk premium shocks— captured by a transition to state 2—
generate a decline in investment and endogenous growth as well as consumption and output, as in
the baseline model. The decline in investment and endogenous growth generates a second ampli-
…cation mechanism that reinforces the mechanism we described earlier. Speci…cally, the recession
lowers asset prices further, not only by reducing output and earnings, but also by reducing growth
in potential output and earnings. Figure I in the introduction illustrates the two ampli…cation
mechanisms. Henceforth, we return to the baseline model without investment.

Remark 6 (More general RRA). In Online Appendix Section E, we extend the baseline dynamic
model to cases where the RRA is di¤erent from one while keeping the EIS equal to one (see Remark
2 for the role of the EIS). This introduces dynamic hedging motives: investors’marginal utility for
future states re‡ects not only their wealth but also the attractiveness of investment opportunities
in the corresponding state. These motives a¤ect our analysis in two ways. First, investors’wealth-
share dynamics are in‡uenced by their relative dynamic hedging motives in addition to belief
disagreements. These e¤ects complicate the analysis with belief disagreements (in particular, the
separability property from Section III.B no longer applies), but they are largely orthogonal to
the e¤ects of speculation that we discuss subsequently. Second, with common beliefs (in which
case the analysis is tractable), dynamic hedging motives further amplify the e¤ect of risk premium
shocks on asset prices and output in the empirically relevant case of RRA greater than one (see
Di Tella (2017)). Speci…cally, an increase in the (relative) risk premium in the high-risk-premium
state makes the investment opportunities in this state (relatively) less attractive, which increases
investors’willingness to hedge the high-risk-premium state. In equilibrium, this translates into a
lower price and output in the high-risk-premium state (and a lower interest rate in the low-risk-
premium state).


                   V. Belief disagreements and speculation
We now turn to the main case with belief disagreements. We show that a greater wealth share for
optimists raises asset valuations and mitigates the recession. We also establish that speculation
induced by belief disagreements exacerbates asset price ‡uctuations and worsens the recession.


                                                 23
    We restrict attention to two investor types, optimists and pessimists, with beliefs denoted by
    i    i
    1;   2    i2fo;pg
                          . Beliefs satisfy the following assumption:
                               o             p                o        p
Assumption 4.                  2   >         2   and          1        1.

When the economy is in the high-risk-premium state, optimists …nd the transition into the low-
                                                                        o       p
risk-premium state relatively likely (                                  2   >   2 );   when the economy is in the low-risk-premium state,
                                                                                                                                        o      p
optimists …nd the transition into the high-risk-premium state relatively unlikely (                                                     1      1 ).   Hence,
optimism and pessimism are relative: an optimist is someone who is optimistic relative to a pes-
simist. In fact, we do not need to specify the “objective distribution” for our theoretical results
(including the welfare results). We do, however, need relative optimism and pessimism to be
persistent across the two risk premium states (see Remark 7 at the end of this section).
    As our analysis in Section III.B suggests, the equilibrium with belief disagreements depends on
investors’wealth shares. In the two-type context, we simplify the notation and denote optimists’
wealth share without a superscript [cf. (26)]:

                                                                                             aot;s
                                                                                t;s                  .
                                                                                           kt;s Qt;s

                                                                                                     apt;s
Pessimists’ wealth share is the residual, 1                                            t;s     =   kt;s Qt;s .   Optimists’ wealth share,       t;s ,   is the
relevant state variable for this economy. Speci…cally, we will establish an equilibrium in which
all variables can be written as a function of                                          t;s .    To this end, we also write the wealth-weighted
average belief as a function of optimists’wealth share [cf. (27)]:

                                                                                               o                         p
(43)                                                      t;s     =    s ( t;s )           t;s s   + (1          t;s )   s.


    We next present our main result in this section, which characterizes the equilibrium with belief
disagreements. The result requires Assumptions 1–3 from the previous section to hold for both
beliefs. These assumptions ensure that there exists an equilibrium in which the low-risk-premium
state 1 always features a positive interest rate, e¢ cient price level, and full factor utilization,
 f
rt;1 > 0; Qt;1 = Q ;               t;1   = 1, whereas the high-risk-premium state 2 always features a zero interest
                                                                f
rate, a lower price level, and insu¢ cient factor utilization, rt;2 = 0; Qt;2 < Q ;                                               t;2   < 1.

Proposition 2. Consider the model with two belief types. Suppose Assumptions 1–3 hold for
each belief, and that beliefs are ranked according to Assumption 4. Then, there is an equilibrium
in which the log-price and interest rate can be written as functions of optimists’ wealth share,
                       f
qt;s = qs (   t;s ) ; rt;s   = rsf (             t;s ),   where optimists’ wealth share evolves according to

                  _ t;s                  0

                    t;s
                           =        ! st;s;o = (          p
                                                          s
                                                                      o
                                                                      s ) (1       t;s )            if there is no state change,
(44)                                     o
                    t;s0
                           =             s
                                                                                                     if there is a state change to s0 .
                    t;s             s ( t;s )



    In the high-risk premium state 2, the interest rate is zero, r2f ( ) = 0, and the log-price per


                                                                                           24
capital is below the e¢ cient level, q2 ( ) < q . The price function is the solution to the di¤ erential
equation

                                       p                                                    exp (q2 ( ))
(45)                  q20 ( ) (   o
                                  2    2)      (1        )=    +g+       2(      ) 1                              2
                                                                                                                  2,
                                                                                                Q

with boundary conditions q2 (0) = q2p and q2 (1) = q2o . The solution, q2 ( ), is strictly increasing in
 . In particular, greater optimists’ wealth share in the high-risk-premium state,                                     t;2 ,     increases the
                                                                                    ct;2       yt;2
price per capital, Qt;2 , as well as consumption and output,                        kt;2   =   kt;2   = Qt;2 .
     In the low-risk-premium state 1, the log-price is at its e¢ cient level, q1 ( ) = q , and the interest
rate is strictly positive, r1f ( ) > 0. The interest rate function is given by
                                                                                                                  o
                                                             Q
(46)                r1f ( ) =     +g        1(      )                        1         2
                                                                                       1     where      0
                                                                                                            =     1
                                                                                                                            .
                                                        exp (q2 ( 0 ))                                           1(     )

The function r1f ( ) is strictly increasing in                   . In particular, a greater optimists’ wealth share in
                                                                             f
the low-risk-premium state,            t;1 ,   increases the interest rate, rt;1 .

     The characterization of optimists’wealth dynamics follows from Lemma 3. When the economy
is in the recession state, optimists purchase the upside contingent security from pessimists (since
 o        p
 2   >    2 ).    As long as the economy remains in the recession state, optimists’ wealth share drifts
downward. However, if there is a transition to the boom state, then optimists’ wealth share
makes an upward jump. Conversely, when the economy is in the boom state, optimists sell the
                                                                         o        p
downside contingent security to pessimists (since                        1        1 ).     This ensures that optimists’ wealth
share drifts upward when the economy remains in the boom state, but it makes a downward jump
if there is a transition to the recession state. Figure II illustrates these dynamics for a particular
parameterization (described subsequently).
     The rest of the proposition characterizes the equilibrium price in the high-risk state and the
interest rate in the low-risk state as functions of optimists’ wealth share. Eqs. (45) and (46)
are similar to their counterparts with common beliefs [cf. Eqs. (38) and (40)]. The main di¤er-
ence is that the asset price and the interest rate depend on the wealth-weighted average belief
in the corresponding state,            2(      ) and      1(   ). Since increasing optimists’ wealth share,                          , makes
the wealth-weighted average belief more optimistic (in either state), these equations suggest that
greater          should increase the asset price and the interest rate. The proposition veri…es this intu-
ition. Figure III illustrates the equilibrium asset price and interest rate functions for a particular
parameterization.
     Proposition 2 has two important implications. First, in the recession state, a greater wealth
share for optimists increases not only asset prices but also consumption and output (in view of
the output-asset price relation). This observation motivates policies that redistribute wealth to
optimists in the recession state— including macroprudential policy, which we analyze in the next
section. The result is reminiscent of the recent macroeconomics literature that emphasizes the im-
portance of wealth distribution for aggregate spending in environments with heterogeneous MPCs.

                                                                   25
      0.03                                                                                                         0.03

      0.02                                                                                                         0.02

      0.01                                                                                                         0.01

         0                                                                                                            0

     -0.01                                                                                                        -0.01

     -0.02                                                                                                        -0.02

     -0.03                                                                                                        -0.03


             0         0.1   0.2         0.3   0.4         0.5   0.6         0.7   0.8         0.9   1                    0       0.1   0.2         0.3   0.4         0.5   0.6         0.7   0.8         0.9   1




         1                                                                                                            1


       0.8                                                                                                          0.8


       0.6                                                                                                          0.6


       0.4                                                                                                          0.4


       0.2                                                                                                          0.2


         0                                                                                                            0
             0         0.1   0.2         0.3   0.4         0.5   0.6         0.7   0.8         0.9   1                    0       0.1   0.2         0.3   0.4         0.5   0.6         0.7   0.8         0.9   1




Figure II: Equilibrium dynamics of investors’wealth shares with heterogeneous beliefs.




        0.94

                                                                                                                      0.06
        0.92


             0.9
                                                                                                                      0.05

        0.88


                                                                                                                      0.04
        0.86


        0.84
                                                                                                                      0.03

        0.82


             0.8                                                                                                      0.02


        0.78
                                                                                                                      0.01
        0.76

                   0               0.2               0.4               0.6               0.8             1                    0               0.2               0.4               0.6               0.8             1




 Figure III: Equilibrium price and interest rate functions with heterogeneous beliefs.




                                                                                                             26
However, the mechanism here is di¤erent and works through general equilibrium e¤ ects driven by
heterogeneous asset valuations. To see this, consider the e¤ect of a wealth transfer from pessimists
to optimists in partial equilibrium— keeping asset prices unchanged, and in general equilibrium—
allowing asset prices to adjust. In partial equilibrium, this transfer would not stimulate aggregate
spending because pessimists and optimists have the same MPC (equal to ). As optimists increase
their spending, pessimists reduce their spending by the same amount. However, in general equi-
librium, the transfer increases asset prices and aggregate spending. In fact, relative to the partial
equilibrium benchmark, optimists and pessimists both increase their spending.
       Second, the proposition implies that …nancial markets are e¤ectively extrapolative even though
investors’beliefs are …xed. Good realizations increase optimists’wealth share, which raises e¤ective
optimism and increases the asset price (in the high-risk-premium state) or the interest rate (in the
low-risk-premium state). Conversely, bad realizations reduce optimists’wealth share, which reduces
e¤ective optimism and decreases the asset price or the interest rate. These results also imply that
speculation exacerbates asset price boom-bust cycles and leads to more severe recessions (see also
Remark 8 at the end of this section).
       We next provide a sketch proof for Proposition 2, which provides further intuition. We then
present a simulation that illustrates how speculation exacerbates boom-bust cycles and demand
recessions.

Sketch proof of Proposition 2. The wealth dynamics in Eq. (44) follow from Lemma 2. Since
we search for an equilibrium that satis…es qt;s = qs (                       t;s ),   and since    t;s   follows a deterministic path
                                                                                                                          Q
absent transition, qt;s also follows a deterministic path absent transition. Therefore,                                   t;s   = 0 (cf.
Remark 4).
       To characterize the rest of the equilibrium, consider Lemma 3 that describes the risk balance
                                                                                     f
condition. Applying Eq. (34) for the high-risk-premium state s = 2 and substituting rt;2 = 0 and
 Q            Q         dQt;2 =dt
 t;2   = 0;   t;2   =     Qt;2      = q_t;2 , we obtain

                                                       1                                   Q2
(47)                                          2   =          + g + q_t;2 +     t;2     1             .
                                                        2                                  Q

This condition is similar to its counterpart with common beliefs, with two di¤erences [cf. (38)].
First, the transition probability e¤ectively depends on the wealth-weighted average belief,                                          t;2 .
Second, the expected return to the market portfolio features the price drift term q_t;2 [cf. (22)],
which is not necessarily zero because optimists’wealth share changes over time.
       Combining Eqs. (44) and (47), we obtain a di¤erential equation system that describes the
joint dynamics of the log price and optimists’wealth share, (qt;2 ;                             t;2 ),   conditional on no transition.
In Online Appendix Section B.3, we show that this system is saddle path stable: for any initial
wealth share,           t;2   2 (0; 1), there exists a unique equilibrium price level, qt;2 2 [q2p ; q2o ), such that
the solution satis…es limt!1                   t;2    = 0 and limt!1 qt;2 = q2p . We further show that the saddle path
is strictly increasing in             t;2 .   These observations imply that the equilibrium price is an increasing


                                                                     27
function of optimists’ wealth share, q2 ( ) (which corresponds to the saddle path). Substituting
this function into Eq. (47) and using Eq. (44), we also obtain the di¤erential equation (45) that
characterizes this function in the -domain.
       Finally, we obtain Eq. (46) by applying the risk balance condition (34) for the low-risk-premium
state s = 1. The term             0    denotes optimists’ wealth share after an immediate transition into the
high-risk-premium state [cf. Eq. (44)]. The interest rate is increasing in                                          both because the
wealth-weighted transition probability to the high-risk-premium state,                                     1(    ), is decreasing in   ;
and because the price that would obtain after transition, q2 (                           0 ),   is increasing in .

Numerical illustration. We next illustrate the equilibrium characterized in Proposition 2 us-
ing a simple parameterization (see Online Appendix Section B.4 for details). For the baseline
parameters, we set g = 5%;                   = 4%;         2   = 2%;    2   = 10%. For investors’ beliefs about transition
                                                           1            2
                          o           1      p       1                               o             p
probabilities, we set     1   =       25 ;   1   =   5   for the boom state and      2   = 15 ;    2   =   1
                                                                                                           25   for the recession state.
       Figure II illustrates the corresponding dynamics for optimists’ wealth share. Figure III illus-
trates the corresponding equilibrium prices. The left panel of Figure III illustrates the price of
capital in the recession (normalized by the e¢ cient price level) as a function of optimists’wealth
share. When pessimists dominate the economy, the price of capital and output decline by 25%.
In contrast, when optimists dominate, they decline by only 5%. The right panel of Figure III
illustrates the interest rate in the boom as a function of optimists’wealth share. The risk-free rate
during the boom is close to 7% when optimists dominate the economy but it is close to 0% when
pessimists dominate.

Ampli…cation from speculation. We next use our numerical example to illustrate how spec-
ulation ampli…es the business-cycle driven by risk premium shocks. We …x investors’ beliefs and
simulate the equilibrium for a particular realization of uncertainty over a 40-year horizon. We
choose the objective simulation belief to be in the “middle” of optimists’ and pessimists’ beliefs
in terms of the relative entropy distance.11 We also focus on the “average path”— the path in
which the length of each boom or bust is exactly equal to its mean value implied by the simulation
belief. Figure IV illustrates the dynamics of equilibrium variables along this path. For comparison,
the dashed red line plots the equilibrium that would obtain in the common-beliefs benchmark if
all investors shared the “middle” simulation belief, and the circled blue line plots the …rst-best
equilibrium that would obtain without interest rate rigidities.
       The …gure illustrates two points. First, as we establish in Section IV, the price per unit of
  11
    Formally, given two probability distributions (p (~  s))s~2S and (q (~
                                                                         s))s~2S , the relative entropy of p with respect
                    P             p(~
                                    s)
to q is de…ned as     ~ p (~
                      s    s) log q(~s) . In a setting similar to ours, Blume and Easley (2006) show that investors
whose belief is closer to the objective distribution in terms of the relative entropy distance dominate the economy
in the long run. We choose the simulation belief (in both the boom and the recession state) to be in the “middle”
of optimists’ and pessimists’ beliefs to prevent this outcome and to ensure that there is a non-degenerate long-run
wealth distribution. This helps to illustrate the destabilizing e¤ects of speculation without taking a stand on whether
optimists or pessimists are “correct.” Our welfare results in the next section do not require this assumption since we
evaluate investors’expected utilities according to their own beliefs.



                                                                       28
   0 .1 0




   0 .0 2
            0    5            10          15           20          25           30          35           40




    0 .8


    0 .6


    0 .4


    0 .2
            0    5            10          15           20          25           30          35           40




   0 .0 6


   0 .0 4


   0 .0 2


       0

            0    5            10          15           20          25           30          35           40




       1

   0 .9 5

    0 .9

   0 .8 5

    0 .8

            0    5            10          15           20          25           30          35           40




       1

   0 .9 5

    0 .9

   0 .8 5

    0 .8

            0    5            10          15           20          25           30          35           40




Figure IV: A simulation of the equilibrium variables over time. The solid red lines illustrate the
equilibrium with belief disagreements. The dahed red lines (resp. the dotted blue lines) illustrate the common
belief benchmark (resp. the …rst-best benchmark).




                                                     29
capital is more volatile and the interest rate is more compressed in the common-belief benchmark
than in the …rst-best equilibrium. In the high-risk-premium state, the interest rate cannot decline
enough to equilibrate the risk balance condition, which leads to a drop in asset prices and a demand
recession. Moreover, asset prices and output decline substantially even though the interest rate is
above the …rst-best level by only one percentage point— illustrating the ampli…cation mechanism.
In the low-risk-premium state, the fear of transition into the recessionary high-risk-premium state
keeps the interest rate lower than in the …rst-best benchmark.
    Second, risk-centric recessions are more severe when investors have belief disagreements (and
this also compresses interest rates). The intuition follows from Proposition 2. Speculation in the
low-risk-premium state decreases optimists’ wealth share once the economy transitions into the
high-risk-premium state, as illustrated by the second-to-top panel of Figure IV. This translates
into lower asset prices and a more severe demand recession, as illustrated by the bottom panels
of Figure IV. Speculation also increases optimists’ wealth share if the boom continues, but this
e¤ect does not translate into higher asset prices or output since it is (optimally) neutralized by
the interest rate response. The adverse e¤ects of speculation on demand recessions motivate the
analysis of macroprudential policy, which we turn to in the next section.

Remark 7 (Interpretation of belief disagreements). As this discussion suggests, what matters
for our results in this section is persistent heterogeneous valuations for risky assets that ensure:
(i) during the recession, a greater wealth share for high-valuation investors increases the (relative)
price of risky assets, and (ii) during the boom, high-valuation investors absorb relatively more of the
recession risks. Belief disagreements generate these features naturally, under the mild assumption
that optimists and pessimists do not ‡ip roles between booms and recessions, but other sources
of heterogeneous valuations would lead to similar results.12 For example, with heterogeneous risk
aversion, more risk tolerant agents take on more aggregate risk (i.e., they insure less risk tolerant
agents), which reduces their wealth share and the (relative) price of risky assets following negative
shocks to fundamentals (see, for instance, Garleanu and Pedersen (2011); Longsta¤ and Wang
(2012)). From this perspective, belief disagreements can also capture institutional reasons for
heterogeneous valuations such as capacity or mandates for handling risk. Investment banks, for
example, have far more capacity to handle and lever risky positions than pensioners and money
market funds.

Remark 8 (Other sources of extrapolative dynamics). In our model, asset prices are determined
as-if there is a representative investor with the wealth-weighted average belief,                    t;s   [cf. Lemma
3]. Our analysis in this section shows that speculation generates extrapolative dynamics for the
wealth-weighted average belief. Therefore, an alternative model in which agents are homogeneous
but have individually extrapolative beliefs would generate identical price dynamics (as long as the
   12
      The no-‡ipping assumption is supported by recent survey evidence that shows belief heterogeneity is largely
explained by persistent individual heterogeneity (Giglio et al. (2019)). The assumption is also consistent with an
extensive psychology literature that documents the prevalence of optimism, as well as its heterogeneity and persistence,
since it is largely a personal trait (see Carver et al. (2010) for a review).



                                                          30
extrapolation mechanism generates identical paths for      t;s ).   However, unlike our model, such an
alternative model would feature homogeneous asset positions. Thus, it would not generate trading
volume, which is a distinctive feature of speculative episodes in practice (see, e.g., Hong and Stein
(2007); DeFusco et al. (2017)). More broadly, extrapolation and speculation are both likely to be
at play and reinforce each other during speculative episodes.


            VI. Welfare analysis and macroprudential policy
Since our model features constrained monetary policy, most of the aggregate demand boosting
policies that have been discussed in the New Keynesian literature are e¤ective in our environment.
We skip a discussion of these policies (our results still apply as long as these policies are imper-
fect). Instead, we focus on macroprudential policy interventions that impose restrictions on risk
market participants with the objective of obtaining macroeconomic bene…ts. In practice, most
macroprudential policies restrict risk taking by banks— especially large ones. Interpreting banks
as high-valuation investors (see Remark 7) or as lenders to such investors (see Section VII), we
capture these policies in reduced form by imposing portfolio risk limits on optimists.
   Our model features heterogeneous beliefs, which makes the welfare analysis challenging. We
mainly focus on the standard Pareto criterion in which the planner evaluates investors’expected
utility according to the investors’own beliefs. This criterion ensures that our results are not driven
by paternalistic concerns. Rather, the planner improves welfare by internalizing aggregate demand
externalities. The standard criterion is also appropriate if we interpret belief disagreements as
a modeling device that captures heterogeneous valuations due to other factors (see Remark 7).
However, if we interpret belief disagreements literally, then a paternalistic criterion such as the
belief-neutral welfare criterion developed by Brunnermeier et al. (2014) could be more appropriate.
In Section VI.C , we illustrate how to use a belief-neutral criterion in our context.
   We provide a decomposition of investors’value functions that simpli…es the theoretical analysis.
Speci…cally, since our model features complete markets and no frictions other than interest rate
rigidities, aggregate demand externalities are the only source of ine¢ ciency. Therefore, the …rst-best
benchmark that corrects for these ine¢ ciencies is Pareto e¢ cient. Motivated by this observation,
we decompose investors’value functions into two components: a …rst-best value function that would
obtain if there were no demand recessions and a gap value function that captures the loss of value
due to demand recessions. Introducing the gap value function simpli…es the analysis considerably
because, up to a …rst order, macroprudential policies a¤ect social welfare only through their impact
on investors’gap values.
   Using the model with two belief types from the previous section, we …rst characterize investors’
value functions in equilibrium according to their own beliefs. We also de…ne the gap value functions
and illustrate the aggregate demand externalities. We then consider macroprudential policy that
induces optimists to act more pessimistically (by imposing appropriate portfolio risk limits). We
show that this policy can lead to a Pareto improvement of social welfare. We focus on macropru-


                                                  31
dential policy in the boom (low-risk-premium) state and brie‡y discuss macroprudential policy in
the recession (high-risk-premium) state.


VI.A. Equilibrium value functions
Because the model is linear, a type i investor’s expected utility can be written as (see Online
Appendix Section B.1.1)

                                         i
                                                       log ait;s =Qt;s
(48)                                   Vt;s ait;s =                           i
                                                                           + vt;s .

       i denotes the normalized value function per unit of capital stock. Consider the equilibrium
Here, vt;s
characterized in Proposition 2. In Online Appendix Section C.1, we characterize the normalized
value corresponding to this equilibrium as the solution to the di¤erential equation system,
                                                 0                                           1
                        i                                            1 2
                      @vt;s                      1@              g   2 s
(49)            i
               vt;s           = log + qt;s +                                          i
                                                                                             A+    i
                                                                                                   s
                                                                                                        i
                                                                                                       vt;s 0
                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                vt;s .
                       @t                                 i            i
                                                                t;s + s log
                                                                                      s
                                                          s                           t;s


The equilibrium price, qt;s , a¤ects the investor’s welfare since it determines output and consumption
[cf. Eqs. (24) and (21)]. Consumption growth, g, and volatility,                      2,    also a¤ect welfare. Finally,
                                                                                      s
                                                                                                                i
speculation a¤ects the investor’s (perceived) welfare. This is captured by the term                             s        t;s   +
         i
 i
 s log          , which is zero with common beliefs and strictly positive with disagreements.
         s
         t;s



Gap value function. To facilitate the policy analysis, we break down the normalized value
function into two components,

                                                   i      i;     i
(50)                                              vt;s = vt;s + wt;s .

       i;
Here, vt;s denotes the …rst-best value function that would obtain if there were no interest rate
rigidities. It is characterized by solving Eq. (49) with the e¢ cient price level, qt;s = q , for each
                     i = vi             i;
t; s. The residual, wt;s  t;s          vt;s , denotes the gap value function, which captures the loss due
to interest rate rigidities and demand recessions. The …rst-order impact of macroprudential policy
on social welfare depends only on the gap value function. Using Eq. (49), we characterize the gap
value function as the solution to the following system,
                                                          i
                                                        @wt;s
                                    i                                i    i        i
(51)                               wt;s = qt;s    q +         +      s   wt;s 0   wt;s .
                                                         @t

The gap value function corresponds to the investor’s present discounted value of utility losses from
output gaps relative to the e¢ cient level. In view of the output-asset price relation (21), the
function accounts for the output gaps in terms of the asset price gaps. Recall that the equilibrium
features qt;1 = q and qt;2 < q . Thus, the key objective of policy interventions is to increase the


                                                          32
asset price in the high-risk-premium state, in order to mitigate the demand recession.


VI.B. Aggregate demand externalities
In Online Appendix Section C.1 we show that the gap value can be written as a function of optimists’
wealth share, wsi ( ). Combining Eqs. (51) and (44), we characterize this function as the solution
to the following system in the -domain,

                                                                              @wsi ( )
(52)               wsi ( ) = qs ( )       q      (   o
                                                     s
                                                         p
                                                         s)    (1         )            +   i
                                                                                           s   wsi 0   0
                                                                                                               wsi ( ) ,
                                                                                @
                      o
where      0   =      s
                            . Recall that the price function in the high-risk-premium state, q2 ( ), is increas-
                     s( )
ing in optimists’wealth share [cf. Figure III]. This leads to the following result.
                                                              dwsi ( )
Lemma 4. The gap value function satis…es                        d        > 0 for each s; i and             2 (0; 1).

      Optimists’wealth share is a scarce resource that brings asset prices and output in the recession
state closer to its …rst-best level. Thus, the gap value function in the recession state is increasing
in optimists’wealth share. The gap value function in the boom state is also increasing, because the
economy can always transition into the recession state, where optimists’wealth share is useful (see
Lemma 5 below for a ranking of the marginal value of optimists’wealth across the two states).
      This result also illustrates the aggregate demand externality. Optimists’ wealth share is an
endogenous variable that ‡uctuates due to investors’portfolio decisions [cf. Figure IV]. Individual
optimists who take positions in contingent markets— and pessimists who take the other side of
these positions— do not take into account the impact of their decisions on asset prices and social
welfare. This leads to ine¢ ciencies that can be corrected by macroprudential policy.


VI.C. Macroprudential policy
To evaluate the direction of the ine¢ ciency, we consider a constrained policy exercise where the
planner can induce optimists to choose allocations as if they have less optimistic beliefs.13 Speci…-
                                                                                                                o;pl       o;pl   o;pl
cally, optimists are constrained to choose allocations as-if they have the beliefs                                         1 ;    2      ,
                     o;pl       o       o o;pl
which satisfy        1          1   and 2 . Pessimists continue to choose allocations according to their
                                          2
own beliefs. Throughout, we use s to denote investors’as-if beliefs and is to denote their actual
                                    i;pl
                                                                  pl          o;pl
beliefs. For pessimists, the two beliefs coincide. We also use s ( ) =        s + (1      ) ps to denote
the weighted average as-if belief.
      In Online Appendix Section C.2, we show that the planner can implement this policy by im-
posing inequality restrictions on optimists’portfolio weights, while allowing them to make uncon-
strained consumption-savings decisions. To understand this implementation, note that optimists’
 13
      For simplicity, we restrict attention to time-invariant policies. The planner commits to a policy at time zero,
  o;pl    o;pl
  1    ;  2    , and implements it throughout.




                                                                  33
position on the contingent security is given by [cf. Eq. (44)]
                                                    0
(53)                                             ! st;s;o;pl =           o;pl
                                                                         s
                                                                                      p
                                                                                      s     (1       t;s ) :


With their own beliefs, optimists sell the contingent security in the boom state, ! 2;o
                                                                                    t;1                                                      0 (since    o
                                                                                                                                                         1
 p
 2 ),   and purchase it in the recession state,                      ! 1;o
                                                                       t;2      > 0 (since          o
                                                                                                    2   >      p
                                                                                                               2 ).   Therefore, Eq. (53) implies
that, in the boom state, the planner prevents optimists from selling too much of the contingent
security, ! 2;o
            t;1          ! 2;o
                           t;1 . In the recession state, the policy prevents optimists from purchasing too
much of the contingent security, ! 1;o
                                   t;2                         ! 1;o
                                                                 t;2 . In either state, the policy also constrains optimists’
weight on the market portfolio not to exceed the market average, ! m;o
                                                                   t;s                                                        1. In the absence of this
constraint, optimists would speculate by increasing their exposure to the market portfolio.
    The characterization of the equilibrium with macroprudential policy is the same as in Section
V. In particular, Eqs. (44) and (47) still hold with the only di¤erence that investors’ beliefs are
replaced by as-if beliefs,               i;pl
                                         s .    We denote the resulting price functions with qspl ( ) to emphasize
that they are determined by as-if beliefs. The equation system that characterizes the gap value
function is given by the following analogue of Eq. (52),

                                                                                                @wsi ( )
(54)              wsi ( ) = qspl ( )        q           o;pl
                                                        s
                                                                     p
                                                                     s          (1          )            +       i
                                                                                                                 s    wsi 0       0;pl
                                                                                                                                            wsi ( ) ;
                                                                                                  @
                          o;pl
where      0;pl   =       s
                                     . This system illustrates that the macroprudential policy can a¤ect the gap
                        o;pl
                        s    (   )
value through two channels. First, it might a¤ect equilibrium asset prices (captured by the term
qspl ( )). Second, the policy a¤ects the dynamics of optimists’wealth share, which in‡uence the gap
                                                                                                                 o;pl
value. For example, in the boom state s = 1, the policy increases                                                1 ,    which increases optimists’
                                                                                                                               0 ;pl
wealth share after a transition to the recession (captured by the term,                                                                ) at the expense of
                                                                                                                                            o;pl    p
reducing optimists’wealth share if there is no transition (captured by the term                                                             s       s   ).

Planner’s Pareto problem.                        To trace the Pareto frontier, we allow the planner to make a one-
time wealth transfer among the investors at time zero. In Online Appendix Section C.2, we show
that the planner’s Pareto problem can be reduced to

                                                     pl                   o                              p
(55)                                            max v0;s =           0;s v0;s        + (1         0;s ) v0;s .
                                                 o;pl



Hence, the planner maximizes a wealth-weighted average of investors’ normalized values. The
wealth shares (chosen by the planner via the one-time transfer) correspond to the planner’s Pareto
weight on optimists and pessimists. We decompose the planner’s value function into …rst-best and
                       pl     pl;    pl
gap value components, v0;s = v0;s + w0;s .
    Since the …rst-best benchmark does not feature any frictions, it is Pareto e¢ cient (due to
the First Welfare Theorem). This in turn implies that the marginal impact of the policy on the
                                                                   pl;
                                                                 @v0;s
planner’s …rst-best value function is zero,                      @       o;pl                   = 0. Consequently, the …rst order impact
                                                                                 o;pl       o
                                                                                        =



                                                                                34
of the policy is characterized by its impact on the planner’s gap value function,

                                                          pl                 o                          p
(56)                                                     w0;s =         0;s w0;s    + (1         0;s ) w0;s .


Macroprudential policy in the boom state.                                               Now suppose the economy is in the boom state
                                                                                                                                      o;pl   o
s = 1. The planner can use macroprudential policy in the current state,                                                               1      1   (she can
induce optimists to act as if transition into the recession is more likely), but not in the other state
 o;pl           o
 2      =       2   (she cannot in‡uence optimists’ actions in the recession state). E¤ectively, this policy
induces optimists to sell less of the contingent security that pays in case there is a transition to the
recession, while also preventing optimists from increasing their position in the market portfolio.
We next present our main result in this section that shows this policy improves welfare. The result
requires a technical assumption (no disagreement in state s = 1) that we discuss subsequently.

Proposition 3. Consider the equilibrium with two belief types characterized in Proposition 2.
                                                     o           p
Suppose agents’ beliefs satisfy                      1    =      1   and consider the macroprudential policy in the boom state,
 o;pl           o                      o;pl              o
 1              1   (and suppose       2      =          2 ).   The policy increases the gap value according to each belief,

                                  @w1i ( )
                                       o;pl
                                                                     > 0 for each i 2 fo; pg and                     2 (0; 1) .
                                   @   1          o;pl
                                                       = o1
                                                  1



                                                                               @v1pl ( )             @w1pl ( )
The policy also increases the planner’s value,                                                   =                   > 0. In particular, regardless
                                                                                @ o;pl
                                                                                   1         o        @ o;pl
                                                                                                         1       o
                                                                                             1                   1
of the planner’s Pareto weight, there exists a Pareto improving macroprudential policy.

    We next present a heuristic derivation of this result, which facilitates the intuition. For small
changes, macroprudential policy in the boom state does not a¤ect current asset prices, which remain
equal to the e¢ cient level, q1pl ( ) = q (since the interest rate in the boom state is not constrained).
Hence, the policy a¤ects the gap value only through its impact on optimists’wealth dynamics and
the associated aggregate demand externalities. Di¤erentiating Eq. (54), for s = 1, with respect to
                                                                                                                     o;pl       o
optimists’as-if beliefs and evaluating at the no-policy benchmark,                                                   1      =   1,   we obtain

                                  i    @w1i ( )                                    @w2i ( 0 )        @w1i ( )                   i
                                                                                                                            i @w2 ( )
                                                                                                                                     0
(57)                          +   1           o;pl
                                                          =      (1        )                                  +             1          .
                                        @     1
                                                                                     @                 @                       @ o;pl
                                                                                                                                  1

                        o
            0                                                                  o        p
Here,           =       1
                              =   given the assumption                         1   =    1.
                       1( )
    The two terms inside the brackets capture the direct impact of the policy on welfare through
aggregate demand externalities. The …rst term illustrates that the policy generates positive aggre-
gate demand externalities— because it increases optimists’wealth share if there is a transition into
the recession state. On the other hand, the second term illustrates that the policy also generates
negative aggregate demand externalities— because it reduces optimists’wealth share if there is no
transition. In a dynamic setting, macroprudential policy in the boom state is associated with some
costs as well as bene…ts. The costs emerge because the policy prevents optimists from accumulating

                                                                                   35
wealth that could be useful in a future recession. However, intuition suggests the bene…ts should
outweigh the costs as long as future recessions are not too di¤erent from an imminent recession.
                                                                            o        p
The following lemma veri…es this under the assumption                       1   =    1.
                                                                            dw2i (   0)       dw1i ( )
                         o       p
Lemma 5. When            1   =   1,   the gap value function satis…es         d           >     d        for each i and       2 (0; 1).

       As expected, optimists are more useful if there is an immediate transition to the recession
state, in which case their bene…ts materialize immediately. Any delay in this transition reduces the
bene…ts by postponing them. Combining this lemma with Eq. (57) provides a heuristic derivation
of Proposition 3 (see Online Appendix Section C.2 for the proof).
                                                                   o       p
       What happens when we relax the assumption                   1   =   1?   This is largely a technical assumption.
Our numerical simulations (e.g., Figure V) suggest that a version of Proposition 3 also holds when
 o        p
 1   <    1   under appropriate technical assumptions, but we are unable to provide a proof.14
                                                                                                                     o         p
       Figure V illustrates the result for our earlier parameterization, which features                              1    <    1.   We
                                                 1
…x the optimists’ wealth share (             =   2)   and calculate the e¤ect of macroprudential policy on the
planner’s value function and on its components. The policy reduces the planner’s …rst-best value
function, since it distorts investors’allocations according to their own beliefs. However, for small
policy changes, this decline is small (due to the First Welfare Theorem). The policy also increases
the planner’s gap value function. This increase is large enough that the policy increases the actual
value function and generates a Pareto improvement. As the policy becomes larger, the gap value
continues to increase whereas the …rst-best value decreases. Moreover, the decline in the …rst-best
value is negligible for small policy changes but it becomes sizeable for large policy changes. Thus,
the constrained-optimal macroprudential policy obtains at an intermediate level.

Macroprudential policy according to a belief-neutral gap-value criterion.                                           When we in-
terpret belief disagreements literally (see Remark 7), it is questionable whether the utility from
speculation should count toward social welfare. A recent literature argues that the Pareto criterion
is not the appropriate notion of welfare for environments with belief disagreements. If investors’
beliefs are di¤erent due to mistakes (e.g., in Bayesian updating), then it is arguably more appro-
priate to evaluate their utility according to a belief that is common across investors. This approach
removes the speculative utility from welfare calculations, and it motivates larger policy interven-
tions. In this case, macroprudential policy not only improves macroeconomic outcomes but it also
  14
     There are two distinct challenges. First, we cannot generalize Lemma 5, although the ranking is intuitive and
should hold unless there are strong nonlinearities in the gap value function. Speci…cally, the proof of Lemma 5
establishes                                               Z 1
                                @w1i (b0;1 )        i                   i               @w2i (bt;2 )
                                             = i    1
                                                               e ( + 1 )t      + i1                  dt,
                                    @b            1 +      0                                @b
where b0;1 denotes a transformed version of at the initial state, and bt;2 denotes the same variable after a transition
into the recession state after a period of length t. When o1 = p1 , we also have bt;2 = b0;1 (since there is no speculation
                                       i                     i              i
                                     @w1 (b0;1 )        i  @w2 (b0;1 )    @w2 (b0;1 )
in the boom state), which yields         @b
                                                 = i+   1
                                                               @b
                                                                       <      @b
                                                                                      . When o1 < p1 , the same result holds and
                                                      1
the ranking is unchanged if the value function is linear in the transformed variable b. Hence, the ranking can fail
only if there are su¢ ciently large nonlinearities in the gap value function.
   Second, in the more general case pessimists and optimists disagree about the bene…ts of macroprudential policy.
The planner takes a weighted average of these perceptions, which complicates the analysis.


                                                              36
                   0 .0 4



                   0 .0 3



                   0 .0 2



                   0 .0 1



                       0



                  - 0 .0 1



                  - 0 .0 2



                  - 0 .0 3



                  - 0 .0 4

                       0 .0 4   0 .0 4 1     0 .0 4 2   0 .0 4 3          0 .0 4 4          0 .0 4 5   0 .0 4 6          0 .0 4 7   0 .0 4 8




Figure V: Welfare e¤ect of macroprudential policy in the boom state according to the Pareto
criterion. The solid red line illustrates the change in the planner’s total value. The dashed black line (resp.
the dotted blue line) illustrates the change in the planner’s gap value (resp. the …rst-best value).


mitigates the microeconomic costs associated with speculation (see, e.g., Simsek (2013b); Dávila
(2017); Heimer and Simsek (2019)).
     In our context, when investors have belief disagreements it might be natural for a planner to
focus exclusively on increasing investors’gap value, wsi ( ), as opposed to their total value, vsi ( ).
This sidesteps di¢ cult questions about whether speculation increases or reduces welfare. It also
accords well with the goals of macroprudential policy in practice: the planner exclusively focuses
on minimizing output gaps relative to a frictionless benchmark. While reasonable, this approach
still faces a major challenge: given that the planner thinks investors’beliefs might be wrong, what
belief should she use to evaluate the gap value?
     In recent work, Brunnermeier et al. (2014) o¤er a belief-neutral welfare criterion that circum-
vents this problem. The basic idea is to require the planner to evaluate welfare according to a single
belief, but also to make the welfare comparisons robust to the choice of the single belief. Speci…cally,
their baseline criterion says that an allocation is belief-neutral superior to another allocation if it
increases welfare under every belief in the convex hull of investors’beliefs. Proposition 3 suggests
their criterion can be useful in this context since macroprudential policy increases the gap value
according to each belief.
                                                                                                                  o;pl
     For a numerical illustration, …x some h 2 [0; 1] and let wsh                                        ;        1      denote the value function
                                                                                     o;pl                                                               h
for an investor when the planner implements policy                                   1      and evaluates utility under the beliefs                     s   =
 p          o   p
 s   + h(   s   s)     for each   s.15     Figure VI illustrates the e¤ect of macroprudential policy on the gap
value according to the optimists’belief (solid line) and the pessimists’belief (dotted line). As the
                                                                   o;pl
…gure suggests, tightening the policy toward                       1       = 0:104 generates a belief-neutral improvement in
  15                                                                                                                                           i
     This value function solves the di¤erential equation system (54) after replacing the actual belief,                                        s,   with the
belief hs .


                                                                      37
                  0.5




                  0.4




                  0.3




                  0.2




                  0.1




                   0
                          0.05             0.1         0.15              0.2              0.25                0.3




Figure VI: Welfare e¤ect of macroprudential policy in the boom state according the belief-
neutral gap value criterion. The solid line (resp. the dotted line) illustrates the change in the gap value
evaluated under the optimists’belief (resp. the pessimists’belief).


gap value. Beyond this level, tightening the policy improves the gap value according to pessimists
but not according to optimists— who perceive smaller bene…ts from macroprudential policy since
they …nd the transition into the recession state unlikely. In this example, the belief-neutral optimal
                                                                                                      o;pl
policy represents a substantial intervention: it induces optimists to act as if                       1      = 0:104 (roughly a
                                                                                                              o
10% chance of transition to recession in a year) whereas optimists’own belief is                              1   = 0:04 (roughly
                                                                   p
a 4% chance of transition) and pessimists’belief is                1   = 0:2 (roughly a 20% chance of transition).
Note that the belief-neutral gap-value criterion supports a much larger policy intervention than the
Pareto criterion (cf. Figure V).

Dynamics of equilibrium with macroprudential policy.                                  We next consider how macropru-
dential policy in the boom state a¤ects the dynamics of equilibrium variables. Figure VII illustrates
the evolution of equilibrium over a 40-year horizon when the planner implements the belief–neutral
                        o;pl
optimal policy,         1        = 0:104. For comparison, the …gure also replicates the evolution of the equi-
librium variables without macroprudential policy from Figure IV. Macroprudential policy in the
boom state ensures optimists’wealth share drops less when there is a transition into the recession
state. This leads to higher asset prices and output when the economy transitions to the recession.
However, the policy is not without its drawbacks. As the periods before year 10 illustrate, macro-
prudential policy in the boom state slows down the growth of optimists’ wealth share when the
economy remains in the boom state.

Macroprudential policy in the recession state.                         Our analysis so far concerns macroprudential
                                                                               o;pl       o
policy in the boom state and maintains the assumption that                     2      =   2.     In Online Appendix Section
C.2, we analyze the opposite case when the economy is currently in the recession state s = 2 and


                                                              38
  0 .1 0




  0 .0 2
           0    5           10         15          20          25          30          35         40




   0 .8


   0 .6


   0 .4


   0 .2
           0    5           10         15          20          25          30          35         40




  0 .0 6


  0 .0 4


  0 .0 2


      0

           0    5           10         15          20          25          30          35         40




      1

  0 .9 5

   0 .9

  0 .8 5

   0 .8

           0    5           10         15          20          25          30          35         40




      1

  0 .9 5

   0 .9

  0 .8 5

   0 .8

           0    5           10         15          20          25          30          35         40




Figure VII: A simulation of the equilibrium variables over time with macroprudential policy.
The dashed blue line (resp. the solid red line) illustrates the equilibrium with disagreements and with
macroprudential policy (resp. without macroprudential policy).




                                                  39
                                                                       o;pl    o
the planner can apply macroprudential policy in this state,            2       2   (she can induce optimists
                                                                                   o;pl         o
to act as if the recovery is less likely), but not in the other state,             1      =     1.   Proposition 4
in the appendix shows that, in contrast to Proposition 3, this policy can reduce social welfare.
Consider the two counteracting forces. As before, macroprudential policy increases the gap value
by increasing optimists’wealth share if the economy stays in the recession state. However, unlike
before, macroprudential policy also reduces current asset prices because the price is below the
e¢ cient level, q2pl ( ) < q , and it is increasing in optimists’as-if optimism,      o;pl
                                                                                      2       (see Eq. (39)). This
channel reduces the gap value (see Eq. (54)). When optimists’wealth share is large ( ! 1), the
latter channel dominates and macroprudential policy reduces the gap value and social welfare. Even
when the current asset price channel does not dominate, macroprudential policy in the recession
state is less useful than in the boom state. We verify this intuition in numerical simulations.
   It is important to emphasize that macroprudential policy in the boom state does not lower asset
prices due to the monetary policy response. Speci…cally, recall that the policy increases optimists’
                                             o;pl
as-if pessimism in the boom state,           1 .    While this does not a¤ect the asset price in the boom
state,   q1pl   ( ) = q , it reduces the interest rate for a given level of optimists’ wealth share, r1f ( )
(see Eq. (40)). As macroprudential policy reduces the demand for risky assets, monetary policy
lowers the interest rate to dampen its e¤ect on asset prices and aggregate demand.
   Our analysis in this section provides support for procyclical macroprudential policy. In states
where output is not demand constrained (in our model, the boom state s = 1), macroprudential
policy that restricts high-valuation investors’risk taking is desirable. This policy improves welfare
by ensuring that high-valuation investors bring more wealth to the demand-constrained states,
which increases asset prices and output. In states where output is demand constrained (in our
model, the recession state s = 2), macroprudential policy is less useful because it has an immediate
negative impact on asset prices and aggregate demand.


                                     VII. Empirical evidence
Our empirical analysis focuses on three predictions. First, our model predicts that risk premium
shocks generate an interest rate reduction when the interest rate is not constrained, and a more
severe demand recession when the interest rate is constrained. Second, the recession reduces …rms’
earnings and leads to a further reduction in asset prices. Third, the recession is more severe when
the shock takes place in an environment with more speculation. To investigate these predictions, we
compare the response to house price shocks in Eurozone countries (which have constrained interest
rates with respect to national shocks) to the response in non-Eurozone developed countries (which
have less constrained interest rates). At the end of the section, we discuss empirical evidence from
the recent literature which suggests that similar results apply for price shocks to other asset classes,
such as stocks, and for other interest rate constraints, such as the zero lower bound.
   While our model relies on the zero lower bound constraint, the mechanisms are more general,
and we …nd it more convenient to work with the currency-union constraint in our empirical analysis.


                                                         40
The zero lower bound has only recently become a practical constraint, limiting data availability,
and it calls for an asymmetric speci…cation that requires separate responses to positive and negative
price shocks (since the monetary policy can raise the interest rate in response to positive shocks).
In contrast, individual Eurozone countries have had constrained interest rates (with respect to
national shocks) for much longer, and the constraint has been symmetric.
       A major challenge in this exercise is identifying the risk premium shock that drives asset prices.
As we clarify in Section II, the exact source of the shock is not important for our mechanisms (e.g.,
risk, risk aversion, and beliefs have similar e¤ects). Therefore, our strategy is to control for factors
that do not act as a risk premium shock according to our model. In particular, we control for
supply shocks and demand shocks that are not speci…c to house prices— including monetary policy
shocks— and we interpret the residual change in house prices as a plausibly exogenous risk premium
shock. Speci…cally, our risk premium shock is a surprise change in house prices in a country after
controlling for contemporaneous and recent changes in output and the policy interest rate.16
       Our model has a single type of capital, which can be interpreted as a value-weighted average of
housing, stocks, and other assets in positive net supply. We focus on house prices for two reasons.
First, housing wealth is large and its size (relative to output) is comparable between Eurozone
and non-Eurozone developed countries (see Table F.3 in Online Appendix Section F). In contrast,
stock markets in Eurozone countries are typically much smaller than in non-Eurozone developed
countries, which makes stocks less suitable for our empirical strategy (see Table F.4 in the online
appendix). Second, house prices are less volatile and seem to react to monetary policy shocks
with some delay (see Figure F.6 in the online appendix). This feature enables us to control for
monetary policy shocks by including contemporaneous and past realization of policy interest rates.
We also interpret the future changes in interest rates as the monetary policy response to the risk
premium shock, which enables us to test a key prediction of our model. This strategy works less
well for stocks, because stock prices react to monetary policy shocks quickly, which might create a
correlation between stock prices and interest rates with the opposite sign (since stock price declines
driven by monetary policy shocks are typically followed by interest rate hikes— the opposite of risk
premium shocks).17

Data sources. We assemble a quarterly cross-country panel data set of …nancial and economic
variables for advanced economies. We obtain data on house price indices from the quarterly dataset
  16
      While our controls are imperfect, we also report the di¤erential e¤ects of these shocks in Eurozone countries
compared to their e¤ects outside the Eurozone, which provides additional robustness. For example, our model
illustrates that permanent supply shocks (e.g., an increase in A) shift asset prices and output regardless of whether
the interest rate is constrained (see Sections III and IV). This suggests that common omitted supply shocks would
lead to a similar bias inside and outside the Eurozone, and this bias is mitigated by focusing on the di¤erential
responses.
   17
      Formally, we assume house prices react to monetary policy shocks with a delay of at least one quarter. Figure F.6
in the appendix plots impulse responses to shocks to the policy interest rate and provides support for this assumption.
Speci…cally, a surprise increase in the policy interest rate is followed by a decline in house prices, but the response
starts after the …rst quarter and takes several quarters to complete. The same …gure shows that the assumption is
clearly violated for stock prices. A surprise increase in the policy interest rate also reduces stock prices, but all of the
response takes place in the same quarter as the shock.


                                                            41
described in Mack et al. (2011). We obtain data on macroeconomic activity such as GDP, invest-
ment, and consumption from the OECD. We also obtain …nancial market data such as the policy
interest rate, stock price indices, and earnings (of publicly traded …rms) from Global Financial Data
(GFD) and the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). Online Appendix Section F describes the
data sources and variable construction.

Sample selection. Our sample covers 20 advanced economies from the …rst quarter of 1990 until
the last quarter of 2017. Our selection of countries is driven by the availability of consistent house
price data. We start the sample in 1990 because monetary policy in most advanced economies had
shifted from focusing on stabilizing in‡ation to stabilizing output by this time, as in our model.
Our results are robust to alternative sample selections.18
       To capture interest rate constraints, we divide the data into two categories. The …rst category,
which we refer to as the Euro/ERM sample, consists of country-quarters in which the country
was a member of the Euro area or the European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) for most of
the calendar year. The ERM system, which preceded the Euro, required member countries to
keep their exchange rates within a narrow band of a central currency. This system constrained
countries’relative policy interest rates (albeit imperfectly) and most member countries eventually
adopted the Euro. The countries in the Euro area share the same policy interest rate (determined
by the European Central Bank). The second category, which we refer to as the non-Euro/ERM
sample, consists of the remaining country-quarters. Table F.1 in the online appendix describes the
Euro/ERM status by country and year.

Empirical speci…cation. To describe how the economy behaves after house price shocks, we
follow the local projection method developed by Jordà (2005). In particular, we regress several
outcome variables at various horizons after time t on (residual) house price changes at time t.
Speci…cally, we estimate equations of the type

                    h        h            h       h       p;h                       c;h
(58)              Yj;t+h   Yj;t   1   =   j   +   t   +         (    log Pj;t ) +         controlsj;t + "hj;t ;

where j denotes the country, t denotes the quarter, h denotes the horizon, Y denotes an outcome
variable, P denotes the (real) house price index, and                        log Pj;t = log Pj;t           log Pj;t   1   denotes
its quarterly log change. We include time and country …xed e¤ects, so our “house price shock”
is a decline in house prices in a quarter, after accounting for the average price decline in the
sample countries and various other controls within the country. Our control variables include the
contemporaneous value and 12 lags of the …rst di¤erence of log GDP— to control for supply shocks
and demand shocks that are not speci…c to house prices. Likewise, we include the contemporaneous
value and 12 lags of the policy interest rate— to control for monetary policy shocks. We also include
12 lags of the …rst di¤erence of log house prices— to capture the momentum in house prices— and
  18
    Figures F.4 and F.5 in the online appendix show that starting the sample in 1980 leaves our results (except for
the e¤ect on in‡ation) qualitatively unchanged.



                                                                42
12 lags of the …rst di¤erence of the outcome variable— to control for other dynamics that might
in‡uence the outcomes. We weight each regression by countries’relative GDP, and estimate (58)
for horizons 0 to 12.
       To evaluate the responses within and outside the Eurozone, we include indicator variables for
Euro/ERM and non-Euro/ERM status, and we interact all right-hand-side variables (including the
                                                            p;h           p;h
…xed e¤ects) with these indicators. We let                  euro   and    non   denote the coe¢ cient on the interaction
of the price shock with the corresponding indicator. Our speci…cation is equivalent to running
the regressions separately within the Euro/ERM and non-Euro/ERM samples.19 We report the
                                      p;h  12                p;h 12
sequence of coe¢ cients,              euro h=0     and       non h=0 ,    which provide an estimate of the impulse
response functions for the respective samples. We also report 95% con…dence intervals calculated
according to Newey and West (1987) standard errors with a bandwidth of 20 quarters.
       We look at outcome variables for which our model makes a clear prediction, such as the policy
interest rate, the unemployment rate (a proxy for factor underutilization), and the logs of GDP,
investment, and consumption. We also include the log (core) CPI. Even though it is constant in our
model (by assumption), variants of our model predict that it should decline in a demand recession.
We analyze public …rms’ earnings and log stock prices to investigate spillover and ampli…cation
e¤ects, as well as log house prices to investigate the price dynamics following the initial shock.
All relevant variables except for the policy interest rate are adjusted for in‡ation to focus on real
e¤ects, as in our model. For earnings, we use the ratio of earnings to the initial stock price level as
our dependent variable (which generates meaningful units).20
       Table F.2 in the online appendix describes the summary statistics by Euro/ERM status for the
variables that enter our regression analysis. The Euro/ERM sample has 760 country-quarters and
the non-Euro/ERM sample has 1130 country-quarters.21 Both samples are unbalanced because a
few countries have imperfect data coverage in earlier years (and because a few countries transi-
tion between samples). The two samples are comparable except that the non-Euro/ERM sample
experienced slightly faster growth over the sample period.

House price shocks and demand recessions. Figure VIII plots the estimated sequences of
coe¢ cients by Euro/ERM status (see Figure F.1 in the online appendix for the di¤erenced coe¢ -
cients). The panels in the top two rows illustrate our main empirical …ndings. The top left panel
shows that, in the non-Euro/ERM sample (dashed blue line), a decline in house prices is followed
  19
     The point estimates from our regression are identical to those obtained from running separate regressions within
each sample. However, because our standard errors account for autocorrelation of the residuals, the joint regression
will have slightly di¤erent standard errors (for example, the joint regression will account for the fact that residuals
are correlated from before and after a country joined the ERM). The joint regression is preferable because it uses
more data and thus gives more precise standard errors.
  20
     Earnings sometimes take a negative value, which makes a log transformation problematic. Instead, we change the
                                                                 e a rn in g s t+h e a rn in g s t 1
speci…cation in (58) slightly so that the dependent variable is           sto ck p ric e t 1
                                                                                                     . Likewise, we adjust the control
variables that feature earnings by dividing them by the stock price at quarter t 1.
  21
     These are the sample sizes for our baseline regression in which the outcome variable is the policy interest rate and
the horizon is 0 (see (58)). For some regressions, the sample size is slightly smaller, because we estimate outcomes
at future horizons (which removes some data from the end of the sample period) and because some variables do not
have complete coverage.


                                                                   43
by a sizeable and persistent decline in the policy interest rate. By contrast, in the Euro/ERM
sample (solid red line), a decline in house prices does not lead to an additional decline in the coun-
try’s interest rate relative to other Euro/ERM countries, illustrating the interest rate constraint.22
The remaining panels in the top two rows illustrate that the shock is followed by a more severe
demand recession in a Euro/ERM country than in a non-Euro/ERM country. In fact, the panels
on GDP, investment, and consumption suggest that the shock initially leads to similar e¤ects in
both samples but is followed by milder outcomes in the non-Euro/ERM sample.
       These results are consistent with our prediction that risk premium shocks lead to a more severe
demand recession when the interest rate is constrained. From the lens of our model, the interest
rate policy mitigates a demand recession driven by a local risk premium shock outside the Eurozone
but not within the Eurozone.23

Spillover e¤ects and ampli…cation. The panels at the bottom row of Figure VIII illustrate the
e¤ect of the house price shock on asset markets. The panels on earnings and stock prices establish
that there are spillover e¤ects on the stock market: speci…cally, earnings and stock prices decline
more in the Euro/ERM sample than in the other sample (although the estimates are imprecise due
to the high volatility of earnings and prices). The remaining panel illustrates that, after the initial
shock, house prices decline more persistently and by a larger amount in the Euro/ERM sample.
       These results are consistent with our prediction that the demand recession reduces …rms’earn-
ings and leads to a further decline in asset prices. From the lens of the model, stock prices (resp.
house prices) decline less in the non-Euro/ERM sample due to the interest rate response, which not
only increases the price to earnings ratio (resp. price to rent ratio) but also mitigates the recession
and supports earnings (resp. rents).24

Speculation and further ampli…cation.                     We need a proxy for speculation to test the …nal
prediction of our model. We choose a measure of bank credit, which is a major catalyst of specula-
  22
     For the Euro era, the Euro/ERM-wide policy interest rate response is common to all countries and is captured by
our time-…xed e¤ects. During the ERM era, there were severe cross-country monetary policy constraints. Figure F.3
in the online appendix illustrates the results from the same regression without time-…xed e¤ects. The …gure shows
that a negative house price shock in the Euro/ERM sample leads to a decline in the Euro/ERM-wide policy interest
rate, but the magnitude of this decline is smaller than in the other sample. This is because house price shocks have
a national (or idiosyncratic) component, and the Euro/ERM-wide policy interest rate arguably responds only to the
Euro/ERM-wide (or systematic) component of these shocks.
  23
     In our model, risk premium shocks generate a less severe recession in unconstrained countries because the interest
rate policy response leads to a smaller decline in asset prices. This suggests that asset price changes might provide
an inaccurate measure of the underlying shock. We believe our analysis is robust to this concern for three reasons.
First, to the extent that this concern is relevant, it biases the empirical analysis against …nding support for our
mechanisms because it implies that an equivalent magnitude of asset price decline corresponds to a larger underlying
shock if the country has an unconstrained interest rate. Second, the concern is less relevant in practice than in our
model because the interest rate policy a¤ects all assets, which implies that risk-driven price declines in one asset class
(such as housing) are partially absorbed by price increases in other asset classes. Third, the concern is less relevant
for house prices because they seem to react to interest rate changes with some delay (see Figure F.6 in the online
appendix). In fact, the panel of Figure VIII on house prices suggests that the interest rate response only partially
stabilizes risk-driven house price changes, and only with some delay.
  24
     We cannot test the predictions on rents because we do not have reliable data.



                                                           44
                    policy interest rate (pp)                 core cpi (percent)                         unemployment rate (pp)




                                                                                                  .8
                                                       .2
    -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                                                                  .4
                                                       0
                                                       -.2




                                                                                                  0
                    0        4         8          12          0        4        8      12                0       4        8       12


                    GDP (percent)                             investment (percent)                       consumption (percent)
    .2




                                                       .1




                                                                                                  0
    -.4




                                                       -1.3




                                                                                                  -.5
                                                       -2.7




                                                                                                  -1
    -1




                    0        4         8          12          0        4        8      12                0       4        8       12


                    earnings/initial price (pp)               stock prices (percent)                     house prices (percent)
    .3




                                                       1.8




                                                                                                  0
    0




                                                                                                  -2.6
                                                       -.5
    -.3




                                                                                                  -5.2
                                                       -2.8




                    0        4         8          12          0        4        8      12                0       4        8       12



                                                        Euro/ERM                            Non-Euro/ERM



Figure VIII: Impulse responses to one percent decrease in real house prices. The panels illustrate
the results from the regression speci…cation in (58) with the addition of the indicator variables for Euro/ERM
and non-Euro/ERM status as well as the interaction of all right-hand-side variables with these indicators.
The solid red (resp. dashed blue) lines plot the coe¢ cients corresponding to the the negative log house price
variable when the Euro/ERM status is equal to 1 (resp. 0). For the units, “percent”corresponds to 0.01 log
units (i.e., it is approximate) and “pp” corresponds to percentage points. All regressions include time and
country …xed e¤ects; contemporaneous value and 12 lags of the …rst di¤erence of log GDP; contemporaneous
value and 12 lags of the policy interest rate; 12 lags of the …rst di¤erence of log house prices; 12 lags of the
…rst di¤erence of the outcome variable. The dotted lines show 95% con…dence intervals calculated according
to Newey-West standard errors with a bandwidth of 20 quarters. All regressions are weighted by countries’
PPP-adjusted GDP in 1990. Data is an unbalanced quarterly panel that spans 1990Q1–2017Q4. All variables
except for those in the top panel are adjusted for in‡ation. Earnings are normalized by the stock price in
the quarter before the shock (see Footnote 20). We describe our sources and variable de…nitions in Online
Appendix Section F.




                                                                           45
tion in housing markets. First, banks can be thought of as high-valuation investors (“optimists”)
because they have a greater capacity to handle risk than non-institutional investors, and they have
real estate exposures through mortgage loans. Under this interpretation, bank credit provides a
measure of banks’ exposure to the housing market. Second, banks lend to other high-valuation
investors in the housing markets, such as optimistic homebuyers that use bank credit to purchase
larger homes or second homes. When bank credit is easily available, perhaps because of banks’
optimism about house prices, these high-valuation investors wield a greater in‡uence in the hous-
ing market (see Simsek (2013a) for a formalization). Thus, bank credit provides a broad proxy for
speculation in the housing market.
   Our speci…c measure of bank credit comes from Baron and Xiong (2017), who construct a
variable, “credit expansion”, de…ned as the change in the bank credit-to-GDP ratio in the last three
years. They standardize this variable by its mean and standard deviation within each country so
that the measure is high when bank credit expansion in a country has been high in recent years
relative to its historical trends. They show that their standardized measure predicts the likelihood
of a large decline in bank equity prices, and despite the elevated risk it also predicts lower average
returns on bank equity. Their preferred interpretation is that bank equity investors are excessively
optimistic or neglect crash risk, which in our framework would translate into greater speculation
(by banks or their borrowers).
   We use BIS data on bank credit to households and non…nancial …rms to construct a close
analogue of Baron and Xiong’s standardized credit expansion variable (see Online Appendix Section
F for details). We then run the same regressions as in (58), but we include the interaction of the
price shock with standardized credit expansion. That is, we estimate
(59)                                 2                                                                    3
                                                                  p;h
                                                                        (          log Pj;t )
  h
Yj;t+h     h
         Yj;t   1   =   h
                        j   +   h
                                t   +4                                                                    5+    c;h
                                                                                                                      controlsj;t + "j;t .
                                             pc;h
                                         +          (          log Pj;t )          credit expansion-std

In addition to the earlier controls, we include 12 lags of standardized credit expansion to capture its
direct impact. As before, we interact all right-hand-side variables with the Euro/ERM and the non-
                                                        pc;h                pc;h
Euro/ERM status indicators. We let                      euro   and          non    denote the coe¢ cient on the interaction of the
                                                                                                          pc;h 12              pc;h 12
shock and credit with these indicators. The sequence of coe¢ cients,                                      euro h=0    and      non h=0 ,
provide an estimate of the additional e¤ect of the shock when credit expansion has been one
standard deviation above average (relative to its baseline e¤ect with average credit).
   Figure IX plots these sequences and illustrates our …ndings (see Figure F.2 in the online appendix
for the di¤erenced coe¢ cients). The panels in the …rst two rows show that, in the Euro/ERM
sample, house price shocks lead to a greater decline in economic activity when credit expansion
has been high in recent years. In contrast, credit expansion does not change the e¤ect of the house
price shock in the non-Euro/ERM sample. These results support our prediction that risk premium
shocks lead to a more severe demand recession (in constrained economies) when they take place in
an environment with elevated speculation.


                                                                        46
   On the other hand, the bottom row of Figure IX presents inconclusive results that neither
support nor refute our predictions. We do not …nd meaningful di¤erences for the additional e¤ect
of house price shocks on earnings or house prices when credit expansion has been high (in either
sample). We do …nd a negative e¤ect on stock prices for the Euro/ERM sample, but the e¤ect is not
statistically signi…cantly di¤erent from the other sample. That said, since standard errors are large,
we cannot rule out sizeable e¤ects either. While we tentatively conclude that speculation proxied by
credit expansion is associated with deeper risk-centric demand recessions, further empirical research
should verify the robustness of this conclusion and the precise channels through which speculation
a¤ects the recession.

Other supporting evidence. Our empirical analysis is related to Mian and Su… (2014, 2018),
who use regional data within the U.S. to provide evidence for the central role played by the house
price cycle and housing speculation in the Great Recession.
   Mian and Su… (2014) argue that house price declines explain much of the job losses between
2007 and 2009. Our results for the Euro/ERM sample suggest that similar results hold in cross-
country data, while the non-Euro/ERM sample suggests that monetary policy can mitigate the
adverse e¤ects of house price shocks. Moreover, while Mian and Su… (2014) emphasize household
deleveraging as the key channel by which house price declines cause damage, some of our empir-
ical results (e.g., the investment response) suggest there are other mechanisms as well. As our
model demonstrates, house price declines could lower aggregate demand even without household
deleveraging or other …nancial frictions— although these additional ingredients would amplify the
e¤ects.
   Mian and Su… (2018) argue that housing speculation ampli…ed the house price cycle and led to
a more severe downturn. As in our empirical exercise, they emphasize bank credit expansion as a
major catalyst of speculation. They …nd that the U.S. areas more exposed to credit expansion in
the early 2000s featured greater speculative trading activity (measured from detailed transaction
data) and greater belief disagreements (measured from survey data). They argue that the same
areas experienced a larger housing boom but also a much greater bust, so they ended the housing
cycle with lower house prices and economic activity. Our empirical results on speculation (although
less detailed) suggest similar results hold in cross-country data. Our model illustrates how greater
speculation during the boom naturally leads to lower prices and economic activity once the economy
transitions to recession.
   In recent work, P‡ueger et al. (2018) present evidence that suggests risk premium shocks in
the stock market also a¤ect aggregate demand and interest rates. Speci…cally, they construct a
measure of risk appetite for the U.S. as the price of high (idiosyncratic) volatility stocks relative
to low volatility stocks. They show that a decrease in their measure of risk appetite is followed
by a slowdown in economic activity and a decline in the risk-free rate— similar to our results for
the non-Euro/ERM sample. P‡ueger et al. (2018) argue that their risk appetite measure explains
almost half of the variation of the one year risk-free rate in the U.S. since 1970. This suggests that


                                                 47
          policy interest rate (pp)                 core cpi (percent)                         unemployment rate (pp)
    .2




                                                                                        .4
                                             .1
    .1




                                             0




                                                                                        .2
    0




                                             -.1




                                                                                        0
          0        4         8          12          0        4        8      12                0       4        8       12


          GDP (percent)                             investment (percent)                       consumption (percent)




                                                                                        .4
                                             .5
    .1




                                                                                        -.1
                                             -.5
    -.2




                                             -1.5
    -.5




                                                                                        -.6
          0        4         8          12          0        4        8      12                0       4        8       12


          earnings/initial price (pp)               stock prices (percent)                     house prices (percent)
    .3




                                             .8




                                                                                        .7
    0




                                                                                        -.2
                                             -.6




                                                                                        -1.1
    -.3




                                             -2




          0        4         8          12          0        4        8      12                0       4        8       12



                                              Euro/ERM                            Non-Euro/ERM



Figure IX: Additional impulse responses to one percent decrease in real house prices when
credit expansion has been one standard deviation above average. The panels illustrate the results
from the regression speci…cation in (59) with the addition of the indicator variables for Euro/ERM and
non-Euro/ERM status as well as the interaction of all right-hand-side variables with these indicators. The
solid red (resp. dashed blue) lines plot the coe¢ cients corresponding to the interaction of the negative log
house price and the standardized credit expansion variables when the Euro/ERM status is equal to 1 (resp.
0). For the units, “percent” corresponds to 0.01 log units (i.e., it is approximate) and “pp” corresponds
to percentage points. All regressions include time and country …xed e¤ects; contemporaneous value and 12
lags of the …rst di¤erence of log GDP; contemporaneous value and 12 lags of the policy interest rate; 12
lags of the …rst di¤erence of log house prices; 12 lags of the …rst di¤erence of the outcome variable; and 12
lags of standardized credit expansion. The dotted lines show 95% con…dence intervals calculated according
to Newey-West standard errors with a bandwidth of 20 quarters. All regressions are weighted by countries’
PPP-adjusted GDP in 1990. Data is an unbalanced quarterly panel that spans 1990Q1–2017Q4. All variables
except for those in the top panel are adjusted for in‡ation. Earnings are normalized by the stock price in
the quarter before the shock (see Footnote 20). We describe our sources and variable de…nitions in Online
Appendix Section F.




                                                                 48
the time varying risk premium is an important driver of the risk-free rate in practice. Chodorow-
Reich et al. (2019) provide further support for the link between the stock market and aggregate
demand. Using regional data within the U.S., they …nd that a decline in local stock wealth (driven
by aggregate stock prices) decreases local payroll and employment. They also …nd stronger e¤ects in
nontradable industries but no e¤ects for tradable industries, consistent with a consumption wealth
e¤ect as in our model.
   Focusing on a value-weighted average of house and stock prices, Jordà et al. (2019) argue that
low frequency ‡uctuations in the risk premium in developed economies have been associated with a
collapse of safe asset returns (as opposed to a spike in risky asset returns). In particular, when the
risk premium rises, the risk-free rate tends to fall and the value-weighted average risky asset returns
remain relatively stable, as in our model. Looking at more recent years, Del Negro et al. (2017)
provide a comprehensive empirical evaluation of the di¤erent mechanisms that have put downward
pressure on interest rates and show that risk and liquidity considerations played a central role (see
also Caballero et al. (2017a)).
   Finally, our mechanisms are supported by a literature that investigates the macroeconomic
impact of “uncertainty shocks.”Using vector autoregressions (VARs), Bloom (2009) shows that an
increase in the volatility index in the U.S. is followed by a slowdown in economic activity. Moreover,
although his model does not emphasize monetary policy, his empirical analysis shows that the shock
is followed by a decline in the federal funds rate. This response suggests the e¤ects could be more
severe if the interest rate were constrained. Recent empirical work veri…es this intuition and shows
that uncertainty shocks in the U.S. are associated with a greater decline in economic activity when
the federal funds rate is close to zero, arguably because of the zero lower bound constraint on the
interest rate (see, for instance, Caggiano et al. (2017); Plante et al. (2018)).


                                   VIII. Final remarks
We develop a risk-centric macroeconomic model to focus on the role of the aggregate demand
channel in causing recessions driven by risky asset price ‡uctuations, and to study the e¤ect of
…nancial speculation on the severity of these recessions. Our analysis reformulates the standard
New Keynesian model in terms of a risk-centric decomposition that puts asset prices at the center
of the analysis. When the interest rate is constrained, a rise in the risk premium lowers asset
prices and triggers a demand recession, which further drives down asset prices. The feedbacks are
especially powerful when investors are pessimistic and think the higher risk premium will persist.
Hence, average beliefs play a central role in the recession phase not only because they a¤ect asset
valuations but also because they determine the strength of the ampli…cation mechanism. In the ex-
ante boom phase, belief disagreements (and more broadly, heterogeneous valuations) matter because
they induce investors to speculate. This speculation exacerbates the recession because it depletes
high-valuation investors’ wealth when the risk premium rises, which leads to a greater decline in
asset prices and economic activity. Macroprudential policy in the boom improves outcomes by


                                                  49
restricting speculation and preserving high-valuation investors’wealth during the recession. This
policy intervention leads to a Pareto improvement because it internalizes the aggregate demand
externalities that result from speculation.
       Our analysis supports “the Fed put”: the tendency of central banks to cut interest rates in
response to asset price declines driven by risk premium shocks. In our model, as long as the central
bank can cut interest rates without constraints, the economy remains in the …rst best. The lower
bound constraint on the interest rate can be thought of as the inability to provide a put beyond
a certain point. Moreover, our ampli…cation mechanism implies that even small constraints on
the interest rate can generate large recessions (see Figure IV for an illustration). This highlights
that “the Fed put”is important not only because of its direct e¤ect on aggregate demand but also
because it stabilizes expected future outcomes and prevents a large decline in current asset prices.
       In addition, our approach highlights that the interest rate policy a¤ects aggregate demand
through its impact on …nancial markets and asset prices. From this perspective, our analysis
supports unconventional monetary policies— such as central bank asset purchases— that attempt
to stimulate aggregate demand through their impact on asset prices. More broadly, any policy that
reduces perceived market volatility and prevents sudden asset price drops should have a similar
e¤ect, providing support for various policies implemented after the subprime and European crises.
       In our model, we use a lower bound constraint as the interest rate friction, but our mechanisms
apply if the interest rate is constrained for other reasons. When the interest rate has both an upper
bound and a lower bound (such as in a currency union or …xed exchange rate regime), our results
often become stronger. In this setting, speculation causes damage not only by lowering asset prices
during the recession but also by raising asset prices during the boom, when aggregate demand
is stretched above its natural level, which exacerbates the ine¢ ciency. Moreover, in this case
macroprudential policy during the boom is bene…cial not only because it preserves high-valuation
investors’wealth for a future recession but also because it immediately contains the excessive rise
in asset prices.
       Our results with belief disagreements do not depend on whether optimists or pessimists are
right about the transition probabilities. In fact, since the equilibrium is a function of investors’
subjective beliefs, the objective belief does not enter the equilibrium characterization.25 Moreover,
the objective belief is largely irrelevant for our policy analysis because we mainly focus on the
Pareto criterion and evaluate investors’welfare under their subjective beliefs. For example, we could
think of optimists as rational agents and pessimists as Knightian agents (see, e.g., Caballero and
Krishnamurthy (2008); Caballero and Simsek (2013)). Absent any direct mechanism for alleviating
Knightian behavior during severe recessions, the key point that reducing optimists’ risk taking
  25
    The objective belief matters if one is interested in understanding the evolution of investors’wealth shares along
the objective path (that would be realized in practice). The market selection hypothesis, formulated by Friedman
(1953), posits that investors with incorrect beliefs should be driven out of the market as they consistently lose money.
Our model features a version of this hypothesis in the long run (see Footnote 11). However, recent research has
identi…ed many reasons why this hypothesis is unlikely to apply in practice (see, e.g., Cao (2017); Boroviµcka (2020)).
We view our model as capturing the short run given belief disagreements (or more broadly, heterogeneous valuations)
that result from various unmodeled factors.



                                                          50
during the boom leads to Pareto improvements survives this alternative motivation. More generally,
our results are driven by persistent heterogeneous valuations, so similar results would also apply
if investors share the same beliefs but value risky assets heterogeneously for other reasons such as
di¤erences in risk tolerance (see Remark 7).
   Our model illustrates that wealth distribution matters for aggregate demand, not only because of
…nancial frictions or heterogeneous MPCs as emphasized in the previous macroeconomics literature
but also because of heterogeneous asset valuations. In the recession, a greater wealth share for high-
valuation investors improves asset prices and raises everyone’s spending. From this perspective,
our analysis supports not only ex-ante macroprudential policy but also a variety of ex-post policies
that transfer wealth to high-valuation investors in recessions. In recent work, Kekre and Lenel
(2019) show that heterogeneous asset valuations (which they refer to as a heterogeneous marginal
propensity to take risk) also strengthen the transmission of monetary policy.
   As we noted in the introduction, we removed all …nancial frictions in order to isolate the aggre-
gate demand mechanism and its interactions with speculation. However, if we were to introduce
these realistic frictions in our setting, many of the themes in that literature would reemerge and
be exacerbated by aggregate demand feedbacks. For example, asset price declines would not only
depress aggregate demand directly, but also indirectly by tightening collateral constraints. This
mechanism would amplify the feedback loops between asset prices and aggregate demand. While
our analysis shares many similarities with the …nancial frictions literature, we have a di¤erent fo-
cus. Financial frictions highlight the importance of constrained …rms or commercial banks that
lend to such …rms, whereas our heterogeneous valuations approach highlights the importance of in-
stitutional investors or …nancial intermediaries that lend to such investors, e.g., hedge funds, active
mutual funds, investment banks, broker-dealers, and so on. Consistent with our main mechanism,
a growing empirical literature suggests that …nancial intermediaries’ balance sheets have a large
impact on asset prices (see, e.g., Adrian et al. (2014); He et al. (2017)).
   Related, we assumed complete markets so investors speculate only via contingent Arrow-Debreu
securities. When these securities are not available, investors engage in proxy-speculation with
leverage. In Caballero and Simsek (2019), we analyze this modi…ed environment and show that our
main results still hold: that is, contingent securities do not play an important role beyond providing
analytical tractability. However, speculation via leverage breaks the separability property that we
derive in Section III.B : asset prices and the interest rate become relevant for the dynamics of
investors’wealth shares. Once the separability property breaks down, monetary policy can be an
e¤ective prudential tool. In particular, raising interest rates during the low risk-premium state can
reduce speculation. We explore the role of prudential monetary policy in Caballero and Simsek
(2019).
   While this is mostly an applied theory paper, we surveyed some of the extensive empirical evi-
dence supporting our analysis, and provided our own evidence by contrasting the local response to
risk premium shocks— captured by surprise house price changes— in constrained Euro/ERM coun-
tries with the local response in less constrained non-Euro/ERM countries. Our evidence suggests


                                                  51
that risk premium shocks lead to more severe recessions when the interest rate is constrained, as in
our model. The evidence also supports our model’s prediction that recessions reduce …rms’earnings
and lead to a further reduction in asset prices. When we proxy speculation with the size of the
bank credit expansion before the shock, we also …nd some evidence that high speculation increases
the severity of recessions driven by risk premium shocks.



                                           References
Adrian, T., Boyarchenko, N., 2012. Intermediary leverage cycles and …nancial stability.

Adrian, T., Etula, E., Muir, T., 2014. Financial intermediaries and the cross-section of asset returns.
 The Journal of Finance 69 (6), 2557–2596.

Auclert, A., 2019. Monetary policy and the redistribution channel. American Economic Review
 109 (6), 2333–67.

Bacchetta, P., Benhima, K., Kalantzis, Y., 2016. Money and capital in a persistent liquidity trap.

Baker, S. R., Bloom, N., Davis, S. J., 2016. Measuring economic policy uncertainty. The quarterly
  journal of economics 131 (4), 1593–1636.

Baker, S. R., Bloom, N., Terry, S., 2019. Does uncertainty reduce growth? using disasters as natural
  experiments. working paper.

Barberis, N., Greenwood, R., Jin, L., Shleifer, A., 2018. Extrapolation and bubbles. Journal of
  Financial Economics 129 (2), 203–227.

Baron, M., Xiong, W., 2017. Credit expansion and neglected crash risk. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 132 (2), 713–764.

Basak, S., 2000. A model of dynamic equilibrium asset pricing with heterogeneous beliefs and
  extraneous risk. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 24 (1), 63–95.

Basak, S., 2005. Asset pricing with heterogeneous beliefs. Journal of Banking & Finance 29 (11),
  2849–2881.

Basak, S., Cuoco, D., 1998. An equilibrium model with restricted stock market participation.
  Review of Financial Studies 11 (2), 309–341.

Basu, S., Bundick, B., 2017. Uncertainty shocks in a model of e¤ective demand. Econometrica
  85 (3), 937–958.

Beaudry, P., Portier, F., 2006. Stock prices, news, and economic ‡uctuations. American Economic
  Review 96 (4), 1293–1307.

Bernanke, B. S., Gertler, M., Gilchrist, S., 1999. The …nancial accelerator in a quantitative business
  cycle framework. Handbook of macroeconomics 1, 1341–1393.

Bianchi, J., Mendoza, E. G., 2018. Optimal time-consistent macroprudential policy. Journal of
  Political Economy 126 (2), 588–634.


                                                  52
Biswas, S., Hanson, A., Phan, T., 2018. Bubbly recessions.

Blanchard, O. J., L’Huillier, J.-P., Lorenzoni, G., 2013. News, noise, and ‡uctuations: An empirical
  exploration. The American Economic Review 103 (7), 3045–3070.

Bloom, N., 2009. The impact of uncertainty shocks. econometrica 77 (3), 623–685.

Bloom, N., Floetotto, M., Jaimovich, N., Saporta-Eksten, I., Terry, S. J., 2018. Really uncertain
  business cycles. Econometrica 86 (3), 1031–1065.

Blume, L., Easley, D., 2006. If you’re so smart, why aren’t you rich? belief selection in complete
  and incomplete markets. Econometrica 74 (4), 929–966.

Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., 2018. Diagnostic expectations and credit cycles. The Journal
  of Finance 73 (1), 199–227.

Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., Terry, S. J., 2019. Real credit cycles.

Boroviµcka, J., 2020. Survival and long-run dynamics with heterogeneous beliefs under recursive
  preferences. Journal of Political Economy 128 (1).

Brunnermeier, M. K., Sannikov, Y., 2014. A macroeconomic model with a …nancial sector. The
  American Economic Review 104 (2), 379–421.

Brunnermeier, M. K., Sannikov, Y., 2016a. The i theory of money. NBER working paper no. 22533.

Brunnermeier, M. K., Sannikov, Y., 2016b. Macro, money, and …nance: A continuous-time ap-
  proach. Handbook of Macroeconomics 2, 1497–1545.

Brunnermeier, M. K., Simsek, A., Xiong, W., 2014. A welfare criterion for models with distorted
  beliefs. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (4), 1753–1797.

Caballero, R. J., Farhi, E., 2018. The safety trap. The Review of Economic Studies 85 (1), 223–274.

Caballero, R. J., Farhi, E., Gourinchas, P.-O., 2017a. Rents, technical change, and risk premia
  accounting for secular trends in interest rates, returns on capital, earning yields, and factor
  shares. American Economic Review 107 (5), 614–620.

Caballero, R. J., Farhi, E., Gourinchas, P.-O., 2017b. The safe asset shortage conundrum. The
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 31 (3).

Caballero, R. J., Krishnamurthy, A., 2003. Excessive dollar debt: Financial development and un-
  derinsurance. The Journal of Finance 58 (2), 867–894.

Caballero, R. J., Krishnamurthy, A., 2008. Collective risk management in a ‡ight to quality episode.
  The Journal of Finance 63 (5), 2195–2230.

Caballero, R. J., Simsek, A., 2013. Fire sales in a model of complexity. The Journal of Finance
  68 (6), 2549–2587.

Caballero, R. J., Simsek, A., 2019. Prudential monetary policy. NBER working paper no. 25977.

Caggiano, G., Castelnuovo, E., Pellegrino, G., 2017. Estimating the real e¤ects of uncertainty
  shocks at the zero lower bound. European Economic Review 100, 257–272.


                                                  53
Campbell, J. Y., 2014. Empirical asset pricing: Eugene Fama, Lars Peter Hansen, and Robert
  Shiller. The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 116 (3), 593–634.

Campbell, J. Y., Viceira, L. M., 2002. Strategic asset allocation: portfolio choice for long-term
  investors. Clarendon Lectures in Economic.

Cao, D., 2017. Speculation and …nancial wealth distribution under belief heterogeneity. The Eco-
  nomic Journal.

Carver, C. S., Scheier, M. F., Segerstrom, S. C., 2010. Optimism. Clinical psychology review 30 (7),
  879–889.

Chen, J., Hong, H., Stein, J. C., 2002. Breadth of ownership and stock returns. Journal of Financial
  Economics 66 (2), 171–205.

Chodorow-Reich, G., Nenov, P. T., Simsek, A., 2019. Stock market wealth and the real economy:
  A local labor market approach. NBER working paper no. 25959.

Christiano, L. J., Eichenbaum, M. S., Trabandt, M., 2015. Understanding the great recession.
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (1), 110–167.

Cieslak, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2017. The economics of the fed put.

Cochrane, J. H., 2011. Presidential address: Discount rates. The Journal of …nance 66 (4), 1047–
  1108.

Dávila, E., 2017. Optimal …nancial transaction taxes. working paper.

Davila, E., Korinek, A., 2016. Pecuniary externalities in economies with …nancial frictions. The
  Review of Economic Studies.

DeFusco, A. A., Nathanson, C. G., Zwick, E., 2017. Speculative dynamics of prices and volume.
  NBER working paper no. 23449.

Del Negro, M., Giannone, D., Giannoni, M. P., Tambalotti, A., Wu, J. C., 2017. Safety, liquidity,
  and the natural rate of interest.

Detemple, J., Murthy, S., 1994. Intertemporal asset pricing with heterogeneous beliefs. Journal of
  Economic Theory 62 (2), 294–320.

Di Tella, S., 2017. Uncertainty shocks and balance sheet recessions. Journal of Political Economy
  125 (6), 2038–2081.

Di Tella, S., 2019. Risk premia and the real e¤ects of money. Stanford University working paper.

Di Tella, S., Hall, R. E., 2019. Risk premium shocks can create ine¢ cient recessions. Stanford
  University working paper.

Du¢ e, D., Epstein, L. G., 1992. Stochastic di¤erential utility. Econometrica: Journal of the Econo-
 metric Society, 353–394.

Eggertsson, G. B., Woodford, M., September 2006. Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy in a
  Liquidity Trap. The MIT Press, pp. 75–144.



                                                54
Farhi, E., Werning, I., 2016. A theory of macroprudential policies in the presence of nominal
  rigidities. Econometrica 84 (5), 1645–1704.

Farhi, E., Werning, I., 2017. Fiscal unions. American Economic Review forthcoming.

Fernández-Villaverde, J., Guerrón-Quintana, P., Kuester, K., Rubio-Ramírez, J., 2015. Fiscal
  volatility shocks and economic activity. American Economic Review 105 (11), 3352–84.

Fostel, A., Geanakoplos, J., 2008. Leverage cycles and the anxious economy. The American Eco-
  nomic Review 98 (4), 1211–1244.

Friedman, M., 1953. Essays in positive economics. University of Chicago Press.

Galí, J., 2018. Monetary policy and bubbles in a new keynesian model with overlapping generations.

Garleanu, N., Pedersen, L. H., 2011. Margin-based asset pricing and deviations from the law of one
 price. The Review of Financial Studies 24 (6), 1980–2022.

Geanakoplos, J., 2010. The leverage cycle. NBER macroeconomics annual 24 (1), 1–66.

Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., 2018. A crisis of beliefs: Investor psychology and …nancial fragility.
 Princeton University Press.

Gertler, M., Kiyotaki, N., 2010. Financial intermediation and credit policy in business cycle analysis.
 Handbook of monetary economics 3 (3), 547–599.

Giglio, S., Maggiori, M., Stroebel, J., Utkus, S., 2019. Five facts about beliefs and portfolios. NBER
  working paper no. 25744.

Guerrieri, V., Lorenzoni, G., 2017. Credit crises, precautionary savings, and the liquidity trap.
 Quarterly Journal of Economics forthcoming.

Hall, R. E., 2011. The long slump. The American Economic Review 101 (2), 431–469.

Harris, M., Raviv, A., 1993. Di¤erences of opinion make a horse race. Review of Financial studies
  6 (3), 473–506.

Harrison, J. M., Kreps, D. M., 1978. Speculative investor behavior in a stock market with hetero-
  geneous expectations. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 92 (2), 323–336.

He, Z., Kelly, B., Manela, A., 2017. Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence from many asset
  classes. Journal of Financial Economics 126 (1), 1–35.

He, Z., Krishnamurthy, A., 2012. A model of capital and crises. The Review of Economic Studies
  79 (2), 735–777.

He, Z., Krishnamurthy, A., 2013. Intermediary asset pricing. The American Economic Review
  103 (2), 732–770.
                                                      ¼ Ź leverage be limited? Journal of Financial
Heimer, R., Simsek, A., 2019. Should retail investorsâA
  Economics 132 (3), 1–21.

Hong, H., Stein, J. C., 2007. Disagreement and the stock market. Journal of Economic perspectives
  21 (2), 109–128.


                                                  55
Iachan, F. S., Nenov, P. T., Simsek, A., 2015. The choice channel of …nancial innovation. NBER
  working paper no. 21686.

Ilut, C. L., Schneider, M., 2014. Ambiguous business cycles. The American Economic Review
   104 (8), 2368–2399.

Isoré, M., Szczerbowicz, U., 2017. Disaster risk and preference shifts in a new keynesian model.
  Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 79, 97–125.

Jeanne, O., Korinek, A., 2018. Managing credit booms and busts: A pigouvian taxation approach.
  Journal of Monetary Economics.

Jordà, Ò., 2005. Estimation and inference of impulse responses by local projections. American
  economic review 95 (1), 161–182.

Jordà, Ò., Knoll, K., Kuvshinov, D., Schularick, M., Taylor, A. M., 2019. The rate of return on
  everything, 1870–2015. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (3), 1225–1298.

Kekre, R., Lenel, M., 2019. Monetary policy, redistribution, and risk premia. Tech. rep., Princeton
  University working paper.

Kindleberger, C. P., 1978. Manias, panics and crashes: a history of …nancial crises. Basic Books.

Kiyotaki, N., Moore, J., 1997. Credit cycles. Journal of political economy 105 (2), 211–248.

Korinek, A., Nowak, M., 2016. Risk-taking dynamics and …nancial stability.

Korinek, A., Simsek, A., 2016. Liquidity trap and excessive leverage. American Economic Review
 106 (3), 699–738.

Krugman, P., 1998. It’s baaack: Japan’s slump and the return of the liquidity trap. Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity 1998 (2), 137–205.

Kubler, F., Schmedders, K., 2012. Financial innovation and asset price volatility. The American
 Economic Review 102 (3), 147–151.

Lintner, J., 1969. The aggregation of investor’s diverse judgments and preferences in purely com-
  petitive security markets. Journal of …nancial and quantitative analysis 4 (04), 347–400.

Longsta¤, F. A., Wang, J., 2012. Asset pricing and the credit market. The Review of Financial
  Studies 25 (11), 3169–3215.

Lorenzoni, G., 2008. Ine¢ cient credit booms. The Review of Economic Studies 75 (3), 809–833.

Lorenzoni, G., 2009. A theory of demand shocks. The American economic review 99 (5), 2050–2084.

Mack, A., Martínez-García, E., et al., 2011. A cross-country quarterly database of real house prices:
 a methodological note. Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper 99.

Mian, A., Su…, A., 2014. What explains the 2007–2009 drop in employment? Econometrica 82 (6),
 2197–2223.

Mian, A., Su…, A., 2018. Credit supply and housing speculation. NBER working paper no. 24823.



                                                 56
Midrigan, V., Philippon, T., Jones, C., et al., 2016. Beyond the liquidity trap: the secular stagnation
 of investment. In: 2016 Meeting Papers. No. 1429. Society for Economic Dynamics.
Miller, E. M., 1977. Risk, uncertainty, and divergence of opinion. The Journal of …nance 32 (4),
 1151–1168.
Minsky, H. P., 1977. The …nancial instability hypothesis: An interpretation of keynes and an
 alternative to standard theory. Challenge 20 (1), 20–27.
Moreira, A., Savov, A., 2017. The macroeconomics of shadow banking. The Journal of Finance
 forthcoming.
Newey, W. K., West, K. D., 1987. A simple, positive semi-de…nite, heteroskedasticity and autocor-
  relation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55 (3), 703–708.
P‡ueger, C., Siriwardane, E., Sunderam, A., 2018. A measure of risk appetite for the macroeconomy.
  NBER working paper no. 24529.
Plante, M., Richter, A. W., Throckmorton, N. A., 2018. The zero lower bound and endogenous
  uncertainty. The Economic Journal 128 (611), 1730–1757.
Rognlie, M., Shleifer, A., Simsek, A., 2018. Investment hangover and the great recession. American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 10 (2), 113–53.
Romer, C. D., Romer, D. H., 2018. Phillips lecture–why some times are di¤erent: Macroeconomic
  policy and the aftermath of …nancial crises. Economica 85 (337), 1–40.
Scheinkman, J. A., Xiong, W., 2003. Overcon…dence and speculative bubbles. Journal of political
  Economy 111 (6), 1183–1220.
Schularick, M., Taylor, A. M., 2012. Credit booms gone bust: Monetary policy, leverage cycles, and
  …nancial crises, 1870-2008. American Economic Review 102 (2), 1029–61.
Shiller, R. J., 2014. Speculative asset prices. American Economic Review 104 (6), 1486–1517.
Silva, D. H., 2016. The risk channel of unconventional monetary policy.
Simsek, A., 2013a. Belief disagreements and collateral constraints. Econometrica 81 (1), 1–53.
Simsek, A., 2013b. Speculation and risk sharing with new …nancial assets. The Quarterly journal
  of economics 128 (3), 1365–1396.
Tobin, J., 1975. Keynesian models of recession and depression. The American Economic Review
  65 (2), 195–202.
Varian, H. R., 1989. Di¤erences of opinion in …nancial markets. In: …nancial Risk: Theory, Evidence
  and implications. Springer, pp. 3–37.
Werning, I., 2012. Managing a liquidity trap: Monetary and …scal policy. NBER working paper no.
 17344.
Xiong, W., Yan, H., 2010. Heterogeneous expectations and bond markets. Review of Financial
  Studies 23 (4), 1433–1466.
Zapatero, F., 1998. E¤ects of …nancial innovations on market volatility when beliefs are heteroge-
  neous. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 22 (4), 597–626.

                                                  57
                Online Appendix for:
A RISK-CENTRIC MODEL OF DEMAND RECESSIONS AND
                 SPECULATION
             Ricardo J. Caballero                              Alp Simsek
        MIT and NBER. caball@mit.edu              MIT, NBER, and CEPR. asimsek@mit.edu


   This online appendix contains supplementary material for A Risk-centric Model of Demand
Recessions and Speculation. Sections A-E contain the omitted derivations and proofs as well as the
extensions related to our theoretical analysis in Sections II-VI. Section F has information about
our data sources and details for our empirical analysis in Section VII.


            A. Omitted derivations for the two period model
This section presents the derivations and proofs omitted from the main text for the two period model
that we analyze in Section II. We start by presenting the details of the baseline case analyzed in the
main text. We then analyze an extension in which the elasticity of substitution (EIS) is di¤erent
than one and show that our conclusions remain qualitatively unchanged. Finally, we analyze the
extension with belief disagreements discussed in the main text. Throughout, recall that the market
portfolio is the claim to all output at date 1. Combining Eqs. (1) and (2), the return on the market
portfolio is also log normally distributed, that is,

                                             Q1                                 2
(A.1)                       rm (z1 ) = log          N      g       log Q            ;   2
                                                                                            .
                                             z1                                 2

A.1. Baseline two period model
For this case, most of the analysis is provided in the main text. Here, we formally state the investor’s
problem and derive the optimality conditions. The investor takes the returns as given and solves
the following problem,

                                max log c0 + e    log U1
                              c0 ;a0 ;! m
                                          h                    i   1=(1    )
                              where U1 = E c1 (z1 )1
                     s.t.     c0 + a0 = y0 + Q
                     and      c1 (z1 ) = a0 ! m exp (rm (z1 )) + (1            ! m ) exp rf     .

Here, c1 (z1 ) denotes total …nancial wealth, which equals consumption (since the economy ends at
date 1). Note that the investor has Epstein-Zin preferences with EIS coe¢ cient equal to one and
the RRA coe¢ cient equal to > 0. The case with = 1 is equivalent to time-separable log utility
as in the dynamic model.

                                                    58
   In view of the Epstein-Zin functional form, the investor’s problem naturally splits into two steps.
Conditional on savings, a0 , she solves a portfolio optimization problem, that is, U1 = RCE a0 , where
                                         h                             i   1=(1    )
(A.2)                        RCE = max
                                    m
                                       E   (Rp (z1 ))1
                                              !
                             p
                     and R (z1 ) =            ! m exp (rm (z1 )) + (1       ! m ) exp rf   .

Here, we used the observation that the portfolio problem is linearly homogeneous. The variable,
Rp (z1 ), denotes the realized portfolio return per dollar, and RCE denotes the optimal certainty-
equivalent portfolio return. In turn, the investor chooses asset holdings, a0 , that solve the intertem-
poral problem,

(A.3)                            max log (y0 + Q         a0 ) + e    log RCE a0 :
                                  a0

The …rst order condition for this problem implies Eq. (4) in the main text. That is, regardless
of her certainty-equivalent portfolio return, the investor consumes and saves a constant fraction of
her lifetime wealth.
    It remains to characterize the optimal portfolio weight, ! m , as well as the certainty-equivalent
return, RCE . Even though the return on the market portfolio is log-normally distributed (see
Eq. (A:1)), the portfolio return, Rp (z1 ), is in general not log-normally distributed (since it is
the sum of a log-normal variable and a constant). Following Campbell and Viceira (2002), we
assume the investor solves an approximate version of the portfolio problem (A:2) in which the
log portfolio return is also normally distributed. To state the problem, let p         log E [Rp ] rf
          2
and ( p )     var (log Rp ) to denote respectively the risk premium and the variance of the market
portfolio (measured in log returns). Then, the approximate portfolio return satis…es,
                         p
(A.4)                            = !m     k

                                                                                               2
                         k
                where              log (E [exp (rm (z1 ))])         rf = E [rm (z1 )]   rf +       .
                                                                                               2
Hence, the risk premium on the portfolio return depends linearly on the risk premium on the market
portfolio (measured in log returns). We also have,
                                                     p
(A.5)                                                    = !m .

Thus, the volatility of the portfolio also depends linearly on the volatility of the market portfolio
(measured in log returns). These identities hold exactly in continuous time. In the two period
model, they hold approximately when the period time-length is small. Moreover, they become
exact for the level the risk premium that ensures equilibrium, ! m = 1, since in this case the
portfolio return is actually log-normally distributed.
    Taking the log of the objective function in problem (A:2), and using the log-normality assump-
tion, the problem can be equivalently rewritten as,
                                                                      1      p 2
(A.6)                                  log RCE    rf = max      p
                                                                        (     ) ,
                                                        m !           2
where p and p are de…ned in Eqs. (A:4) and (A:5). It follows that, up to an approximation
(that becomes exact in equilibrium), the investor’s problem turns into standard mean-variance
optimization. Taking the …rst order condition, we obtain Eq. (6) in the main text. Substituting


                                                          59
                                                    2
! m = 1 and E [rm (z1 )] = g log Q     2 [cf. Eq. (A:1)] into this expression, we further obtain Eq.
(7) in the main text.
    For future reference, we also obtain a closed-form solution for the certainty-equivalent return,
RCE . Substituting Eqs. (A:4) and (A:5) together with ! m = 1 into (A:6), and using E [rm (z1 )] =
              2
g log Q      2 , we obtain:

                                                                                       1
(A.7)                                          log RCE = g              log Q                  2
                                                                                                   .
                                                                                       2
As expected, RCE increases with expected growth, g, and decreases with the volatility, , and the
risk aversion, .


A.2. More general EIS
Now consider the same model with the di¤erence that we allow the EIS, denoted by ", to be di¤erent
than one. We …rst characterize the equilibrium. We then describe how a risk premium shock a¤ects
the equilibrium and show that our conclusions from the main text remain qualitatively unchanged.

Equilibrium with more general EIS.                          In this case, the representative investor solves the fol-
lowing problem,
                                                   1 1="                          1 1="
                                                   c0             1             U1                     1
                     max                    U0 =                      +e
             c0 ;a0 ;! m ;fc1 (z1 )g                1       1="                  1         1="
                                                        h                  i    1=(1       )
                         where              U1 = E c1 (z1 )1
                             s.t.           c0 + a0 = y0 + Q
                            and             c1 (z1 ) = a0 ! m exp (rm (z1 )) + (1                             ! m ) exp rf   .

The case with " = 1 is equivalent to the earlier problem.
    Most of the analysis remains unchanged. As before, the investor’s problem splits into two parts.
The portfolio problem (A:2) as well as its solution remains unchanged. In particular, Eqs. (6) and
(7) from the main text apply. Moreover, the certainty equivalent return, RCE , is still given by Eq.
(A:7).
    The main di¤erence concerns the intertemporal problem (A:3), which is now given by,
                                                                                                           1 1="
                                    max (y0 + Q         a0 )1     1="
                                                                           +e          RCE a0                      :
                                       a0

Taking the …rst order condition for the intertemporal problem and rearranging terms, we obtain
the consumption function,
                                               1
                               c0 =                       (y0 + Q) .
                                    1+e     " (RCE )(" 1)
Combining this expression with the aggregate resource constraint, y0 = c0 , we obtain the following
analogue of the output-asset price relation [cf. Eq. (5)],

                                                              "                1 "
(A.8)                                              y0 = e             RCE            Q.

The expression shows that consumption is not only in‡uenced by a wealth e¤ect, as in the baseline


                                                                      60
analysis, but also by substitution and income e¤ects. When " > 1, the substitution e¤ect dominates
the income e¤ect. All else equal, a decline in the attractiveness of investment opportunities captured
by a reduction in RCE tends to reduce savings and increase consumption, which in turn increases
output. Conversely, when " < 1, the income e¤ect dominates the substitution e¤ect. In this case,
a decline in RCE tends to increase savings and reduce consumption and output.
     The equilibrium is found by jointly solving Eqs. (A:8) and (A:7) together with Eq. (7) and
the constrained policy interest rate. Collecting the equations together, the equilibrium tuple,
 y0 ; Q; RCE ; rf , is the solution to the following system,

(A.9)                    log y0 =          ") log RCE + log Q
                                      " + (1
                                              1 2
                      log RCE    = g log Q
                                              2
                                   1 g log Q rf
                                 =

                            rf   = max rf ; 0               where rf ensures y0 = z0 .

    To characterize the solution further, consider the case in which the equilibrium is supply deter-
mined, y0 = z0 = 1. Substituting this into the …rst two equations, we solve for the …rst-best price
level of the market portfolio as,

                                                       ("       1)                1   2
(A.10)                           log Q =       +                      g                       .
                                                            "                     2

Substituting this into the last equation, we further obtain an expression for “rstar”,

                                                                ("    1)                  1
(A.11)                      rf   =     +g              2
                                                                                  g               2
                                                               "                          2
                                           g    1              1              2
                                 =     +                    1+                    .
                                           "    2              "

Note that setting " = 1 recovers Eq. (8) in the main text.
    Now consider the case in which the interest rate is at its lower bound, rf = 0. Substituting this
into the equation system (A:9), we obtain,
                                                   2
(A.12)                      log Q = g
                                                                     ("       1)              1       2
                       and log y0 = "          + log Q                                g
                                                                          "                   2
                                                   g            1             1           2
                                     = "       +                      1+                      .
                                                   "            2             "

Note that setting " = 1 recovers Eq. (9) in the main text.

Risk premium shocks with more general EIS. Now consider how a risk premium shock that
increases or (or lowers g) a¤ects the equilibrium. Eq. (A:7) illustrates that this reduces RCE
for a given asset price level: as expected, an increase in the risk premium reduces the attractiveness
of investment opportunities. Combining this with the output-asset price relation in (A:8), we see
that the shock a¤ects consumption and aggregate demand through two channels. As before, it
exerts a downward in‡uence on asset prices, which reduces consumption through a wealth e¤ect.


                                                           61
Unlike before, the induced decline in RCE also a¤ects consumption depending on the balance of
income and substitution e¤ects. When " > 1, the second channel works against the wealth e¤ect
because investors substitute toward consumption. When " < 1, the second channel reinforces the
wealth e¤ect.
    Eqs. (A:11) and (A:12) show that the net e¤ect on aggregate demand is qualitatively the same
as in the baseline model regardless of the level of EIS. In particular, Eq. (A:11) illustrates that the
risk premium shock reduces rf .26 Eq. (A:12) illustrates that, when the interest rate is constrained,
rf = 0, the shock reduces the equilibrium level of output y0 , as well as the asset price, Q. When
" > 1, the substitution e¤ect mitigates the magnitude of these declines but it does not overturn
them— that is, the wealth e¤ect ultimately dominates. Since the purpose of our model is to obtain
qualitative insights, in the main text we assume " = 1 and isolate the wealth e¤ect.
    Finally, consider also how the shock a¤ects Q : the equilibrium asset price that obtains once
the interest rate declines su¢ ciently to ensure output is equal to its supply determined level. In our
baseline model, Q is constant. In general, Eq. (A:10) illustrates that Q can decrease or increase
in response to the risk premium shock. When " > 1, Q declines, which means that rf does
not need to fully accommodate the price impact of the risk premium shock. The reason is that
the substitution e¤ect supports current consumption and reduces the burden on wealth to support
aggregate demand. The opposite happens when " < 1, where the substitution e¤ect is dominated
by the income e¤ect. In this case Q needs to rise to support aggregate demand, which is achieved
by a larger decline in rf following the risk premium shock.


A.3. Belief disagreements and speculation
We next go back to the baseline setup with " = 1 complete the analysis of the case with belief
disagreements discussed in the main text. Recall that there are two types of investors, optimists
and pessimists, denoted by superscript i 2 fo; pg. With a slight abuse of notation, we also let
  o     and p 1           denote respectively optimists’and pessimists’wealth shares. Investors are
identical except possibly their beliefs about aggregate growth. Optimists perceive greater growth,
go > gp.
    In this case, type i investors solve the following problem,

(A.13)                 max               log c0 + e   log U1
               c0 ;a0 ;! m ;fc1 (z1 )g
                                                 h                i   1=(1   )
                           where         U1 = E i c1 (z1 )1
                                                      i
                               s.t.      c0 + a0 =        (y0 + Q)
                               and       c1 (z1 ) = a0 ! m exp (rm (z1 )) + (1   ! m ) exp rf   .

Note that we set the EIS equal to one as in the baseline setting. Note also that the asset market
clearing condition requires,

(A.14)                                          ! m;o ao0 + ! m;p ap0 = Q,
  26
    The e¤ect of this risk premium shock on Q is more subtle (see Eq. (A:10)). When " > 1, Q declines, which
means that rf does not need to fully accommodate the risk premium shock. The reason is that the substitution
e¤ect supports current consumption and reduces the burden on wealth to support aggregate demand. The opposite
happens when " < 1, where the substitution e¤ect is dominated by the income e¤ect. In this case Q needs to rise
to support aggregate demand, which is achieved by a larger decline in rf following the risk premium shock.




                                                             62
that is, the total amount of wealth invested in the market portfolio equals the value of the market
portfolio. The rest of the model is the same as in the baseline setting.
    To characterize the equilibrium, note that the investor’s portfolio problem (A:2) remains un-
changed. Applying the log-normal approximation that we described previously, we obtain Eq. (6)
as in the main text, that is,
                                                              2
                                          1 E i [rm (z1 )] + 2  rf
                                 ! m;i '                           .
                                                2
Substituting E i [rm (z1 )] = g i   log Q       2   [cf. Eq. (A:1)] into this expression, we further obtain,

                                                      1 gi     log Q      rf
(A.15)                                 ! m;i '                                 .

As before, investors choose their share of the market portfolio so that their optimal portfolio risk
is proportional to the Sharpe ratio. The di¤erence is that the Sharpe ratio is calculated according
to investors’own beliefs (and it is greater for optimists since g o > g p ).
    The intertemporal problem (A:3) also remains unchanged. Taking the …rst order condition, we
obtain,
                                                      1
(A.16)                                    ci0 =                 i
                                                                    (y0 + Q)
                                                    1+e
Aggregating this equation across investors, and using the aggregate resource constraint (3), shows
that the output-asset price relation (5) continues to apply in this setting. Belief heterogeneity does
not a¤ect this equation since investors share the same discount rate, .
   Next note that combining (A:14) ; (A:16) and (5), the asset market clearing condition can be
rewritten as,

(A.17)                                      ! m;o + (1         ) ! m;p = 1.

Investors’wealth-weighted average portfolio weight on the market portfolio is equal to one. Com-
bining this with Eq. (A:15), we obtain the following analogue of Eq. (7),

                                            1   ogo   +   pgp        log Q     rf
(A.18)                                '                                             .

Hence, the risk balance condition continues to apply with the di¤erence that the expected growth
rate is determined according to a weighted average belief. Another di¤erence is that the condition
is typically not exact because investors’shares of the market portfolio typically deviate from one
(and thus, their return is typically not log-normal). Speci…cally, the equilibrium portfolio shares
satisfy, ! o > 1 > ! p : optimists’ make a leveraged investment in the market portfolio by issuing
some risk-free debt, whereas pessimists invest only a fraction of their wealth in the market portfolio
(and invest the rest of their wealth in the risk-free asset issued by optimists).
    Next consider the supply-determined equilibrium in which output is equal to its potential,
y0 = z0 = 1. By Eq. (5), this requires the asset price to be at a particular level, Q = e .
Combining this with Eq. (A:18) we obtain Eq. (10) in the main text that characterizes “rstar.”
The level of “rstar”is increasing in optimists’wealth share, . This is because increasing optimists’
wealth share tends to increase asset prices, aggregate demand, and output. In a supply-determined
equilibrium, the monetary policy increases the interest rate to neutralize the impact of optimists
on aggregate demand and output.


                                                          63
    Finally, consider the case in which the interest rate is at its lower bound, rf = 0. Substituting
this into the risk balance condition (A:18), and using the output-asset price relation (5), we obtain
Eq. (11) in the main text that characterizes the equilibrium level of output in a demand recession.
In this case, increasing optimists’ wealth share translates into an actual increase in asset prices,
aggregate demand, and output, because the monetary policy cannot neutralize these e¤ects due to
the constraint on the interest rate.




                                                 64
                  B. Omitted derivations for the dynamic model
This section presents the details of the dynamic model that we present and analyze in Sections
III-V. Sections B.1-B.3 describe derivations and proofs omitted from the main text for the dynamic
model. Section B.4 describes how we parameterize the model. The subsequent section C presents
the details of the welfare analysis for the same model.


B.1. Omitted derivations in Section III
B.1.1      Portfolio problem and its recursive formulation
A type i investor’s portfolio problem (at some time t and state s) can be written as,
                                  Z 1
  i   i                        i          ~
Vt;s at;s = h     max i      Et;s     e t log c~it~;~s dt~
                                     0
                          !m
                 c~t~;~s ;~ t~;~
                                  ! s~ s
                                 ;~
                               s t~;~
                                                               t
                                           t~ t;~
                                                s

(B.1)8
                                                              0
     >                     f
     < dait;s = ait;s rt;s + ! ~m       m
                                 t;s rt;s
                                               f
                                              rt;s     !~ st~~;~s                                       ~m
                                                                                             c~t;s dt + !      i
                                                                                                          t;s at;s
                                                                                                                     m dZ
                                                                                                                     t;s  t          absent transition,
s.t.                                  Qt;s0 Qt;s       0
     >
     :                          ~m
             ait;s0 = ait;s 1 + ! t;s              ~ st;s s10
                                                  +!                                           if there is a transition to state s0 6= s.
                                         Qt;s                p                      t;s


         i [ ] denotes the expectations operator that corresponds to the investor’s beliefs for state
Here, Et;s
transition probabilities.
   The HJB equation corresponding to this problem is given by,
                                                                              i
                                                                           @Vt;s
                    i                                                                   f                          f             0
(B.2)             Vt;s ait;s = max0 log c~ +                                     ait;s rt;s +!    m
                                                                                             ~ m rt;s             rt;s      ~s
                                                                                                                            !           c~
                                               ~ m ;~
                                               !    !s  ;~
                                                         c                  @a
                                                     2  i
                                                    @ Vt;s                       @Vt;s i ai
                                               1                             m 2            t;s
                                           +                   ~ m ait;s
                                                               !             t;s    +
                                               2     @a2                                @t              !!                             !
                                                                                 Q         Q         s0
                                                i       i                         t;s 0      t;s  !~
                                           +    s     Vt;s 0       ait;s      ~m
                                                                            1+!                  + s0                      i
                                                                                                                         Vt;s ait;s          .
                                                                                     Qt;s         pt;s

    In view of the log utility, the solution has the functional form in (48), which we reproduce here,

                                                             i
                                                                                log ait;s =Qt;s
                                                           Vt;s ait;s =                                i
                                                                                                    + vt;s .

This functional form also implies,
                                                            i
                                                         @Vt;s               i
                                                                       @ 2 Vt;s
                                                                 1                                       1
                                                               = i and          =                           2.
                                                          @a     at;s   @a2                           ait;s

The …rst order condition for c~ then implies Eq. (23) in the main text. The …rst order condition for
~ m implies,
!

               i                                                      i
                                                                   @Vt;s   ait;s0
            @Vt;s                               f
                                                                         0                  Qt;s0 Qt;s                 i
                                                                                                                 @ 2 Vt;s               m 2
                  ai rm                        rt;s    +       i
                                                                                    ait;s              =                  ! m ai            .
             @a t;s t;s                                        s
                                                                           @a                   Qt;s              @a2 t;s t;s           t;s




                                                                                    65
                        @V i     @V i    0    @2V i
After substituting for @at;s ; @a
                                t;s
                                    ; @at;s
                                        2   and rearranging terms, this also implies Eq. (31) in the
                                                      0
main text. Finally, the …rst order condition for ! ~ s implies,
                                                               i
                                                            @Vt;s   i
                                                  0              0 at;s0
                                              pst;s                 @a
                                                                                           1=ait;s0
                                                  i
                                                       =                           =                  ,
                                                  s
                                                                   i ai
                                                                @Vt;s ( t;s )              1=ait;s
                                                                    @a

which is Eq. (32) in the main text. This completes the characterization of the optimality conditions.

B.1.2    Partial characterization of equilibrium
Proof of Lemma 1. Provided in the main text.

Proof of Lemmas 2 and 3. We prove the two lemmas together since they follow from similar
steps. To characterize positions on the market portfolio, note that Eqs. (32) and (31) imply,

                                                      1                                    0   Qt;s0 Qt;s
(B.3)                          ! m;i
                                 t;s
                                        m
                                        t;s   =       m
                                                                 m
                                                                rt;s        f
                                                                           rt;s + pst;s                     .
                                                      t;s                                          Qt;s

This implies ! m;i     m                                                           m;i
               t;s = ! t;s . Combining this observation with Eq. (16), we obtain ! t;s = 1. This
proves Eq. (28).
   To characterize the positions on the contingent security, …rst consider how type i investors’
wealth share changes after a state transition. By de…nition, we have

                                                          ait;s =      i
                                                                       t;s Qt;s kt;s .

After plugging this into Eq. (32), and using kt;s = kt;s0 (since capital does not jump), we obtain
Eq. (33):
                               i       i   i 1                  0 Qt;s0
                               t;s0 = t;s s      where t;s = pst;s      .
                                             t;s                   Qt;s
                                                           P
Aggregating this expression across all investors, and using i it;s0 = 1, we obtain t;s = t;s , where
 t;s denotes the wealth-weighted average belief de…ned in (27). Substituting this back into Eq. (33),
we obtain
                                                                              i   i
                                                                i             t;s s
                                                                t;s0   =               :
                                                                                t;s

This proves the second line of Eq. (30).
    Combining t;s = t;s with the de…nition of                                t;s   in Eq. (33), we obtain an expression for the
price of the contingent security,
                                                            0                1=Qt;s0
                                                          pst;s =      t;s           :
                                                                             1=Qt;s
This proves Eq. (35). Combining this with Eq. (B:3), and substituting ! m;i     t;s = 1, we obtain the
risk balance condition (34). This completes the proof of Lemma 3.
     Next consider the positions type i investors take in the contingent security to achieve the change
in their wealth share after transition. The evolution of investors’wealth in Eq. (B:1) together with
! m:i
  t;s = 1 implies
                                         i
                                         t;s0           0 Qt;s    1
                                              = 1 + ! st;s              :
                                          i
                                          t;s              Qt;s0 pst;s0

                                                                       66
                                                          i                            0
                                                          t;s0                     ! st;s;i
Combining this with Eq. (35), we obtain                    i        = 1+                      . Combining this with the second line of
                                                           t;s                        t;s
Eq. (30), we solve for type i investors’equilibrium position in the contingent security
                                                          0
                                                       ! st;s;i =        i
                                                                         s           t;s .

This proves Eq. (29).
    Next consider how type i investors’wealth share changes absent a state transition. The evolution
of investors’wealth in Eq. (B:1) together with ! m:i
                                                 t;s = 1 implies
                                                                                      !
                              dait;s                              0           cit;s
                                     =          m
                                               rt;s           ! st;s;i                        dt +     m
                                                                                                       t;s dZt .
                              ait;s                                           ait;s

                                         m;
Substituting for ct;s from Eq. (23) and rt;s                      m     from Eqs. (22), we further obtain
                                                                  t;s

                       dait;s                Q             Q                   0
                              = g+           t;s   +     s t;s            ! st;s;i dt +                s    +    Q
                                                                                                                 t;s   dZt .
                       ait;s

Note also we also have [cf. (14)]

                        d (Qt;s kt;s )                    Q                Q                                     Q
                                       = g+               t;s     +      s t;s         dt +            s   +     t;s   dZt .
                          Qt;s kt;s

Recall that it;s = ait;s = (Qt;s kt;s ). Thus, using the last two displayed equations together with Ito’s
formula for ratio, we further obtain,

                                  d    i
                                       t;s                    0

                                      i
                                              =         ! st;s;i dt =                  i
                                                                                       s         t;s       dt.
                                      t;s

Here, the last equality substitutes (29). This establishes the …rst line of Eq. (30).
    It remains to prove the last part of Lemma 3. To this end, consider the same economy with
the only di¤erence that there is a single investor type (the representative investor) whose beliefs
about transition probabilities are allowed to be possibly time-varying and stochastic. Consider a
history in which the investor’s beliefs agree with the wealth-weighted average belief, t;s . Then,
the representative investor’s portfolio optimality conditions imply that Eqs. (32) and (31) hold
after replacing is with t;s . The market clearing conditions (16) imply ! m;i              i
                                                                             t;s = 1 and at;s = Qt;s .
Substituting these expressions into the portfolio optimality conditions, we obtain Eqs. (34 35).
This shows that asset prices are determined as if there is a representative investor with the wealth-
weighted average belief and completes the proof of the lemmas.

B.1.3    New Keynesian microfoundation for nominal rigidities
The supply side of our model features nominal rigidities similar to the standard New Keynesian
setting. There is a continuum of measure one of monopolistically competitive production …rms
denoted by . These …rms own the capital stock (in equal proportion) and produce di¤erentiated
goods, yt;s ( ), subject to the technology,

(B.4)                                          yt;s ( ) = A                  t;s (    ) kt;s .



                                                                        67
Here, t;s ( ) 2 [0; 1] denotes the …rm’s choice of capital utilization. We assume utilization is free
up to t;s ( ) = 1 and in…nitely costly afterwards. The production …rms sell their output to a
competitive sector that produces the …nal output according to the CES technology,
                                                             Z     1                          "=(" 1)
                                                                                  " 1
(B.5)                                           yt;s =                 yt;s ( )    "    d               ;
                                                               0

for some " > 1. Thus, the demand for the …rms’goods implies,
                                                              "
(B.6)                           yt;s ( )         pt;s ( )          yt;s , where pt;s ( ) = Pt;s ( ) =P .

Here, pt;s ( ) denotes the …rm’s relative price, which depends on its nominal price, Pt;s ( ), as well
                                             R                1=(1 ")
as the ideal nominal price index, Pt;s =       Pt;s ( )1 " d          . We write the demand constraint
as an inequality because an individual …rm can in principle refuse to meet the demand for its goods.
    Without price rigidities, the …rm chooses t;s ( ) 2 [0; 1] ; yt;s ( ) ; pt;s ( ) to maximize its earn-
ings, pt;s ( ) yt;s ( ), subject to the supply constraint in (B:4) and the demand constraint, (B:6).
In this case, the demand constraint holds as equality (because otherwise the …rm can always raise
its price to keep its production unchanged and raise its earnings). By combining the constraints,
the …rm’s problem can be written as,

                                                                                                   pt;s ( ) " yt;s
                        max                  pt;s ( )1   "
                                                             yt;s s.t. 0              t;s (   )=                        1.
                   pt;s ( );     t;s (   )                                                              Akt;s

Inspecting this problem reveals that the solution features full factor utilization, t;s ( ) = 1. This
is because, when t;s ( ) < 1, the marginal cost of production is zero. Thus, the …rm can always
lower its price and increase its demand and production, which in turn increases its earnings. Hence,
at the optimum, the …rms set t;s ( ) = 1 and yt;s ( ) = Akt;s . To produce at this level, they set
                                                   y             1="
the relative price level, pt;s ( ) = Akt;st;s  . Since all …rms are identical, we also have pt;s ( ) = 1
and yt;s = yt;s ( ) = Akt;s . In particular, output is determined by aggregate supply at full factor
utilization.
    Now consider the alternative setting in which …rms have a preset nominal price that is equal
for all …rms, Pt;s ( ) = P . This also implies the relative price of a …rm is …xed and equal to
one, pt;s ( ) = 1. The …rm chooses the remaining variables, t;s ( ) 2 [0; 1] ; yt;s ( ), to maximize
its earnings, yt;s ( ), subject to the supply constraint in (B:4) and the demand constraint, (B:6).
Combining the constraints and using pt;s ( ) = 1, the …rm’s problem can be written as,

                    max A           t;s (     ) kt;s s.t. 0              t;s (    )     1 and A      t;s (   ) kt;s   yt;s .
                    t;s (   )

                                                                   y
The solution is given by, t;s ( ) = min 1; Akt;st;s . Intuitively, when t;s ( ) < 1 and A t;s ( ) kt;s <
yt;s , the marginal cost of production is zero and there is some unmet demand for …rms’goods. The
…rm optimally increases its production until the supply or the demand constraints bind. Combining
this observation with the production technology for the …nal output, we also obtain, yt;s Akt;s .
This implies that the demand constraint holds as equality also in this case. In particular, we have
            yt;s
 t;s ( ) = Akt;s   1.
      In sum, when the …rms’nominal prices are …xed, aggregate output is determined by aggregate
demand subject to the capacity constraint, which veri…es Eq. (18) in the dynamic model (and Eq.
(3) in the two period model).

                                                                           68
   Note also that, in equilibrium, …rms’equilibrium earnings are equal to aggregate output, yt;s .
Since …rms own the capital (and there is no rental market for capital), the division of these earnings
between return to capital and monopoly pro…ts is indeterminate. This division does not play an
important role in our baseline model but it matters when we introduce investment. In Online
Appendix Section D with endogenous investment (that we present subsequently), we use slightly
di¤erent microfoundations that ensure earnings accrue to …rms in the form of return to capital, i.e.,
there are no monopoly pro…ts, which helps to simplify the exposition.


B.2. Omitted derivations in Section IV
Proof of Proposition 1. Provided in the main text. The predictions regarding the e¤ect of risk
premium shocks on consumption and output follow from combining the characterization with Eqs.
(24) and (21).


B.3. Omitted derivations in Section V
Proof of Proposition 2. Eq. (44) follows from Lemma 2. To establish the remaining results, we
use Lemma 3 that establishes the risk balance condition.
   First consider the equilibrium for the high-risk-premium state, s = 2. Applying Eq. (34) for
                          f
s = 2 and substituting rt;2  = 0 and Qt;2 = 0, we obtain Eq. (47) that describes the risk balance
condition for the high-risk-premium state. Combining this expression with Eq. (44), we obtain the
di¤erential equation system,

                                                                          exp (q2 )   2
(B.7)                   q_t;2 =              +g+    2 ( t;2 )   1                     2   ;
                                                                            Q
                                         o     p
                        _ t;2 =      (   2     2)   t;2 (1      t;2 ) .

This system describes the joint dynamics of the price and optimists’ wealth share, (qt;2 ; t;2 ),
conditional on there not being a transition. We next analyze the solution to this system using
the phase diagram over the range 2 [0; 1] and q2 2 [q2p ; q2o ]. Here, recall that q2i corresponds to
the equilibrium log price with common beliefs characterized in Section IV corresponding to type i
investors’belief.
      First note that the system has two steady states given by, ( t;2 = 0; qt;2 = q2p ), and
( t;2 = 1; qt;2 = q2o ). Next note that the system satis…es the Lipschitz condition over the relevant
range. Thus, the vector ‡ows that describe the law of motion do not cross. Next consider the locus,
q_2 = 0. By comparing Eqs. (47) and (38), this locus is exactly the same as the price that would
obtain if investors shared the same wealth-weighted average belief, denoted by q2 = q2h ( ). Using
our analysis in Section IV, we also …nd that q2h ( ) is strictly increasing in . Moreover, q2 < q2h ( )
implies q_t;2 < 0 whereas q2 > q2h ( ) implies q_t;2 > 0. Finally, note that _ t;2 < 0 for each 2 (0; 1).
      Combining these observations, the phase diagram has the shape in Figure B.1. This in turn
implies that the system is saddle path stable. Given any t;2 2 [0; 1), there exists a unique solution,
qt;2 , which ensures that limt!1 qt;2 = q2p . We de…ne the price function (the saddle path) as q2 ( ).
Note that the price function satis…es q2 ( ) < q2h ( ) for each             2 (0; 1), since the saddle path
cannot cross the locus, q_t;2 = 0. Note also that q2 (1) = q2o , since the saddle path crosses the other
steady-state, ( t;2 = 1; qt;2 = q2o ). Finally, recall that q2 < q2h ( ) implies q_t;2 < 0. Combining this
with _ t;2 < 0, we further obtain dqd2 ( ) > 0 for each 2 (0; 1).
      Next note that, after substituting q_t;2 = q20 ( ) _ t;2 , Eq. (B:7) implies the di¤erential equation
(45) in -domain. Thus, the above analysis shows there exists a solution to the di¤erential equation

                                                       69
        Figure B.1: The phase diagram for the equilibrium with heterogeneous beliefs.


with q2 (0) = q2p and q2 (1) = q2o . Moreover, the solution is strictly increasing in , and it satis…es
q2 ( ) < q2h ( ) for each 2 (0; 1). Note also that this solution is unique since the saddle path
is unique. This completes the characterization of the equilibrium for the high-risk-premium state
s = 2. The claims for ct;2 =kt;2 and yt;2 =kt;2 follow from Eqs. (24) and (21).
    Finally consider the equilibrium in the low-risk-premium state, s = 1. In the conjectured
equilibrium, we have Qt;1 = Q , which also implies Q            Q
                                                          t;1 = t;1 = 0. Substituting these expressions
into Eq. (34) for s = 1, we obtain the risk balance condition for the low-risk-premium state,

                                       1               f                    Q
                               1   =        g+        rt;1 +   t;1   1                 .
                                       1                                    Qt;2
                                                                                          f
Writing the equilibrium variables as a function of optimists’wealth share, we obtain rt;1    = r1f ( )
                                                            o
and t;1 = 1 ( ) and Qt;2 = exp (q2 ( 0 )), where 0 =        1 = 1 ( ) denotes optimists’wealth share
after a transition [cf. Eq. (44)]. Substituting these expressions into the risk balance condition and
rearranging terms, we obtain Eq. (46) in the main text that, which we replicate here,

                                                                Q
                          r1f ( ) =        +g    1(   )                        1           2
                                                                                           1.
                                                           exp (q2 ( 0 ))

                drf ( )
Note also that d1     > 0 because 1 ( ) is decreasing in (in view of Assumption 4), and q2 ( 0 ) is
                                                                        o
strictly increasing in . The latter observation follows since 0 = o +(1 1 ) p is increasing in (in
                                                                                   1            1
view of Assumption 4) and q2 ( ) is a strictly increasing function. Note also that r1f ( ) > r1f (0) > 0,
where the latter inequality follows since Assumptions 1-3 holds for the pessimistic belief. Thus, the
interest rate in state 1 is always positive, which veri…es our conjecture and completes the proof of
the second part of the proposition.




                                                          70
B.4. Details of the parameterization
This section describes the details of the parameterization of the dynamic model that we use to
numerically illustrate our …ndings. This parameterization is only meant to be reasonable, as its
purpose is to give a sense of potential magnitudes. Throughout, we measure time in years so that
the continuous-time rates we choose correspond to (approximate) yearly rates.
    Since we do not explicitly model steady-state in‡ation (for simplicity), we interpret the growth
rate in our model as g = g~ + where g~ can be thought of as the real growth rate and        0 can be
thought of as the steady-state in‡ation. With this adjustment, we can interpret the returns in our
model as capturing the corresponding nominal returns in the data. In particular, the zero lower
bound constraint in the model (19) becomes a restriction on the nominal risk-free rate (as in the
data). We set = 2% based on the Fed’s in‡ation target in recent decades; and g~ = 3% based on
pre-recession estimates for the U.S. trend output growth, which leads to:

                                               g = 5%.

   For the discount rate, we set,
                                                    = 4%,
based on the yearly discount rates typically assumed in the literature. This implies a …rst-best
(nominal) return to capital given by rm; = + g = 9%, which is consistent with the historical
estimates for the weighted-average return on stocks and housing in Jordà et al. (2019).
    We set the variance in the low-risk-premium state to target the …rst-best nominal risk-free
interest rate in the boom given by, r1f; = 7% (equivalently, a real risk-free rate given by 5%). We
target a relatively high r1f; because this is the highest level of interest rate that can be observed
in our environment— the actual interest rate in the boom will be lower. Using (36), this leads to:
                                                2
                                                1   = 2%:

We set the variance in the high-risk-premium state to target a …rst-best interest rate is only slightly
negative, r2f; = 1%, which leads to:
                                             2
                                             2 = 10%.

These choices (together with the choices of and g) ensure that Assumption 1 holds. For the
productivity level, we set A = 1. This does not play a role as it scales all variables.
   It remains to set investors’beliefs for transition probabilities, is s2f1;2g;i2fo;pg . We set:

                                      o                         o
                                      1   = 1=25 and            2   = 1=5,
                                      p                     p
                                      1   = 1=5 and         2   = 1=25.

Hence, optimists think a low-risk-premium episode lasts on average 25 years whereas pessimists
think it lasts for only 5 years (and vice versa for the high-risk-premium episode).




                                                    71
              C. Omitted derivations for the welfare analysis
This section presents the omitted derivations and proofs for the welfare analysis of the dynamic
model that we present in Section VI. Section C.1 establishes the properties of the equilibrium value
functions that are used in the main text. Section C.2 describes the details of the equilibrium with
macroprudential policy, presents the analyses omitted from the main text (e.g., macroprudential
policy in the high-risk-premium state), and presents omitted proofs. Throughout, we focus on
the equilibrium characterized in Proposition 2. In particular, the price per unit of capital follows
deterministic dynamics absent state transitions, Qt;s = 0.


C.1. Value functions in equilibrium
We …rst derive the HJB equation that describes the normalized value function in equilibrium and
derive Eqs. (49) and (51). We then derive the di¤erential equations in -domain that characterize
the value function and its components. In particular, we derive Eq. (52). We then prove Lemmas
4 and 5 that are used in the analysis.

Characterizing the normalized value function in equilibrium. Recall that the value func-
tion has the functional form in Eq. (48). Our goal is to characterize the value function per unit of
          i (corresponding to ai = Q ). To facilitate the analysis, we de…ne,
capital, vt;s                   t;s    t;s


                                                        i        i        log Qt;s
(C.1)                                                   t;s   = vt;s                 .

            i
Note that   t;sis the value function per unit wealth (corresponding to ait;s = 1), and that the value
                                    log(ait;s )
                         i ai
function also satis…es Vt;s   t;s =             + it;s : We …rst characterize it;s . We then combine this
with Eq. (C:1) to characterize our main object of interest, vt;s   i .

   Consider the recursive version of the portfolio problem in (B:2). We substitute the optimal
consumption rule from Eq. (23), the contingent allocation rule from Eq. (32), and ait;s = 1 (to
characterize the value per unit wealth) to obtain,

                                       1        f                                    1          2                 0
(C.2)             i
                  t;s   = log +                rt;s  + ! m;i
                                                         t;s
                                                                  m
                                                                 rt;s    f
                                                                       rt;s             ! m;i
                                                                                          t;s
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                      s       ! st;s;i
                                                                                     2
                                                                 !                    !
                            @ it;s         i    1             i
                                                              s
                        +          +       s        log       0     + it;s0       i
                                                                                  t;s    .
                             @t                            pst;s

From Lemma 2, the optimal investment in the market portfolio and contingent securities satis…es,
                s0 ;i                                                                s0        1=Qt;s0
! m;i                 i
  t;s = 1 and ! t;s = s t;s , and the price of the contingent security is given by, pt;s = t;s 1=Qt;s .
Here, t;s denotes the weighted average belief de…ned in (43). Using these conditions, the HJB
equation becomes,
                                                   m       1 2
                                                                     !
                         i           1           rt;s      2   s
(C.3)                    t;s = log +          i            i
                                                                 i
                                                     t;s + s log
                                                                 s
                                              s                                                 t;s
                                               i
                                           @   t;s      i      1          Qt;s0          i      i
                                   +           +        s          log            +      t;s0   t;s       .
                                            @t                            Qt;s


                                                                     72
                                                                                                                                             Q
   After substituting the return to the market portfolio from (22), and using                                                                t;s     = 0, the HJB
equation can be further simpli…ed as,
                                                                      !
                                      1
                                                g+ Q   t;s
                                                            1 2
                                                            2 s
                               log +          i            i
                                                                   i
                         i                               +   log   s
(C.4)                    t;s =                s    t;s     s      t;s
                                                                         .
                                                    i                                 Qt;s0
                                                @   t;s            i    1                               i           i
                                            +       @t    +        s        log       Qt;s      +       t;s0        t;s

                                                                                                                                             i
                                                                  i           i
Here, the term inside the summation on the second line,           s    t;s + s log
                                                                                      s
                                                                                        , is zero when
                                                                                    t;s
there are no disagreements, and it is strictly positive when there are disagreements. This illustrates
that speculation increases the expected value for optimists as well as pessimists.
                                          log Qt;s
   We …nally substitute vt;si  = it;s +            (cf. (C:1)) into the HJB equation to obtain the
di¤erential equation,
                                                                                  !
                                                1
                                                               g 12 2s
                    i
                          log + log (Qt;s ) +            i           i
                                                                              i
                                                              t;s + s log
                                                                              s
                   vt;s =                                s                   t;s
                                                                                    .
                                                                 i
                                                               @vt;s              i
                                                          +     @t          +     s    vt;s0        vt;s

Here, we have canceled terms by using the observation that

                                   @ it;s     i
                                            @vt;s                  1 @ log Qt;s     i
                                                                                  @vt;s                        1    Q
                                          =                                     =                                   t;s :
                                    @t       @t                          @t        @t

The last step also uses Q  t;s = 0.
                                                                     i;
    We have thus obtained Eq. (49) in the main text. Note also that vt;s solves the same di¤erential
equation after substituting Qt;s = Q . Taking the di¤erence of these di¤erential equations, and
              i     i;
using wt;s = vt;s  vt;s , we obtain Eq. (51).


Di¤erential equations for the nvalue functions         o         in   -domain. We next write the
                                            i   i;
value function and its components, vt;s ; vt;s ; wt;s        , as functions of optimists’ wealth share,
n                            o                           s;i
 vsi ( ) ; vsi; ( ) ; ws ( )   . We will characterize these functions as solutions to appropriate dif-
                             s;i
ferential equations in the -domain.
     Recall that the price level in each state can be written as a function of optimists’wealth shares,
qt;s = qs ( ) (where we also have, q1 ( ) = q ). Plugging in these price functions, and using the
dynamics of t;s from Eq. (44), the HJB equation (49) can be written as,

                                                                                                        1 2
                                                                                                                                         !
                                                               1
                                                                                                g       2 s
                               log + qs ( ) +                                     i
                                                                                                                              i
                 vsi ( ) =                                                        s        s(       )   + is log              s
                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                            s(   )
                                                                                                                o
                                     @vsi       o         p                               i
                                     @      (   s         s)           (1        )+       s    vsi 0            s
                                                                                                                            vsi (    )
                                                                                                               s(   )

For each i 2 fo; pg, the value functions, vsi ( ) s2f1;2g , are found by solving this system of ODEs.
For i = o, the boundary conditions are that the values, fvso (1)gs , are the same as the values in
the common belief benchmark characterized in Section IV when all investors have the optimistic
beliefs. For i = p, the boundary conditions are that the values, fvsp (0)gs , are the same as the values

                                                                            73
in the common belief benchmark when all investors have the pessimistic beliefs.
    Likewise, the …rst-best value functions, vsi; ( )     , are found by solving the analogous
                                                                                  s2f1;2g
system after replacing qs ( ) with q (and changing the boundary conditions appropriately). Finally,
substituting the price functions into Eq. (51), the gap-value functions, wsi ( ) s;i , are found by
solving the system in (52).

   For the proofs in this section (as well as in some subsequent sections), we …nd it useful to work
with the transformed state variable,

                                               t;s                                                    1
(C.5)                bt;s       log                             , which implies       t;s   =                    .
                                      1              t;s                                        1 + exp ( bt;s )

The variable, bt;s , varies between ( 1; 1) and provides a di¤erent measure of optimism, which
we refer to as “bullishness.” Note that there is a one-to-one relation between optimists’ wealth
share, t;s 2 (0; 1), and the bullishness, bt;s 2 R = ( 1; +1). Optimists’wealth dynamics in (44)
become particularly simple when expressed in terms of bullishness,

                    (
                                b_ t;s = ( os                    p
                                                                 s) ;           if there is no state change,
(C.6)                                                      o             p
                        bt;s0   = bt;s + log               s      log    s,      if there is a state change.

With a slight abuse of notation, we also let q2 (b) ; wsi (b), and so on, denote the equilibrium functions
in terms of bullishness. Note also that, since ddb = (11 ) , we have the identities,

                    @q2 (b)                                @q2 ( )     @wsi (b)                                @wsi ( )
(C.7)                       =         (1             )             and          =               (1         )            .
                      @b                                     @b          @b                                      @
Using this observation, the di¤erential equation for the price function, Eq. (45), can be written in
terms of bullishness as,


                            @q2 (b)        o               p                                    Q2              2
(C.8)                               (      2               2)   =       +g+      2(   ) 1                       2.
                              @b                                                                Q

Likewise, the di¤erential equation for the gap value function, Eq. (52), can be written in terms of
bullishness as,

                                                                              @wsi (b)
(C.9)              wsi (b) = qs (b)            q            (    o
                                                                 s
                                                                        p
                                                                        s)             +    i
                                                                                            s   wsi 0 b0         wsi (b) :
                                                                                @b

Proof of Lemma 4. To show that the gap value function is increasing, consider its representation
in terms of bullishness, wsi (b) [cf. (C:5)], which solves the system in (C:9). We will …rst describe
this function as a …xed point of a contraction mapping. We will then use this contraction mapping
to establish the properties of the function.
    Recall that, in the time domain, the gap value function solves the HJB equation (51). Integrating
this equation forward, we obtain,
                                     Z 1
                                               i
(C.10)                 wsi (b0;s ) =     e ( + s )t qs (bt;s ) q + is wsi 0 bt;s0 dt,
                                           0



                                                                         74
for each s 2 f1; 2g and b0;s 2 R. Here, bt;s denotes bullishness conditional on there not being
a transition before time t, whereas bt;s0 denotes the bullishness if there is a transition at time t.
Solving Eq. (C:6) (given beliefs, i ) we further obtain,
                                                                     o        p
(C.11)                               bt;s = b0;s               t(    s        s) ,
                                                                     o        p                   o              p
                                    bt;s0   = b0;s             t(    s        s) +      log       s      log     s.

Hence, Eq. (C:10) describes the value function as a solution to an integral equation given the closed
form solution for bullishness in (C:11).
   Implicitly di¤erentiating the integral equation (C:10) with respect to b0;s , and using Eq. (C:11),
we also obtain,
                                   Z 1                                        !
                                                                     i b 0
                    @wsi (b0;s )             i    @q  (b    )     @w      t;s
                                       e ( + s )t
                                                    s   t;s           0
(C.12)                           =                            + is s            dt.
                        @b          0                @b                @b

We next let B R2 denote the set of bounded value functions over R2 . Given some continuation
                       ~si (b)
                      @w                                                                                  i
value function,         @b         2 B R2 , we de…ne the function, T @ w~@b
                                                                          s (b)
                                                                                                                      2 B R2 , so that
                               s                                                                                 s

                                            Z                                                                            !
                           ~si (b0;s )
                          @w                     1
                                                                i         @qs (bt;s )                    ~si 0
                                                                                                      i @w      bt;s0
                        T              =             e (   +    s   )t                +               s                      dt,
                              @b             0                               @b                                @b

for each s and b0;s 2 R. Note also that the resulting value functions are bounded since the derivative
                                @qs (bt;s )
of the price functions,             @b          , are bounded (see Eq. (C:8)). Thus, Eq. (C:12) describes the
                                              s
                                 i
                               @ws (b0;s )
derivative functions,             @b          , as a …xed point of a corresponding operator T over bounded
                                            s
functions. It can be checked that this operator is a contraction mapping with respect to the sup
norm. Thus, it has a unique …xed point that corresponds to the derivative functions. Moreover,
      @q (b )
since s@bt;s > 0 for each b, and is > 0 for each s, it can further be seen that the …xed point
         @wi (b   )                                                                                                                @wsi ( )
satis…es, s@b0;s > 0 for each b and s 2 f1; 2g. Using Eq. (C:7), we also obtain                                                      @        > 0 for each
  2 (0; 1) and s 2 f1; 2g, completing the proof.
                                                                                                                                    o         p
Proof of Lemma 5. Consider the analysis in Lemma 4 for the special case,                                                            1   =     1.   Applying
Eq. (C:12) for s = 1, we obtain [since q1 (bt;s ) = q is constant],
                                                           Z   1
                                      @w1i (b0;1 )                             i
                                                                                            i
                                                                                        i @w2 (bt;2 )
                                                   =                e (   +    1   )t
                                                                                        1             dt.
                                          @b               0                                      @b
                  o        p
Note also that    1   =    1   and Eq. (C:11) imply bt;2 = b0;1 (since there is no speculation). Substituting
                                                                @w1i (b0;1 )              i       @w2i (b0;1 )         @w2i (b0;1 )
this into the displayed equation, we obtain                         @b             =     +
                                                                                          1
                                                                                              i       @b         <         @b       .   Combining this
                                                                                              1
with Eq. (C:7) completes the proof.


C.2. Equilibrium with macroprudential policy
Recall that macroprudential policy induces optimists to choose allocations as if they have more
                              o;pl o;pl
pessimistic beliefs, o;pl     1 ; 2     , that satisfy, o;pl
                                                        1
                                                               o
                                                               1 and 2
                                                                       o;pl    o
                                                                               2 . We next show
that this allocation can be implemented with portfolio restrictions on optimists. We then show
that the planner’s Pareto problem reduces to solving problem (55) in the main text. We also

                                                                         75
derive the equilibrium value functions that result from macroprudential policy. We then analyze
macroprudential policy in the recession state, which complements the analysis in the main text
(that focuses on the boom state), and present Proposition 4. Finally, we present the proofs of
Propositions 3 and 4.

Implementing the policy with risk limits. Consider the equilibrium that would obtain if
optimists had the planner-induced beliefs, o;pl
                                           s . Using Lemma 2, optimists’equilibrium portfolios
are given by
                                                                       0
(C.13)                                 ! m;o;pl
                                         t;s    = 1 and ! st;s;o;pl =                 o;pl
                                                                                      s
                                                                                                   p
                                                                                                   s    (1           t;s ) .


We …rst show that the planner can implement the policy by requiring optimists to hold exactly
these portfolio weights. We will then relax these portfolio constraints into inequality restrictions
(see Eq. (C:15)).
    Formally, an optimist solves the HJB problem (B:2) with the additional constraint (C:13). In
view of log utility, we conjecture that the value function has the same functional form (48) with
potentially di¤erent normalized values, ot;s ; vt;s
                                                o , that re‡ect the constraints. Using this functional

form, the optimality condition for consumption remains unchanged, ct;s = aot;s [cf. Eq. (23)].
Plugging this equation and the portfolio holdings in (C:13) into the objective function in (B:2)
veri…es that the value function has the conjectured functional form. For later reference, we also
obtain that the optimists’unit-wealth value function satis…es [cf. Eq. (C:1)],
                                             1    f                                                              0
(C.14)                o
                      t;s    = log +             rt;s + ! m;o;pl
                                                          t;s
                                                                  m
                                                                 rt;s                      f
                                                                                          rt;s               ! st;s;o;pl
                                                                                                                 !                         !
                                        1                        2     @ ot;s                1          aot;s0
                                            ! m;o;pl
                                              t;s    s               +        +       o
                                                                                      s          log                 +     o
                                                                                                                           t;s0
                                                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                                                     t;s       .
                                       2                                @t                              aot;s
                                                        0
        aot;s0                    Qt;s0 Qt;s         ! st;s;o;pl
Here,    aot;s   = 1 + ! m;o;pl
                         t;s         Qt;s        +          0        in view of the budget constraints (B:1). Hence, the value
                                                       pst;s
function has a similar characterization as before [cf. Eq. (C:2)] with the di¤erence that optimists’
portfolio holdings re‡ect the portfolio constraints.
    Since pessimists are unconstrained, their optimality conditions are unchanged. It follows that
the equilibrium takes the form in Section V with the di¤erence that investors’beliefs are replaced by
their as-if beliefs, i;pl
                     s . This veri…es that the planner can implement the policy using the portfolio
restrictions in (C:13). We next show that these restrictions can be relaxed to the following inequality
constraints,

(C.15)                      ! m;o;pl
                              t;s            1 for each s,
                                                                           pl                                                     pl
                            ! 2;o;pl
                              t;1            ! 2;o
                                               t;1
                                                                o;pl
                                                                1          t;1   and ! 1;o;pl
                                                                                       t;2             ! 1;o
                                                                                                         t;2
                                                                                                                       o;pl
                                                                                                                       2          t;2 .

In particular, we will establish that all inequality constraints bind, which implies that optimists
optimally choose the portfolio weights in Eq. (C:13). Thus, our earlier analysis continues to apply
when optimists are subject to the more relaxed restrictions in (C:15).
   The result follows from the assumption that the planner-induced beliefs are more pessimistic
than optimists’ actual beliefs, o;pl
                                  1
                                           o
                                           1 and 2
                                                   o;pl    o
                                                           2.   To see this formally, note that the




                                                                                 76
optimality condition for the market portfolio is given by the following generalization of Eq. (31),
                                                                      !
                                                  ao
                 m;o;pl m     1          f         t;s  Qt;s 0  Q t;s
(C.16)         ! t;s    t;s   m
                                   m
                                  rt;s  rt;s + os o                     and ! m;o;pl
                                                                              t;s    1,
                              t;s                 at;s0     Qt;s

with complementary slackness. We claim that this holds with ! m;o;pl
                                                              t;s    = 1.
   To see this, …rst note that,
                                                                                pl
                                     ao
                                    o t;s       Qt;s0 Qt;s                o     t;s   Qt;s0 Qt;s             pl Qt;s0      Qt;s
                                    s o                    =              s    o;pl                          t;s                  .
                                     at;s0          Qt;s                       s         Qt;s0                        Qt;s0
Here, the equality follows because optimists’wealth share dynamics are determined by as-if beliefs,
           aot;s0         o;pl     Qt;s0
that is,   aot;s    =     s
                           pl      Qt;s    [cf. Eq. (44)]. The inequality follows by considering separately the two
                           t;s
cases, s 2 f1; 2g. For s = 2, the inequality holds since Qt;s0 Qt;s > 0 and the beliefs satisfy,
 o     o;pl
 s     s . For s = 1, the inequality holds since Qt;s0    Qt;s < 0 and the beliefs satisfy, o;pl
                                                                                            s
                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                   s.
Note also that in equilibrium the return to the market portfolio satis…es the risk balance condition
(34) with as-if beliefs,
                             m      1     m     f      pl       Qt;s
                             t;s = m    rt;s   rt;s + t;s 1             .
                                    t;s                         Qt;s0
                                                                                                              o
                                                                   m           1       m           f       o at;s Qt;s0 Qt;s
Combining these expressions implies,                               t;s         m      rt;s        rt;s +   s ao 0    Qt;s         . This in turn implies
                                                                               t;s                            t;s

the optimality condition (C:16) is satis…ed with ! m;o;plt;s  = 1, proving the claim.
      A similar analysis shows that optimists also choose the corner allocations in contingent securities,
! 2;o;pl
  t;1    = ! 2;o       1;o;pl
             t;1 and ! t;2    = ! 1;o
                                  t;2 , verifying that the portfolio constraints (C:13) can be relaxed to
the inequality constraints in (C:15).

Simplifying the planner’s problem. Recall that, to trace the Pareto frontier, we allow n     the
                                                                                              o
                                                                              i   i      o;pl
planner to do a one-time wealth transfer among the investors at time 0. Let Vt;s at;s j t
denote type i investors’ expected value in equilibrium when she starts with wealth ait;s and the
                                           n       o
                                              o;pl
planner commits to implement the policy,      t     . Then, the planner’s Pareto problem can be
written as,
                                                                              o;pl                 p                                 o;pl
(C.17)                    max              o     o
                                               V0;s ~ 0;s Q0;s k0;s j ~               +      p
                                                                                                 V0;s (1     ~ 0;s ) Q0;s k0;s j ~          .
                        ~ o;pl   ;~ 0;s

Here, o ; p 0 (with at least one strict inequality) denote the Pareto weights, and Q0;s denotes
the endogenous equilibrium price that obtains under the planner’s policy.
    Next recall that the investors’value function with macroprudential policy has the same func-
tional form in (48) (with potentially di¤erent ot;s ; vt;so for optimists that re‡ect the constraints).
                    i      i
After substituting at;s = t;s kt;s Qt;s , the functional form implies,

                                                                               log         i      + log (kt;s )
                                                          i         i                      t;s
                                                        Vt;s   =   vt;s   +                                       .




                                                                                      77
Using this expression, the planner’s problem (C:17) can be rewritten as,

                           o o         p p
                                                     o log   ~ o0;s +            p log     1    ~ o0;s         (   o   +   p ) log (k
                                                                                                                                        0;s )
           max              v0;s   +    v0;s   +                                                         +                                      .
         ~ o;pl   ;~ 0;s

Here, the last term (that features capital) is a constant that doesn’t a¤ect optimization. The second
term links the planner’s choice of wealth redistribution, o0;s ; p0;s , to her Pareto weights, o ; p .
                                                                                           o
Speci…cally, the …rst order condition with respect to optimists’wealth share implies p = 1 0;s0;s .
Thus, the planner e¤ectively maximizes the …rst term after substituting o and p respectively with
the optimal choice of 0;s and 1      0;s . This leads to the simpli…ed problem (55) in the main text.


Characterizing the value functions with macroprudential policy. We …rst show that
                                 i , are characterized as the solution to the following di¤erential
the normalized value functions, vt;s
equation system,
                                        0                  1 2
                                                                           1
                  i
                @vt;s                 1               g    2 s
(C.18)     i
          vt;s        = log + qt;s + @         i;pl   pl      i
                                                                      i;pl A + is vt;s
                                                                                     i
                                                                                       0
                                                                                           i
                                                                                          vt;s .
                 @t                            s      t;s +   s log   s
                                                                      pl
                                                                                                             t;s


This is a generalization of Eq. (49) in which investors’positions are calculated according to their
as-if beliefs, i;pl
                s , but the transition probabilities are calculated according to their actual beliefs,
 i
 s .
     First consider the pessimists. Since they are unconstrained, their value function is characterized
by solving the earlier equation system (C:14). In this case, equation (C:18) also holds since it is
the same as the earlier equation.
     Next consider the optimists. In this case, optimists’wealth share dynamics are determined by
as-if beliefs. In particular, we have [cf. Eq. (44)]

                                                        aot;s0            o;pl
                                                                          s      Qt;s0
                                                                 =                     .
                                                        aot;s              pl    Qt;s
                                                                           t;s

Plugging this expression as well as Eq. (C:13) into Eq. (C:14), optimists’unit-wealth value function
satis…es,
                                         0             m        1 2
                                                                            1
                                       1              rt;s      2 s
                      o
                      t;s = log +
                                         @                pl
                                                                       o;pl A
                                                 o;pl           o      t;s
                                                 s        t;s + s log   pl
                                                                                                             t;s
                                               o
                                             @ t;s      o       1           Qt;s0              o         o
                                         +       +      s           log                    +   t;s0      t;s       ,
                                              @t                            Qt;s

This is the same as Eq. (C:14) with the di¤erence that the as-if beliefs, o;pl
                                                                           s , are used to calculate
their positions on (and the payo¤s from) the contingent securities, whereas the actual beliefs, os ,
are used to calculate the transition probabilities. Using the same steps after Eq. (C:14), we also
obtain (C:18) with i = o.
                                                                     i;        i , that we use in the
    We next characterize the …rst-best and the gap value functions, vt;s and wt;s
main text. By de…nition, the …rst-best value function solves the same di¤erential equation (C:18)




                                                                      78
                                                                      i = vi                                             i;
after substituting qt;s = q . It follows that the gap value function wt;s  t;s                                          vt;s , solves,
                                           i
                                         @wt;s
                                i                                         i    i            i
                               wt;s            = qt;s           q +       s   wt;s 0       wt;s ,
                                          @t
which is the same as the di¤erential equation (51) without macroprudential policy. The latter a¤ects
the path of prices, qt;s , but it does not a¤ect how these prices translate into gap values.
   Note also that,
               n       as before, the value
                                         o     functions can be written as functions of optimists’
                  i         i;
wealth share, vs ( ) ; vs ( ) ; ws ( )       . For completeness, we also characterize the di¤eren-
                                               s;i
tial equations that these functions satisfy in equilibrium with macroprudential policy. Com-
bining Eq. (C:18) with the dynamics of optimists’ wealth share conditional on no transition,
           o;pl   p                                        i
_ t;s =    s      s  t;s (1   t;s ), the value functions, vs ( ) s;i , are found by solving,

                           2                             0                             1 2
                                                                                                                        1 3
                                                                               g       2 s
                         6 log + qspl ( ) +          1   @                                                   i;pl   A 7
                         6                                         i;pl       pl
                                                                                       +       i                      7
                                                                                               s log
                                                                                                             s
               vsi (   )=6
                         6
                                                                   s          t;s                            pl
                                                                                                             t;s
                                                                                                                      7,
                                                                                                                      7
                         4 @vi                                                                 o;pl                   5
                                       o;pl     p                         i
                               @
                                   s
                                       s        s        (1        )+     s    vsi 0           s
                                                                                                pl           vsi ( )
                                                                                                t;s


with appropriate boundary conditions. As in the main text, we denote the price functions with
qspl ( ) to emphasize that they are determined by as-if beliefs. Likewise, the …rst-best value func-
tions, vsi; ( )        , are found by solving the analogous system after replacing qs ( ) with q .
                 s2f1;2g
Finally, combining Eq. (51) with the dynamics of optimists’wealth share, the gap-value functions,
 wsi ( ) s;i , are found by solving Eq. (54) in the main text


Macroprudential policy in the recession state. The analysis in the main text concerns
macroprudential policy in the boom state and maintains the assumption that o;pl      2  = o2 . We next
consider the polar opposite case in which the economy is currently in the recession state s = 2, and
the planner can apply macroprudential policy in this state, o;pl  2
                                                                         o
                                                                         2 (she can induce optimists to
                                                                    o;pl
act as if the recovery is less likely), but not in the other state, 1 = o1 . We obtain a sharp result
for the special case in which optimists’wealth share is su¢ ciently large.
Proposition 4. Consider the equilibrium with two belief types characterized in Proposition 2.
Consider the macroprudential policy in the recession state, o;pl
                                                             2
                                                                     o
                                                                     2 (and suppose 1
                                                                                      o;pl
                                                                                           = o1 ).
There exists a threshold,      < 1, such that if 2 ( ; 1], then the policy reduces the gap value
according to each belief, that is,

                                   @w2i ( )
                                                              < 0 for each i 2 fo; pg .
                                        o;pl
                               @        2       o;pl
                                                2    = o2


                                                                                               @vspl ( )                     @wspl ( )
Thus, for   2 ( ; 1], the policy also reduces the planner’s value,                                    o;pl
                                                                                                                    =             o;pl
                                                                                                                                             < 0.
                                                                                           @          2        o
                                                                                                                         @        2      o
                                                                                                               2                         2

   Thus, in contrast to Proposition 3, macroprudential policy in the recession state can actually
reduce the gap value (and therefore also the social welfare). The intuition can be understood by
considering two counteracting forces. First, as before, macroprudential policy in the recession state

                                                              79
   0.003                                                           0.003


 0.0025                                                          0.0025


   0.002                                                           0.002


 0.0015                                                          0.0015


   0.001                                                           0.001


 0.0005                                                          0.0005


           0                                                               0


 -0.0005                                                         -0.0005


  -0.001                                                          -0.001


 -0.0015                                                         -0.0015


  -0.002                                                          -0.002


               0   0.2   0.4    0.6      0.8         1                         0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8     1



Figure C.1: Welfare e¤ect of macroprudential policy in either the boom or the recession state.
The left (resp. the right) panel illustrates the change in the planner’s total value function and its components
in response to a small change in macroprudential policy in the boom (resp. the recession) state.


is potentially valuable by reallocating optimists’wealth from the boom state s = 1 to the recession
state s = 2. Intuitively, optimists purchase too many upside contingent securities that pay if there
is a transition to the boom state but that impoverish them in case the recession persists. They do
not internalize that, if they keep their wealth, they will improve asset prices if the recession lasts
longer.
    However, there is a second force that does not have a counterpart in the boom state: Macro-
prudential policy in the recession state also a¤ects the current asset price level, with potential
implications for gap value. It can be seen that making optimists less optimistic in the recession
                                                     @q2pl ( )
state shifts the price function downward,                 o;pl
                                                                 < 0 (as in the common-belief benchmark we
                                                 @        2
analyzed in Section IV). Hence, the price impact of macroprudential policy reduces the gap value.
Moreover, as optimists dominate the economy, ! 1, the price impact of the policy is still …rst
order, whereas the bene…cial e¤ect from reshu- ing optimists’wealth is second order. Thus, when
optimists’ wealth share is su¢ ciently large, the net e¤ect of macroprudential policy on the gap
value is negative.
    This analysis also suggests that, even when the policy in the recession state exerts a net positive
e¤ect, it would typically increase the gap value by a smaller amount than a comparable policy in
the boom state. Figure C.1 con…rms this intuition. The left panel plots the change in the planner’s
gap value function in the boom state resulting from a small macroprudential policy change. Note
that the policy slightly reduces the planner’s …rst-best value function but increases the gap value
function. The right panel illustrates the e¤ect of the macroprudential policy in the recession state
that would generate a similar distortion in the …rst-best equilibrium as the policy in the boom



                                                          80
state.27 Note that a small macroprudential policy in the recession state has a smaller positive
impact on the gap value when optimists’wealth share is small, and it has a negative impact when
optimists’wealth share is su¢ ciently large, illustrating Proposition 4.

Proof of Proposition 3. We will prove the stronger result that

                                        @wsi ( )
(C.19)                                       o;pl
                                                                       > 0 for each i; s and                   2 (0; 1) .
                                         @   1          o;pl
                                                               =   o


That is, a marginal amount of macroprudential policy in the low-risk-premium state increases the
gap value in either state. Combining this with the de…nition of the planner’s gap value function in
                                                                                               pl;
                 @wspl ( )                                                                   @v0;s
(56) implies                                 > 0. Combining this with                                                         = 0 (which follows from the
                  @ o;pl
                     1       o;pl        o                                                   @   o;pl
                                                                                                          o;pl        o
                                    =                                                                            =
                            pl     pl;    pl                                                 @wspl ( )                              @vspl ( )
First Welfare Theorem) and v0;s = v0;s + w0;s implies                                                                         =                                for each s
                                                                                              @ o;pl
                                                                                                 1         o;pl           o          @ o;pl
                                                                                                                                        1       o;pl       o
                                                                                                                  =                                    =
and 2 (0; 1). Applying this result for state s = 1 proves the proposition.
    It remains to prove the claim in (C:19). To this end, …x a belief type i and consider the
representation of the gap value function in terms of bullishness, wsi (b) [cf. (C:5)]. Following similar
steps as in Lemma 4, we describe this as solution to the integral function,
                                  Z 1
                                            i
(C.20)                 i
                     ws (b0;s ) =     e ( + s )t qspl (bt;s ) q + is wsi 0 bt;s0 dt,
                                                    0

for each s 2 f1; 2g and b0;s 2 R, where the bullishness has the closed form solution,

                                                                         o;pl        p
(C.21)                              bt;s = b0;s                    t     s           s   ,
                                                                         o;pl        p                  o;pl                   p
                                    bt;s0     = b0;s               t     s           s   + log          s         log          s.


The main di¤erence from the analysis in Lemma 4 is that the dynamics of bullishness is in‡uenced
by policy, as illustrated by the as-if beliefs in (C:11). In addition, we denote the price functions
with qspl (b) to emphasize they are in principle determined by as-if beliefs.
    Next note that in this case the price functions qspl (b) are actually not a¤ected by the as-if
belief, o;pl                                                                                  pl
          1 . The price function in the low-risk-premium state is not a¤ected because q1 (b) = q
(because the beliefs continue to satisfy Assumption 3 for small changes). The price function in the
high-risk-premium state is also not a¤ected because o;pl    1    does not enter the di¤erential equation
                      pl
that characterizes q2 (b) [see. Eq. (45) or Eq. (C:8)].
    Using this observation, we implicitly di¤erentiate the integral equation (C:20) with respect to
 o;pl
 1 , and use Eq. (C:21), to obtain,

                                 Z 1                                                  !
                  @w1i (b0;1 )          ( + i1 )t i   @w2i (bt;2 ) @w2i (bt;2 ) dbt;2
                               =      e           1                 +                   dt,
                   @ o;pl
                       1          0                      @ o;pl
                                                           1
                                                                        @b     d o;pl
                                                                                  1
                                 Z 1
                  @w2i (b0;2 )                         i
                                        ( + i1 )t i @w1 (bt;1 ) dt.
                               =      e           2
                   @ o;pl
                       1          0                  @ o;pl
                                                         1
  27
    Speci…cally, we calibrate the policy-induced belief change in the recession state so that the maximum decline
in the planner’s …rst-best value function is the same in both cases plotted in Figure C.1, max         v2pl; ( ) =
max      v1pl; ( ) .


                                                                                81
                                                           dbt;2           1
Note also that, using Eq. (C:21) implies,                        = t + o;pl  . Plugging                         this into the previous system,
                                                          d o;pl
                                                             1             1
                                                            o;pl
and evaluating the partial derivatives at                   1    = o1 , we obtain,

                                                                     Z      1
                         @w1i (b0;1 )                                                        i
                                                                                                          i
                                                                                                      i @w2 (bt;2 )
(C.22)                                        = h (b0;1 ) +                       e (    +   1   )t
                                                                                                      1             dt,
                          @ o;pl
                              1                                         0                                @ o;pl
                                                                                                            1
                                                    Z     1
                         @w2i (b0;2 )                                    i
                                                                                i
                                                                            i @w1 (bt;1 )
                                  o;pl
                                              =               e (   +    1
                                                                            2
                                                                             )t           dt,
                              @   1                   0                        @ o;pl
                                                                                  1
                                                    Z     1                     i
                                                                    + i1 )t i @w2 (bt;2 )                               1
                     where h (b0;1 ) =                        e (           1                                   t+       o     dt.
                                                      0                                      @b                          1

                                                                                                                             @w2i (b)
Note that the function, h (b), is bounded since the derivative function,                                                       @b , is bounded        (see
                                                                                                                              @wsi (b)
(C:12)). Hence, Eq. (C:22) describes the partial derivative functions,                                                                 j o;pl = o ,   as a
                                                                                                                               @ o;pl
                                                                                                                                   1     1      1
                                                                                                                                                  s
…xed point of a corresponding operator T over bounded functions. Since h (b) is bounded, it can
be checked that the operator T is also a contraction mapping with respect to the sup norm. In
particular, it has a …xed point, which corresponds to the partial derivative functions.
    The analysis so far applies generally. We next consider the special case, o1 = p1 , and show that
it implies the partial derivatives are strictly positive. In this case, i1   1 for each i 2 fo; pg. In
addition, Eq. (C:11) implies bt;2 = b0;2 . Using these observations, for each b0;1 , we have,
                                                               Z    1
                                              @w2i (b0;2 )                   ( +      1 )t
                                                                                                                1
                       h (b0;1 ) =                                      e                    1            t+            dt
                                                  @b            0                                               1
                                                 i
                                              @w2 (b0;2 )                    1           1                  1
                                      =                                                               +                 > 0.
                                                  @b                     +        1     +        1         +        1

                                               @w2i (b0;2 )
Here, the inequality follows since                 @b         > 0 [cf. Lemma 4]. Since h (b) > 0 for each b, and
 i                                                                                                                              @wsi (b)
 s   > 0, it can further be seen that the …xed point that solves (C:22) satis…es                                                           > 0 for each b
                                                                                                                                @ o;pl
                                                                                                                                   s
                                                                    @wsi ( )
and s 2 f1; 2g. Using Eq. (C:7), we also obtain                                       > 0 for each s 2 f1; 2g and                          2 (0; 1). Since
                                                                    @ o;pl
                                                                       1
the analysis applies for any …xed belief type i, this establishes the claim in (C:19) and completes
the proof.

Proof of Proposition 4. A similar analysis as in the proof of Proposition 3 implies that the
                               i (b)
partial derivative function, @wso;pl , is characterized as the …xed point of a contraction mapping
                                  @       2
over bounded functions (the analogue of Eq. (C:22) for state 2). In particular, the partial derivative
exists and it is bounded. Moreover, since the corresponding contraction mapping takes continuous
functions into continuous functions, the partial derivative is also continuous over b 2 R. Using Eq.
                                                          i
(C:7), we further obtain that the partial derivative, @ws (o;pl) , is continuous over 2 (0; 1).
                                                                                  @      2

     Next note that wsi (1)    lim            i
                                          !1 ws (
                                             ) exists and is equal to the value function according to type
i beliefs when all investors are optimistic. In particular, the asset prices are given by q1pl = q and
q2pl = q o , and the transition probabilities are evaluated according to type i beliefs. Then, following




                                                                    82
the same steps as in our analysis of value functions in Online Appendix Section C.1, we obtain,

                                         wsi (1) =       i o
                                                         s qs   + 1               i
                                                                                  s   qso0   q ,
                                                                     i
                                                 i              +    s0
                                    where        s   =          i         i
                                                                              .
                                                          +     s0   +    s

Here, is can be thought of as the expected discount time the investor spends in state s according to
                                                                                                o;pl
type i beliefs. We consider this equation for s = 2 and take the derivative with respect to     2
to obtain,
                                     @w2i (1)         dq2o
                                               = i2           < 0.
                                          o;pl           o;pl
                                   @      2         d    2

Here, the inequality follows since reducing optimists’optimism reduces the price level in the common
belief benchmark (see Section IV).
                                 @w2i (1)
    Note that the inequality,         o;pl
                                           < 0, holds for each belief type i. Using the continuity of the
                                    @      2

                                   @w2i ( )                                                                   @w2i ( )
partial derivative function,            o;pl
                                               , we conclude that there exists                such that           o;pl
                                                                                                                                     <0
                               @        2                                                                 @       2      o;pl
                                                                                                                         2    = o2
for each i; s and   2 ( ; 1), completing the proof.




                                                            83
        D. Extension with investment and endogenous growth
Our baseline setup in the main text assumes there is no investment and the expected growth
rate of capital is exogenous. In this section, we analyze a more general environment that relaxes
these assumptions. We …rst present the environment, de…ne the equilibrium, and provide a partial
characterization. We then characterize this equilibrium when investors have common beliefs and
generalize Proposition 1 to this setting.


D.1. Environment and equilibrium with investment
We focus on the components that are di¤erent than the baseline setting described in Section III.

Potential output and endogenous growth. We modify the equation that describes the dy-
namics of capital (12) as follows,

                         dkt;s
(D.1)                          = gt;s dt +   s dZt         where gt;s          '(   t;s )   .
                         kt;s
             i
Here, t;s = kt;s
             t;s
                 denotes the investment rate, ' ( t;s ) denotes a neoclassical production function for
capital (we will work with a special case that will be described below), and denotes the depreciation
rate. Hence, the growth of capital is no longer exogenous: it depends on the endogenous level of
investment as well as depreciation.

Investment …rms. To endogenize investment, we introduce a new set of …rms, which we refer to
as investment …rms, that own and manage the aggregate capital stock. These …rms rent capital to
production …rms to earn the instantaneous rental rate, Rt;s . They also make investment decisions
                                          ~ t;s denote the price of capital, the …rm’s investment
to maximize the value of capital. Letting Q
problem can generally be written as,

(D.2)                                    ~ t;s ' (
                                     max Q           t;s ) kt;s   t;s kt;s .
                                       t;s


    As before, we denote the price of the market portfolio per unit of capital with Qt;s . In this case,
the market portfolio represents a claim on investment …rms as well as production …rms. Hence, we
have the inequality Q~ t;s  Qt;s , where the residual price, Qt;s Q ~ t;s , corresponds to the value of
production …rms per unit of capital. We make assumptions (that we describe below) so that output
accrues to the investment …rms in the form of return to capital, yt;s = Rt;s kt;s , and there are no
monopoly pro…ts. This in turn implies that the value of the market portfolio is equal to the value
of capital (and the value of production …rms is zero), that is,

(D.3)                                                 ~ t;s .
                                               Qt;s = Q

This simpli…es the analysis by ensuring that we have only one price to characterize. Considering
a di¤erent division of output between return to capital and pro…ts will have a quantitative e¤ect
on investment, as illustrated by problem (D:2), but we conjecture that it would leave our qualita-
tive results on investment unchanged. We leave a systematic exploration of this issue for further
research.




                                                      84
Return of the market portfolio. The price of the market portfolio per unit of capital follows
the same equation (13) as in the main text. The volatility of the market portfolio (absent state
                                                            Q
transitions) is also unchanged and given by m    t;s = s + t;s . However, the return on the market
portfolio conditional on no transition is slightly modi…ed and given by,

                               m       yt;s    t;s kt;s                  Q           Q
(D.4)                         rt;s =                    + gt;s +         t;s   +   s t;s .
                                          Qt;s kt;s

Hence, the dividend yield is now net of the investment expenditures the (investment) …rms under-
take. In addition, the expected growth of the price of the market portfolio is now endogenous and
given by gt;s .

Nominal rigidities and equilibrium in goods markets. As before, the supply side of our
model features nominal rigidities similar to the standard New Keynesian model that ensure out-
put is determined by aggregate demand. In this case, demand comes from investment as well as
consumption so we modify Eq. (18) as,
                                        X
(D.5)                yt;s = t;s Akt;s =     cit;s + kt;s t;s , where t;s 2 [0; 1] .
                                              i

We also modify the microfoundations that we provide in Section B.1.3 so that all output accrues
to investment …rms as return to capital and there are no monopoly pro…ts, that is,

(D.6)                           Rt;s = A     t;s   and thus yt;s = Rt;s kt;s .

We relegate a detailed description of these microfoundations to the end of this section. The rest of
the model is the same as in Section III. We formally de…ne the equilibrium as follows.

De…nition 2. The equilibrium with investment and endogenous growth is a collection of processes
for allocations, prices, and returns such that capital evolves according to (12), the price of market
portfolio per capital evolves according to (13), its instantaneous return (conditional on no transition)
is given by (D:4), investment …rms maximize (cf. Eqs. (D:7), investors maximize (cf. Online
Appendix Section B.1.1), asset markets clear (cf. Eqs. (16) and (17)), production …rms maximize
(cf. Online Appendix Section D.3), goods markets clear (cf. Eq. (18)), all output accrues to agents
in the form of return to capital (D:6), the price of the market portfolio per unit of capital is the
same as the price of capital (cf. Eq. (D:3)), and the interest rate policy follows the rule in (20).


    We next provide a partial characterization of the equilibrium with investment. Investors’ op-
timality conditions remain unchanged. Therefore, most of the analysis remains unchanged. The
main di¤erences concern the goods market equilibrium analyzed in Section III.A, because aggre-
gate demand is now a¤ected by investment as well as consumption. We next derive the optimal
level investment and characterize the goods market equilibrium. We then brie‡y consider the asset
market equilibrium and present the risk balance condition. We conclude the section by deriving
the …rst-best equilibrium without interest rate rigidities.

Investment …rms’optimality conditions. Under standard regularity conditions for the capital
production function, ' ( ), the solution to problem (D:2) is determined by the optimality condition,

                                             '0 (   t;s )   = 1=Qt;s :


                                                            85
We will work with the special and convenient case proposed by Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2016b):
' ( ) = log     + 1 . In this case, we obtain the closed form solution,

(D.7)                                      (Qt;s ) =         (Qt;s           1) :

The parameter,    , captures the sensitivity of investment to asset prices.

Growth-asset price relation.          Note also that the amount of capital produced is given by,

(D.8)                          ' ( (Qt;s )) = qt;s , where qt;s                 log (Qt;s ) .

The log price level, qt;s ; will simplify some of the expressions. Combining Eq. (D:8) with Eq. (12),
we obtain Eq. (42) in the main text, which we replicate here for ease of exposition,

                                             gt;s = qt;s                 .

Hence, the expected growth rate of capital (and potential output) is now endogenous and depends
on asset prices. Lower asset prices reduce investment, which translates into lower growth and lower
potential output in future periods. As we will describe, this mechanism provides a new source of
ampli…cation.

Goods market equilibrium. As in the main text, there is a tight relationship between output
and asset prices. Speci…cally, we have the following analogue of Lemma 1.

Lemma 6 (Output-asset price relation). The equilibrium level of output (per capital) satis…es Eq.
(41) in the main text:
                            yt;s =kt;s = A t;s = ( + ) Qt;s     .
The equilibrium return and the volatility of the market portfolio (absent state transition) is given
by
                       m                           Q            Q                   m                 Q
(D.9)                 rt;s =    + qt;s       +     t;s   +    s t;s      and        t;s   =   s   +   t;s .

     To prove this lemma, note that Eq. (24) in the main text continues to apply and implies that
aggregate consumption is a constant fraction of aggregate wealth. Plugging this into Eq. (18) and
using the investment equation (D:7), we obtain yt;s = Qt;s kt;s + (Qt;s 1) kt;s . After rearranging
                                                                                       y      kt;s
terms, we obtain Eq. (41). Combining this relation with Eq. (D:7), we obtain t;sQt;st;s     kt;s   = .
Substituting this into Eq. (D:5) and using Eq. (42), we obtain Eq. (D:9).
     Eq. (41) illustrates that a version of the output-asset price relation in the main text continues
to apply [cf. Eq. (21)]. In this case, output and factor utilization depend on the price of capital
not only because consumption depends on asset prices through a wealth e¤ect but also because
investment depends on asset prices through a standard marginal-Q channel. Full factor utilization,
 t;s = 1, obtains only if the price of capital is at a particular level

                                                         A+
                                               Q                     :
                                                          +
This is the e¢ cient price level that ensures that the implied consumption and investment clear the
goods market. Likewise, the economy features a demand recession, t;s < 1, if and only if the price
of capital is strictly below Q .

                                                         86
    Eq. (D:9) is also similar to its counterpart from the baseline model [cf. Eq. (22)]. As before,
the equilibrium dividend yield on the market portfolio is equal to the consumption rate . Unlike
before, the growth rate of dividends is endogenous and is determined by the growth-asset price
relation.
    Combining the output-asset price relation with the interest rate policy in (20), we also sum-
marize the goods market side of the economy with (25) as in the main text. In particular, the
equilibrium at any time and state takes one of two forms. If the natural interest rate is nonnega-
tive, then the interest rate policy ensures that the price per unit of capital is at the e¢ cient level,
Qt;s = Q , capital is fully utilized, t;s = 1, and output is equal to its potential, yt;s = Akt;s .
                                               f
Otherwise, the interest rate is constrained, rt;s = 0, the price is at a lower level, Qt;s < Q , and
output is determined by aggregate demand according to Eq. (21).

Asset market equilibrium. Since investors’optimality conditions remain unchanged, the analy-
sis in Section III.B remains unchanged. In particular, Lemma 2 that describes investors’portfolios
and wealth dynamics still apply. Lemma 3 also applies after appropriately adjusting the return on
the market portfolio absent transition. Speci…cally, the risk balance condition is given by

                  m             1      m       f                   Qt;s0 Qt;s
(D.10)            t;s   =       m     rt;s    rt;s +         t;s                     ;
                                t;s                                   Qt;s0
                 m                                     Q              Q             m                 Q
          where rt;s =          + qt;s         +       t;s   +      s t;s   and     t;s   =   s   +   t;s   [cf. Lemma 2]

The condition is essentially the same as in the baseline model [cf. Eq. (34)]. The only di¤erence is
      m re‡ects the endogenous level of growth, g
that rt;s                                          t;s = qt;s    , as opposed to exogenous growth,
g.

First-best equilibrium. As a benchmark, we characterize the …rst-best equilibrium without
interest rate rigidities. In this case, there is no lower bound constraint on the interest rate, so the
price of capital is at its e¢ cient level at all times and states, Qt;s = Q and qt;s = q        log Q .
Combining this with Eq. (D:10), we solve for “rstar” as,

(D.11)                          rsf =        + q                     2
                                                                     s   for each s 2 f1; 2g .

As before, in the …rst-best equilibrium the risk premium shocks are fully absorbed by the interest
rate.


D.2. Common beliefs benchmark with investment
We next characterize the equilibrium with interest rate rigidities for the case in which investors
have common beliefs. We generalize Proposition 1 to this setting and illustrate an additional
ampli…cation mechanism.
                                                                            i
    Suppose there is a single investor type with belief denoted by s        s . As in the case without
investment, we focus on equilibria in which the price per capital and the interest rate will remain
                                         f
constant within states, Qt;s = Qs and rt;s  = rsf . In particular, there is no price drift or volatility
within a state, Q       Q
                t;s = t;s = 0. The risk balance condition (D:10) can then be written as


                                + qs          +    s     1         Qs
                                                                   Qs0       rsf
(D.12)                  s   =                                                      for each s 2 f1; 2g .
                                                   s



                                                                   87
To characterize the equilibrium, we make the following analogue of Assumption 1.
Assumption 1I .      2
                     2   >   + q            >      2.
                                                   1

    With this assumption, we conjecture that the low-risk-premium state 1 features positive interest
rates, e¢ cient asset prices, and full factor utilization, r1f > 0; q1 = q and 1 = 1, whereas the high-
risk-premium state 2 features zero interest rates, lower asset prices, and imperfect factor utilization,
r2f = 0; q2 < q and 2 < 1.

Equilibrium in the high-risk-premium state and ampli…cation from the growth-asset
price relation. Under our conjecture, the risk balance condition (D:12) for the high-risk state
s = 2 can be written as,
                                                                                   Q2
                                                   + q2            +   2   1       Q
(D.13)                                 2   =                                             .
                                                                   2

As before, this equation illustrates an ampli…cation mechanism: Since the recession reduces …rms’
earnings, a lower price level does not increase the dividend yield (captured by the constant dividend
yield, = QQ22 ). Unlike before, Eq. (D:13) illustrates a second ampli…cation mechanism captured
by the growth-asset price relation, g2 = q2      . In particular, a lower price level lowers investment,
which reduces the expected growth of potential output and pro…ts, which in turn lowers the return
to capital. The strength of this second mechanism depends on the sensitivity of investment to asset
prices, captured by the term q2 . Figure I in the introduction presents a graphical illustration of
the two ampli…cation mechanisms.
    The stabilizing force from price declines comes from the expected transition into the low-risk-
                                                    Q2
premium state captured by the term, 2 1 Q               . As before, to ensure that there exists an
equilibrium with positive prices, we need a minimum degree of optimism, which we capture with
the following analogue of Assumption 2.
                             min               min
Assumption 2I .      2       2 ,   where       2        is the unique solution to the following equation over the
range min
      2    :
                                                     min                            min          2
                               + q             +     2         +       log     =    2        =   2:

This assumption ensures that there exists a unique Q2 2 (0; Q ) that solves Eq. (D:13) (see the
proof at the end of this section).

Equilibrium in the low-risk-premium state.                         Under our conjecture, the risk balance condition
(D:12) can be written as,

                                                                                        Q
(D.14)                             r1f =    + q                    2
                                                                   1   +   1   1
                                                                                        Q2

As before, the interest rate adjusts to ensure that the risk balance condition is satis…ed with the
e¢ cient price level, Q1 = Q . For our conjectured equilibrium, we also assume an upper bound
on 1 so that the implied interest rate is positive, r1f > 0, which we capture with the following
analogue of Assumption 3.
                             + q       2
Assumption 3I .     1    <   Q =Q2 1
                                       1
                                           , where Q2 2 (0; Q ) solves Eq. (D:13).

As before, Eq. (D:14) implies that r1f is decreasing in the transition probability,                   1,   as well as in
the asset price drop conditional on transition, Q =Q2 .

                                                              88
     The following result summarizes the characterization of equilibrium and generalizes Proposition
1.

Proposition 5. Consider the extended model with investment with two states, s 2 f1; 2g, with
common beliefs and Assumptions 1I -3I . There is an equilibrium in which the price per capital and
                                                                  f
the interest rate are constant within each state, Qt;s = Qs and rt;s = rsf . The low-risk-premium state
1 features a positive interest rate, e¢ cient asset prices and full factor utilization, r1f > 0; Q1 = Q
and 1 = 1. The high-risk state 2 features zero interest rate, lower asset prices, and a demand-driven
recession, r2f = 0; Q2 < Q , and 2 < 1, as well as a lower level of consumption, ct;2 =kt;2 = Q2 ,
investment, it;2 =kt;2 = (Q2 1) ; output, yt;2 =kt;2 = ( + ) Q2             , and growth, g2 = q2       .
The price of capital in state 2 is characterized as the unique solution to Eq. (D:13), and the risk-free
rate in state 1 is given by Eq. (D:14).

Proof. Most of the proof is provided in the discussion leading to the proposition. The predictions
regarding the e¤ect of risk premium shocks on consumption, investment, output, and growth follow
from Eqs. (24) ; (D:7) ; (41) and (42).
   The remaining step is to show that Assumptions 1I -2I ensure there exists a unique solution,
Q2 2 (0; Q ) (equivalently, q2 < q ) to Eq. (D:13).
   To this end, we de…ne the function,

                                                                               exp (q2 )               2
                              f (q2 ;   2)   =   + q2         +    2    1                              2.
                                                                                 Q

The equilibrium price is the solution to, f (q2 ; 2 ) = 0 (given 2 ). Note that f (q2 ; 2 ) is a concave
function of q2 with limq2 ! 1 f (q2 ; 2 ) = limq2 !1 f (q2 ; 2 ) = 1. Its derivative is,

                                         @f (q2 ;    2)
                                                          =        2 exp (q2            q ).
                                            @q2
Thus, for …xed    2,   it is maximized at,

                                             q2max (   2)   = q + log ( =          2) :

Moreover, the maximum value is given by

         f (q2max (   2) ;   2)   =              +   (q + log ( =       2 ))   +    2 (1       exp (log ( =   2 )))
                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                  2
                                  =              + q +        log ( =   2)     +    2             2.

    Next note that, by Assumption 1I , the maximum value is strictly negative when 2 = , that
                                            df (q2max ( 2 ); 2 )
is, f (q2max ( ) ; ) < 0. Note also that            d 2          =1   2
                                                                        , which implies that the maximum
value is strictly increasing in the range 2            . Since lim 2!1 f (q2max ( 2 ) ; 2 ) = 1, there exists
  min
  2    >     that ensures f q2max min 2   ; min
                                             2       = 0. By Assumption 2I , the transition probability
                    min
satis…es 2          2 , which implies that f (q2
                                                   max   ( 2) ; 2)   0. By Assumption 1I , we also have
that f (q ; 2 ) < 0. It follows that, under Assumptions 1I -2I , there exists a unique price level,
q2 2 [q2max ; q ), that solves the equation, f (q2 ; 2 ) = 0.




                                                              89
D.3. New Keynesian microfoundations for nominal rigidities with invest-
     ment
In the rest of this section, we present the microfoundations for nominal rigidities that lead to Eqs.
(D:5) and (D:6). The production structure is the same as in Online Appendix Section B.1.3.
Speci…cally, there is a continuum of monopolistically competitive production …rms that produce
intermediate goods according to (B:4), and there is a competitive sector that produces the …nal
good according to (B:5). This also implies the demand for production …rms is given by(B:6). One
di¤erence is that production …rms do not own the capital but they rent it from investment …rms at
rate Rt;s . Hence, they choose how their capital input kt;s ( ), in addition to their factor utilization
rate, t;s ( ), as well as production and pricing decisions, yt;s ( ) ; pt;s ( ).
    These features ensure that the production …rm’s output will be split between their capital
expenditures (that they pay to investment …rms) and monopoly pro…ts. To simplify the analysis,
we make assumptions so that there are no monopoly pro…ts in equilibrium (and all output accrues
to investment …rms as return to capital). Speci…cally, we assume the government taxes the …rm’s
pro…ts lump sum, and redistributes these pro…ts to the …rms in the form of a linear subsidy to
capital.
    Formally, we let t;s ( ) denote the equilibrium pre-tax pro…ts of …rm (that will be charac-
terized below). We assume each …rm is subject to the lump-sum tax determined by the average
pro…ts of all …rms,
                                                Z
(D.15)                                   Tt;s =     t;s ( ) d :


We also let Rt;s     t;s denote the after-subsidy cost of renting capital, where Rt;s denotes the
equilibrium rental rate paid to investment …rms, and t;s denotes a linear subsidy paid by the
government. We assume the magnitude of the subsidy is determined by the government’s break-
even condition,
                                           Z
(D.16)                                 t;s   kt;s ( ) d = Tt;s .

    Without price rigidities, the …rm chooses pt;s ( ) ; kt;s ( ) ;           t;s (   ) 2 [0; 1] ; yt;s ( ) ; to maximize
its (pre-tax) pro…ts,

(D.17)                        t;s (   )   pt;s ( ) yt;s ( )   (Rt;s       t;s ) kt;s (      );

subject to the supply constraint in (B:4) and the demand constraint in (B:6). As in Online
Appendix Section B.1.3, the demand constraint holds as equality. Then, the optimality conditions
imply,
                                                        " Rt;s    t;s
                            t;s ( ) = 1 and pt;s ( ) =                .
                                                       " 1     A
That is, the …rm utilizes its capital at full capacity (as before) and it increases its capital input and
production up to the point at which its price is a constant markup over its after-subsidy marginal
cost. In a symmetric-price equilibrium, we further have, pt;s ( ) = 1. Using Eqs. (B:4) and (D:16),
this further implies,
                                                                  "       1
(D.18)                   yt;s ( ) = yt;s = Akt;s and Rt;s =                   A+      t;s   = A.
                                                                      "



                                                        90
That is, output is equal to potential output, and capital earns its marginal contribution to potential
output (in view of the linear subsidies).
     Now consider the alternative setting in which the …rms have a preset nominal price that is
equal across …rms, Pt;s ( ) = P . In particular, the relative price of a …rm is …xed and equal to one,
pt;s ( ) = 1. The …rm chooses the remaining variables, kt;s ( ) ; t;s ( ) 2 [0; 1] ; yt;s ( ), to maximize
its (pre-tax) pro…ts, t;s ( ), subject to the supply constraint in (B:4) and the demand constraint,
(B:6). Combining the constraints and using pt;s ( ) = 1, the …rm’s problem can be written as,

      max              A   t;s (   ) kt;s ( )   (Rt;s   t;s ) kt;s (   ) s.t. 0   t;s (   )   1 and A   t;s (   ) kt;s ( )   yt;s .
  t;s (   );kt;s ( )

We conjecture an equilibrium in which Rt;s = t;s and …rms choose symmetric capital inputs,
kt;s ( ) = kt;s . Under this equilibrium, the marginal cost of renting capital is zero, Rt;s        t;s =
0. This veri…es that it is optimal for …rms to choose symmetric inputs, kt;s ( ) = kt;s . After
substituting these expressions, the …rm’s problem becomes equivalent to its counterpart in Online
Appendix Section B.1.3. Following the same steps there, the optimal factor utilization is given by
             yt;s
 t;s ( ) = Akt;s    1. Hence, output is determined by aggregate demand, yt;s , subject to the capacity
constraint, t;s ( ) 1.
     In the conjectured equilibrium, the production …rms choose the same level of inputs and factor
utilization rates and produce the same level of output as each other. Therefore, they also have the
same level of pre-tax pro…ts. Using Eqs. (D:17) together with Rt;s = t;s = 0, we also calculate
the pre-tax pro…t level as t;s = yt;s . Substituting this into Eqs. (D:15) and (D:16), we obtain
 t;s = yt;s =kt;s = t;s A. Substituting this into Eq. (D:17), we further obtain Rt;s = yt;s =kt;s = t;s A.
This veri…es the conjecture, Rt;s = t;s .
     In sum, when the …rms’nominal prices are …xed, aggregate output is determined by aggregate
demand subject to the capacity constraint, which veri…es Eq. (D:5). Moreover, thanks to lump-
sum costs to pro…ts and linear subsidies to capital, all output accrues to the investment …rms as
return to capital, which veri…es Eq. (D:6).




                                                                       91
                    E. Extension with more general RRA
Our baseline dynamic model in the main text focuses on investors that have time-separable log
utility. In particular, we assume the relative risk aversion (RRA) as well as the elasticity of sub-
stitution (EIS) is equal to one. In this section, we analyze a model in which we allow for a more
general RRA but we still set the EIS equal to one. This helps to clarify the role of the assumption
on the RRA for our results (see Online Appendix Section A.2 for the role of the assumption on the
EIS).
    Our analysis proceeds in two steps. First, we generalize the partial characterization of equi-
librium in Section III. We observe that a more general RRA introduces dynamic hedging motives.
These motives complicate the analysis with belief disagreements, because investors’wealth dynam-
ics are in‡uenced by their relative dynamic hedging motives in addition to belief disagreements.
In particular, we illustrate that the separability property from Section III.B no longer applies.
Second, we focus on common beliefs (in which case the analysis is tractable) and investigate how
investors’dynamic hedging motive a¤ects the severity of recessions driven by risk premium shocks.
Our analysis suggests that, in the empirically relevant case of RRA greater than one, dynamic
hedging motives are likely to amplify the e¤ect of risk premium shocks on asset prices and output.


E.1. Environment and equilibrium with more general RRA
Consider the baseline dynamic model described in Section III with the only di¤erence that investors
have Epstein-Zin preferences with the discount rate , the RRA denoted by 6= 1, and the EIS
equal to 1. The limit case, ! 1, corresponds to the baseline dynamic model. The rest of the
model is unchanged. We next de…ne investors’preferences formally and derive the corresponding
HJB equation. We then derive the …rst order conditions and provide a partial characterization of
equilibrium. Finally, we fully characterize the equilibrium with common beliefs and investigate its
comparative statics.

E.1.1   Recursive preferences and the HJB equation
Following Du¢ e and Epstein (1992), we de…ne investor i’s utility recursively as the solution to:
                                          Z 1
                                i                        i
(E.1)                         Ut;s = Et;s     f cu;~s ; Uu;~
                                                           s du ,
                                                 t

where
                                                                     1
(E.2)                f (c; U ) = (1      )U      log (c)                 log ((1   ) U) .
                                                                 1

Here, f ( ) is called an aggregator function. As explained by Du¢ e and Epstein (1992), the aggre-
gator function is not unique since monotone transformations of utility leave preferences unchanged
while a¤ecting the aggregator function. The aggregator function in (E:2) corresponds to the so-
called “normalized utility” that simpli…es the analysis with di¤usion processes.
    In particular, the aggregator in (E:2) (together with homothetic preferences) implies that the
utility of an investor with wealth ait;s can be written as (see Di Tella (2017)):

                                                             i         1
                                   i
                                                     ait;s   t;s =Qt;s
(E.3)                             Ut;s   ait;s   =
                                                             1

                                                     92
The process, it;s , captures forward-looking investment opportunities. We refer to it as the wealth
multiplier since a doubling of it;s has the same e¤ect on the investor’s utility as a doubling of her
wealth. Note that we also normalize the wealth multiplier so that it provides a measure of utility
when the investor has one unit of capital (or wealth ait;s = Qt;s ).
   The formulation in (E:1 E:3) is useful since it allows for a dynamic programming approach.
Speci…cally, suppose that as long as there is no transition the investor’s wealth ait;s follows the
process
                                       dait;s
                                              = at;s dt + at;s dZt .
                                        ait;s
Then, the HJB equation corresponding to the investor’s problem is su¢ cient for optimality (see
Du¢ e and Epstein (1992)):
                                                  i                          i
                                   i
                                                @Ut;s                      @Ut;s          i
                                                                                   1 @ 2 Ut;s                     a 2
        0 = max0 f            c~; Ut;s        +       ai           a
                                                                         +       +            ait;s                       +    i     i
                                                                                                                                    Ut;s 0
                                                                                                                                                     i
                                                                                                                                                    Ut;s .
           ~ m ;~
           !    !s   ;~
                      c                          @a t;s            t;s
                                                                            @t     2 @a2                          t;s          s


   Note also that the evolution of investors’wealth is still given by Eq. (B:1). Using this equation
and substituting the aggregator function from (E:2), we obtain the following analogue of the HJB
equation for the baseline model [cf. (B:2)]:

                                                               i                          1                           i
(E.4)                0 = max0                  (1           ) Ut;s log (~
                                                                        c)                     log (1              ) Ut;s
                              ~ m ;~
                              !    !s    ;~
                                          c                                           1
                                i
                              @Ut;s                                                                                   i
                                                                                                                    @Ut;s ait;s
                                                 f                                  f              0
                          +               ait;s rt;s  ~ m rt;s
                                                     +!    m
                                                                                   rt;s       ~s
                                                                                              !             c~ +
                             @a                                                                                         @t
                                   i
                            1 @ 2 Ut;s                         m 2
                          +            ~ m ait;s
                                       !                       t;s
                            2 @a2                                                                          !!                       !
                                                                                                       0
                               i     i                                   m Qt;s0     Qt;s      !~s
                          +    s    Ut;s 0         ait;s     1+!
                                                               ~                              + s0                  i
                                                                                                                   Ut;s     ait;s       .
                                                                               Qt;s            pt;s

E.1.2    Optimality conditions
                                                                             i in (E:3) implies
To derive the optimality conditions, …rst note that the functional form for Ut;s
                                              !1                                                                  !1
                 i                      i                                                                   i
               @Ut;s                    t;s
                                                                                  i
                                                                             @ 2 Ut;s                       t;s                             1
                     =                                     ait;s         and          =                                     ait;s               .
                @a                 Qt;s                                       @a2                          Qt;s

The …rst order condition for c~ in problem (E:4) then implies

                                                                         (1        i
                                                                                ) Ut;s
(E.5)                                                      cit;s =          i =@a
                                                                                       = ait;s .
                                                                          @Ut;s

The optimality condition for consumption is the same as before [cf. (23)]. As in the baseline model,
the assumption that EIS is equal to one ensures that investors spend a constant fraction of their
wealth.




                                                                              93
                                ~ m in problem (E:4) implies,
   The …rst order condition for !

           i                                            i
                                                      @Ut;s   ait;s0
         @Ut;s                    f
                                                            0                        Qt;s0 Qt;s                i
                                                                                                          @ 2 Ut;s               m 2
               ai r m            rt;s       +     i
                                                                             ait;s              =                  ! m;i ait;s       .
          @a t;s t;s                              s
                                                              @a                         Qt;s              @a2 t;s               t;s


                                i     i
                                    @Ut;s   2 i
                              @Ut;s      0 @ Ut;s
After substituting for         @a ; @a ; @a2                  and rearranging terms, we obtain:
                                        0                                                !1               !                      1
                                                                         i                       ait;s0
                               1                                         t;s0 =Qt;s0                               Qt;s0 Qt;s A
(E.6)       ! m;i
              t;s
                    m
                    t;s   =     m
                                        @rt;s
                                          m            f
                                                      rt;s +       i
                                                                   s      i
                                                                                                                                .
                                t;s                                       t;s =Qt;s              ait;s                 Qt;s

                                                          0                                                    0
                                      ~ s implies that investors choose ! st;s;i that ensures:
Finally, the …rst order condition for !

                                   0
                                              i
                                            @Ut;s   i
                                                 0 at;s0
                                                                                            !1             !
                                                                              i                   ait;s0
                                pst;s               @a                        t;s0 =Qt;s0
(E.7)                              i
                                        =                          =           i
                                                                                                                   .
                                   s
                                                  i
                                                @Ut;s (ait;s )                 t;s =Qt;s           ait;s
                                                    @a

    When 6= 1, conditions (E:6) and (E:7) feature two di¤erences relative to their counterpart
in the baseline model [cf. (31) and (32)]. First, the investor’s desired risk taking also depends on
their relative risk aversion— captured by in the denominator of (E:6). Second, and more subtly,
the investor’s (relative) marginal utility per unit of wealth after a jump depends not only on her
(relative) wealth but also on the (relative) wealth multipliers— captured by it;s0 ; it;s in (E:7). These
terms introduce a dynamic hedging motive into the portfolio choice. To understand these e¤ects,
suppose it;s0 decreases so that the wealth multiplier for the transition state becomes lower while
keeping all else equal [cf. (E:3)]. This introduces substitution and income e¤ects. The substitution
e¤ect reduces the investor’s marginal utility per unit of wealth for this state— because investment
opportunities become less attractive. The income e¤ect increases the investor’s marginal utility
per unit of wealth for this state— because the investor became e¤ectively poorer. When > 1, the
income (resp. the substitution) e¤ect dominates and the investor’s marginal utility increases (resp.
decreases).

E.1.3    Partial characterization of equilibrium
We next present a partial characterization of equilibrium that facilitates the subsequent analysis.

Goods market equilibrium. First consider the goods market equilibrium. The analysis in
Section III.A remains unchanged. In particular, since Eq. (23) still holds, Lemma 1 that captures
the output-asset price relation still applies. Therefore, we have Eq. (21) (that describes output in
terms of Qt;s ) and Eq. (22) (that describes the return on the market portfolio absent transition).

Asset market equilibrium. Next consider the asset markets. As before, the equilibrium in
asset markets depend on investors’wealth shares [cf. (26)]

                                                                   i
                                                                                ait;s
                                                                   t;s   =              .
                                                                              kt;s Qt;s




                                                                             94
We next generalize Lemmas 2 and 3 from Section III.B to this setting. To state the result, we
de…ne type i investors’multiplier-adjusted belief for transition as
                                                                                             !1
                                                                                      i
                                                                 i                    t;s0                i
(E.8)                                                            t;s       =          i                   s.
                                                                                      t;s

We also de…ne the wealth-weighted average multiplier-adjusted belief as
                                                           !
                                         X              1=
                                              i     i
(E.9)                             t;s         t;s   t;s      .
                                                                                 i

            i
Note that   t;s   is a weighted average of multiplier-adjusted beliefs (although not necessarily a linear
average).

Lemma 7 (Wealth-share dynamics and the risk balance condition). Investors hold identical posi-
tions on the market portfolio

(E.10)                                                      ! m;i
                                                              t;s = 1                     for each i.

They hold possibly heterogeneous positions on the contingent security given by
                                                      0            1 1=                     i 1=               1=
(E.11)                                            ! st;s;i =       t;s                      t;s                t;s       .

Type i investors’ wealth share evolves according to
                                        0             1 1=                 1=
             _ it;s =   i     =      ! st;s;i =                                              i 1=         ,          if there is no state change,
                        t;s                           t;s                  t;s               t;s
(E.12)                                                                           1=
                                    i = i         =        i =                        ,                         if there is a state change to s0 .
                                    t;s0 t;s               t;s t;s

   The equilibrium price of the market portfolio satis…es

                              m              1             m            f                                 Qt;s
(E.13)                        t;s   =          m          rt;s         rt;s +             t;s   1                            ,
                                               t;s                                                        Qt;s0
                     m                                       Q                 Q                    m                            Q
              where rt;s =                  +g+              t;s   +         s t;s        and       t;s   =     s    +           t;s   [cf. Lemma 1].

The equilibrium price of the contingent security satis…es

                                                                       0                    1=Qt;s0
(E.14)                                                             pst;s =            t;s           :
                                                                                            1=Qt;s


    The proof follows similar steps as in the main text and is relegated to the end of the section.
    Eq. (E:10) is the same as its counterpart in the main text [cf. Eq. (28)]. As before, investors
express their di¤erences in beliefs through their holdings of the contingent securities. Consequently,
they hold identical positions on the market portfolio. As in the main text, this feature allows
for equilibria with deterministic wealth share and asset price dynamics absent state transitions.
Speci…cally, we will focus on equilibria in which the price per capital can be written as a function
of investors’wealth shares. For these equilibria, Eq. (E:10) also implies Q   t;s = 0 (see Remark 4).
    Eqs. (E:11 E:12) are in general (unless = 1) di¤erent than their counterparts in the main
text [cf. Eqs. (29 30)]. In this case, the wealth share dynamics are determined by the multiplier-

                                                                                      95
                               i      1
                     i         t;s0              i                                                 i
adjusted belief,     t;s   =    i                s,   as opposed to the unadjusted belief,         s.   This illustrates that
                                t;s
wealth ‡uctuations depend not only on investors’ belief di¤erences but also on investors’ relative
dynamic hedging motives. The latter depends on how the transition a¤ects an investor’s wealth
multiplier, it;s0 = it;s , relative to the other investor’s wealth multiplier, jt;s0 = jt;s . When > 1, a
decrease in an investor’s relative multiplier increases the investor’s wealth share after transition.
Intuitively, since the income e¤ect dominates, the investor brings more wealth to this state to hedge
the decline in investment opportunities.
    Eqs. (E:13 E:14) are very similar to their counterparts in the main text [cf. Eqs. (34 35)].
In particular, Eq. (E:13) shows that the risk balance condition generalizes to this setting with
two di¤erences. First, investors’desired risk taking also depends on their relative risk aversion—
                                                                                                     i
captured by in the denominator. Second, the wealth-weighted average transition belief, s , is
                                                                           i
replaced by the wealth-weighted average multiplier-adjusted belief, t;s . This re‡ects the dynamic
hedging motives.

     Lemma 7 suggests that, unlike before, investors’wealth dynamics cannot be characterized sep-
arately from asset prices (cf. Remark 5). This is because the evolution of investors’wealth shares,
   i                                                              i      i
   t;s i , depends on investors’ relative wealth multipliers,     t;s0 = t;s i ; and the latter (typically)
depends on asset prices.
     To illustrate this and to facilitate the rest of the analysis, we present another lemma that
characterizes the wealth multiplier it;s . To state the result, we normalize the wealth multiplier.
Speci…cally, we de…ne the normalized value, vt;si , so that the following holds at all times and states


                                                           i                   i
(E.15)                                                     t;s   = exp        vt;s .

This normalization simpli…es the analysis and ensures continuity with the baseline analysis. Specif-
ically, for the limit case ! 1, Eq. (E:3) implies that the value function has the same form as
                          i           log(ait;s =Qt;s )
in the baseline model, Ut;s ait;s =                            i
                                                        + log vt;s [cf. (48)]. Recall that qt;s = log Qt;s
denotes the log asset price.
    To simplify the expressions, we state the lemma under the assumption that the wealth multiplier
as well as the price per capital follow deterministic dynamics absent state transitions. This will
be the case in equilibrium because these variables can be written as a function of investors’wealth
shares, and the latter follows deterministic dynamics absent state transitions (see Remark 4).
Formally, note that it;s in general follows an endogenous di¤usion process within each state,

                                      d   t;s
                                                 =     t;s dt   +   t;s dZt     for s 2 f1; 2g .
                                          t;s

                                           Q
We assume     t;s   = 0 as well as         t;s   = 0 [cf. (13)].

Lemma 8 (Wealth multiplier). Consider an equilibrium with t;s = Q      t;s = 0. Then, the normal-
             i                                   i          i
ized value, vt;s (where the wealth multiplier is t;s = exp vt;s ) is the solution to the following




                                                                     96
di¤ erential equation
                                                    0                                        _ it;s
                                                                                                              1
                                                                                 1   2
                      i
                    @vt;s                                               g            s   +     i
            i                                       1B                           2             t;s            C
(E.16)     vt;s               = log + qt;s +         @                  i                                     A,
                     @t                                  +     i        t;s0              i            i
                                                               sV        i     exp       vt;s 0       vt;s
                                                                         t;s

                                  c1      1
          where V fcg =
                                    1
                                                                                               !1=
                                                                          i
                     _ it;s        1 1=       1=         i     1=         t;s0
                                                                                         i
                                                                                         t;s
              and      i
                              =    t;s        t;s        t;s        ;     i
                                                                                 =                     [cf. Lemma 7].
                       t;s                                                t;s            t;s




    The proof follows from combining Eq. (E:4) with our characterization of equilibrium and is
relegated to the end of this section. Note also that, in the limit as ! 1, we recover Eq. (49) that
               i in the baseline model. Hence, Eq. (E:16) provides a more general characterization
characterizes vt;s
for the normalized value function that applies for arbitrary .
    Eq. (E:16) shows that the normalized value (and therefore the wealth share multiplier) depends
on asset prices, qt;s . Intuitively, asset prices a¤ect investors’ welfare (per capital) because they
determine output and consumption [cf. Eqs. (24) and (21)]. Importantly, Eq. (E:16) also illustrates
that these e¤ects depend on investors’belief types (in complex fashion). For example, consider an
equilibrium as in the baseline model in which the high-risk-premium state features relatively low
asset prices whereas the low-risk-premium state features e¢ cient asset prices, qt;2 < qt;1 = q .
Suppose also that the economy is currently in the high-risk-premium state s = 2. Then, Eq. (E:16)
suggests that (all else equal) pessimists that perceive a lower probability of transition to the low-
risk-premium state (lower i2 ) will have lower vt;2i than optimists— and more so when q
                                                                                          t;2 is lower.


First-best equilibrium with common beliefs. For future reference, we conclude this section
by solving for the …rst-best equilibrium without interest rate rigidities. In this case, there is no
lower bound constraint on the interest rate, so the price of capital is at its e¢ cient level at all times
and states, Qt;s = Q and qt;s = q     log Q . Combining this with Eq. (E:13), we solve for “rstar”
as,

(E.17)                              rsf =      +g         2
                                                          s    for each s 2 f1; 2g .

As before, in the …rst-best equilibrium the risk premium shocks are fully absorbed by the interest
rate.


E.2. Common beliefs benchmark with more general RRA
We next characterize the equilibrium with interest rate rigidities for the case in which investors
have common beliefs. We generalize Proposition 1 to this setting and discuss how the dynamic
hedging motives a¤ect the severity of demand recessions driven by risk premium shocks.
                                                                         i
   Suppose there is a single investor type with belief denoted by s      s . As before, we conjecture
                                                                                             f
that the price and the interest rate will remain constant within states, Qt;s = Qs and rt;s     = rsf .
This implies the wealth multiplier is also constant within states, t;s = s . Then, using Eq. (E:13),




                                                               97
we obtain the following risk balance conditions,

                      1                                                                                     Qs
(E.18)        s   =               + g + exp ( (1                         ) (vs0     vs ))   s       1                     rsf    for s 2 f1; 2g .
                          s                                                                                 Qs0

Here, we substituted the wealth multiplier with normalized value, s = exp ( vs ) [cf. (E:15)]. Using
Eq. (E:16), we also characterize the normalized value as the solution to

                                               1         1           2
(E.19)      vs = log + qs +                         g                s    +    sV   fexp ( (vs0              vs ))g        for s 2 f1; 2g ,
                                                         2
                                                   c1            1
                       where V fcg =                                 :
                                                     1
                              n                    o
The equilibrium tuple,         rsf ; Qs ; vs                  , is found by solving Eqs. (E:18                                    E:19) together with
                                                    s2f1;2g
the goods market equilibrium conditions (25).
   To characterize the equilibrium further, we make the following analogue of Assumption 1
                                  +g
Assumption 1D .           2
                          2   >        >       2.
                                               1

This assumption ensures that the …rst best equilibrium in (E:17) is not feasible. Therefore, we
conjecture that the interest rate constraint binds in the high-risk-premium state but not in the
low-risk-premium state, r1f > 0; Q1 = Q and r2f = 0; Q2 < Q .

Equilibrium in the high-risk-premium state and dynamic hedging motives. Under our
conjecture, the risk balance condition (E:18) for the high-risk-premium state s = 2 can be written
as,

                                       2                                                                      Q2
(E.20)                                 2   =       + g + exp ( (1                   )    v)     2       1             ,
                                                                                                              Q

where we de…ne v = v1 v2 as the di¤erence in the normalized value between the low and
high-risk-premium states. Taking the di¤erence of Eq. (E:19) across the two states, we further
obtain

                  2                                 1        2             2
(E.21)                v = (q               q2 ) +            2             1   +    1V   fexp (              v)           2V    fexp (   v)gg .
                                                    2
The pair, (q2 ; v), corresponds to the solution to the two equations (E:20) and (E:21). As before,
we need a lower bound on 2 to ensure the existence of an equilibrium with positive asset price.
Under an appropriate parametric restriction, there exists a solution that satis…es q2 < q .
    Given the equilibrium price level, Eq. (E:21) implies v > 0. To see this, note that (q      q2 )+
1     2     2 > 0 Note also that the left-hand-side is an increasing function of
2     2     1                                                                         v whereas   the
right-hand-side is a decreasing function. Hence, the equilibrium satis…es v > 0. As expected,
the normalized value is higher in the low-risk-premium state (that features higher prices and lower
uncertainty) than in the high-risk-premium state.
    To understand how the dynamic hedging motives a¤ect the equilibrium in the high-risk-premium
state, it is instructive to consider a particular comparative statics exercise: speci…cally, suppose
  2 declines. Eq. (E:21) illustrates that this increases the equilibrium level of v. As expected, a
  1
             2
decline in 1 makes the investment opportunities in state 1 relatively more attractive. Equivalently,
it makes the investment opportunities in state 2 relatively less attractive. Eq. (E:20) illustrates


                                                                               98
that this change a¤ects the equilibrium asset price only through its impact on v. Moreover, the
same equation illustrates that the change would not a¤ect the equilibrium price in the baseline
model with       = 1. Hence, this exercise is useful to understand how a decline in the relative
attractiveness of investment opportunities in the high-risk-premium state a¤ects the equilibrium
price in this state.
    Eq. (E:20) implies that the induced increase in v decreases (resp. increases) q2 when > 1
(resp.    < 1). Intuitively, a decline in the (relative) attractiveness investment opportunities in
the high-risk-premium state generates substitution and income e¤ects that in‡uence the investors’
marginal utility and discount factor across states [cf. (E:7)]. The substitution e¤ect increases the
investor’s (relative) marginal utility in the low-risk-premium state— she would like to bring wealth to
the low-risk-premium state to take advantage of the more attractive investment opportunities. The
income e¤ect increases the investor’s (relative) marginal utility in the high-risk-premium state—
she would like to bring more wealth to the high-risk-premium state to hedge the decline in the
attractiveness of investment opportunities. When > 1, the income e¤ect (or the hedging motive)
dominates and an increase in v increases the investor’s marginal utility and discount factor for
the high-risk-premium relative to the low-risk-premium state. Since q2 < q , this reweighting of
discount factors reduces current asset valuations. Since the interest rate is constrained, this also
leads to a decline in the equilibrium price, q2 [cf. (E:20)].

Equilibrium in the low-risk-premium state.                         Under our conjecture, the risk balance condition
(E:13) can be written as,

                                                                                         Q
(E.22)                 r1f =   +g           2
                                            1         exp ( (1        )(       v))   1            1
                                                                                         Q2

As before, the interest rate adjusts to ensure that the risk balance condition is satis…ed with the
e¢ cient price level, Q1 = Q . As before, we need an appropriate parametric restriction (an upper
bound on 1 ) to ensure that the implied interest rate is positive, r1f > 0.
    Eq. (E:22) illustrates that in this state the dynamic hedging motives a¤ect the interest rate, r1f ,
rather than the price level, Q1 = Q . In particular, all else equal, an increase in v decreases (resp.
increases) r1f when > 1 (resp. < 1). As before, when > 1, the income e¤ect (or the hedging
motive) dominates and an increase in v increases the investor’s marginal utility and discount
factor for the high-risk-premium relative to the low-risk-premium state. As before, this reweighting
of discount factors reduces current asset valuations. In this case, the interest rate declines to o¤set
the price impact of the shock. This ensures that asset prices and output are equal to their e¢ cient
levels but the interest rate is lower.


E.3. Omitted proofs
Proof of Lemma 7. Note that, substituting Eqs. (E:7) into (E:6), we …nd

                                            1                              0   Qt;s0 Qt;s
(E.23)                    ! m;i
                            t;s
                                  m
                                  t;s   =       m
                                                        m
                                                       rt;s     f
                                                               rt;s + pst;s                   .
                                                t;s                                Qt;s

This shows that investors allocate identical portfolio weights to the market portfolio, ! m;i     m
                                                                                          t;s = ! t;s .
Combining this with the market clearing condition (16), we …nd that these identical portfolio
weights are equal to one,
                                             ! m;i
                                               t;s = 1.


                                                              99
This proves (E:10).
    To characterize the positions on the contingent security, …rst consider how type i investors’
wealth share changes after a state transition. Using (26) to rewrite Eq. (E:7), we obtain the
following analogue of Eq. (33):
                                                                            1=
                                       i           i        i      1                                                    0   Qt;s0
(E.24)                                 t;s0   =    t;s      t;s                      where                t;s   = pst;s           .
                                                                    t;s                                                     Qt;s

                               i       1
                                   0          i
Recall that it;s =  t;s
                    i                         s   [cf. (E:8)]. Aggregating this expression across all investors, and
                    t;s
      P i
using i t;s0 = 1, we obtain
                                                                                                             !
                                                                  i           X                       1=
                                                                                            i
                                                     t;s   =      t;s                       t;s       t;s           .
                                                                                 i

Substituting this back into (33), we obtain
                                                                                           !1=
                                                               i                     i
                                                               t;s0                  t;s
                                                               i
                                                                        =                             :
                                                               t;s                   t;s

This proves the second line of Eq. (E:12).
   Combining t;s = t;s = 1 with the de…nition of t;s in Eq. (33), we obtain an expression for
the price of the contingent security,
                                           0        1=Qt;s0
                                        pst;s = t;s         :
                                                    1=Qt;s
This proves Eq. (E:14). Combining this with Eq. (E:23), and substituting ! m;i     t;s = 1, we obtain
the risk balance condition (E:13).
    Next consider the positions type i investors take in the contingent security to achieve the change
in their wealth share after transition. Following the same steps as in the proof of Lemma 2, we
         i                 0
         t;s0          ! st;s;i
obtain    i     = 1+               . Combining this with the second line of Eq. (E:12), we solve for type i
          t;s             t;s
investors’equilibrium position in the contingent security
                                              0       !1=                                                        1
                                                                                      i
                                                   s0 ;i                  @           t;s
                                                  ! t;s =         t;s                                           1A .
                                                                                      t;s


Rearranging this expression proves Eq. (E:11).
   Finally consider how type i investors’wealth share changes absent a state transition. Following
                                                                                                  d    i                    0
the same steps as in the proof of Lemma 2, we obtain                                                  i
                                                                                                       t;s
                                                                                                                =       ! st;s;i dt. Substituting Eq. (E:11)
                                                                                                      t;s
proves the …rst line of Eq. (E:12) and completes the proof of the lemma.

   Proof of Lemma 8. First consider the di¤erential equation that characterizes the wealth
multiplier, it;s . Using Eqs. (E:3) and (E:4) along with the characterizations in Lemma 1 (which




                                                                            100
                                                                              Q
applies also in this context) and Lemma 7, as well as                         t;s   = 0, we obtain
                                                   0                                        0            i            1
                                                                                                     @   t;s =@t
                                                            g          1
                                                                       2
                                                                               2
                                                                               s        ! st;s;i +         i
                            i                      1B
                                                    B
                                                                                                           t;s     ! C
                                                                                                                     C.
                      log   t;s   = log + qt;s +    @                               i       i        1
                                                                                                                     A
                                                            i 1                     t;s0    t;s0
                                                        +   s1                       i       i                 1
                                                                                     t;s     t;s



Next, we substitute it;s = exp vt;s  i   and use                t;s
                                                                                            i is also deterministic
                                                                        = 0 (which implies vt;s
absent state transitions) to obtain
                                       0                                                           0                      !1   11
                i                                                                                           i      i
             @v t;s                 1      1 2                        s0 ;i                 1               t;s0   t;s0
        i
       vt;s         = log + qt;s + @g                           ! t;s +             i              @                           1AA .
               @t                          2 s                                      s
                                                                                        1                   i
                                                                                                            t;s
                                                                                                                   i
                                                                                                                   t;s

                  0         _ it;s
Substituting ! st;s;i =      i       from Lemma 7 proves Eq. (E:16).
                             t;s




                                                        101
               F. Data details and omitted empirical results
This section presents the details of the data sources and variable construction used in Section VII,
and presents the empirical results (tables and …gures) omitted from the main text.

House price index.          We rely on the cross-country quarterly panel dataset described
in Mack et al. (2011).         The dataset is regularly updated and publicly available at
https://www.dallasfed.org/institute/houseprice. We use the in‡ation-adjusted (real) house price
index measure to construct the shock variable in our regression analysis (see (58)). Our country
coverage is to a large extent determined by the availability of this measure. In particular, we ex-
clude a few developed countries such as Portugal, Austria, and Greece for which we do not have
data on house prices that we can consistently compare with house prices in other countries.

Euro or Exchange Rate Mechanism (Euro/ERM) status. We hand-collect this data from
various online sources. A country-quarter is included in the Euro/ERM sample if the country is
a member of the Euro or the European Exchange Rate mechanism in most of the corresponding
calendar year. Table F.1 describes the Euro/ERM status by year for all countries in our sample.

GDP, consumption, investment. We obtain this data from the OECD’s quarterly national
accounts dataset (available at https://stats.oecd.org). We use the variables calculated according
to the expenditure approach. The corresponding OECD subject codes are as follows:

      GDP: “B1_GE” (Gross domestic product –expenditure approach).

      Consumption: “P31S14_S15” (Private …nal consumption expenditure)

      Investment: “P51” (Gross …xed capital formation)

For each of these variables, we use the measures that are adjusted for in‡ation as well as seasonality.
The OECD measure code is: “LNBQRSA”(National currency, chained volume estimates, national
reference year, quarterly levels, seasonally adjusted).

Relative GDP (with PPP-adjusted prices in a common base year).                     We obtain
an alternative GDP measure from the OECD’s annual national accounts dataset (available at
https://stats.oecd.org). We use the variable calculated according to the expenditure approach
(with subject code “B1_GE”), measured with PPP-adjusted prices in a common base year. The
OECD measure code is: “VPVOB”(Current prices, constant PPPs, OECD base year). We use the
value of this measure in 1990 to weight all of our regressions (see (58)).

CPI. We obtain this data from the OECD’s prices and purchasing power parities dataset (available
at https://stats.oecd.org). We use the core CPI measure that excludes food and energy. The OECD
subject code is: “CPGRLE”(Consumer prices - all items non-food, non-energy). We use the annual
measure, which is less subject to seasonality, and we linearly interpolate this to obtain a quarterly
measure.

Unemployment rate. We obtain this data from the OECD’s key short-term economic indicators
database (available at https://stats.oecd.org). We use the harmonized unemployment rate measure
with seasonal adjustment and at quarterly frequency. The OECD subject code is “LRHUTTTT”
(Harmonized unemployment rate: all persons, s.a).


                                                 102
The policy interest rate. Obtaining the policy interest rate is not as trivial as it might sound
since di¤erent central banks conduct monetary policy in terms of di¤erent target rates (and some-
times without specifying a target rate, or by monitoring multiple rates). On the other hand, the
selection does not substantially a¤ect the results since short-term risk-free rates within a developed
country are often highly correlated. Following Romer and Romer (2018), we use announced policy
target rates when available, and otherwise we use collateralized short-term market rates (such as
Repo rates or Lombard rates). For Eurozone countries, we use the local collateralized rate until
the country joins the Euro, and we switch to the European Central Bank’s (ECB) main re…nancing
operations (MRO) rate after the country joins the Euro.
    For most of the countries, we construct our own measure of the policy interest rate according to
the above selection criteria by using data from the Global Financial Data’s GFDATABASE (GFD).
This is a proprietary database that contains a wealth of information on various asset prices (see
https://www.global…nancialdata.com for details).
    For a few countries (speci…ed below), we instead rely on the Bank for International
Settlements’s (BIS) database on central bank policy interest rates (publicly available at
https://www.bis.org/statistics/cbpol.htm). We switch to the BIS measure when we cannot con-
struct an appropriate measure using the GFD; or when the BIS measure has greater coverage than
ours and the two measures are highly correlated. From either database, we obtain monthly data
and convert to quarterly data by averaging over the months within the quarter.

     United States: GFD ticker “IDUSAFFD” (USA Fed Funds O¢ cial Target Rate).

     United Kingdom: GFD ticker “IDGBRD” (Bank of England Base Lending Rate).

     Australia: GFD ticker “IDAUSD” (Australia Reserve Bank Overnight Cash Rate).

     South Korea: GFD ticker “IDKORM” (Bank of Korea Discount Rate).

     Germany: GFD ticker “IDDEULD”(Germany Bundesbank Lombard Rate) until the country
     joins the Euro. Afterwards, we use the ECB MRO rate. The corresponding GFD ticker is:
     “IDEURMW” (Europe Marginal Rate on Re…nancing Operations).

     New Zealand: GFD ticker “IDNZLD” (New Zealand Reserve Bank O¢ cial Cash Rate).

     France: GFD ticker “IDFRARD” (Bank of France Repo Rate) until the country joins the
     Euro.

     Denmark: We use the BIS measure (highly correlated with our measure and greater coverage).

     Finland: GFD ticker “IDFINRM” (Bank of Finland Repo Rate) until the country joins the
     Euro.

     Sweden: GFD ticker “IDSWERD” (Sweden Riksbank Repo Rate).

     Israel: GFD ticker “IDISRD” (Bank of Israel Discount Rate).

     Italy: GFD ticker “IDITARM” (Bank of Italy Repo Rate) until the country joins the Euro.

     Spain: GFD ticker “IDESPRM”(Bank of Spain Repo Rate) until the country joins the Euro.

     Ireland: GFD ticker “IDIRLRD” (Bank of Ireland Repo Rate) until the country joins the
     Euro.


                                                 103
     Belgium: GFD ticker “IDBELRM” (Belgium National Bank Repo Rate) until the country
     joins the Euro.

     Netherlands: GFD ticker “IDNLDRD”(Netherlands Bank Repo Rate) until the country joins
     the Euro.

     Norway: GFD ticker “IDNORRD” (Bank of Norway Sight Deposit Rate).

     Japan: GFD ticker “IDJPNCM”(Japan Target Call Rate). GFD data is missing from March
     2001 until July 2006. BIS data is also missing for most of this period. We use other sources
     to hand-…ll the interest rate over this period as being equal to 0% (see for instance, the data
     from St. Louis Fed at https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/IRSTCI01JPM156N).

     Switzerland: We use the BIS measure (cannot identify an appropriate rate from the GFD).

     Canada: We use the BIS measure (highly correlated with our measure and greater coverage).


Stock prices. We obtain this data from the GFD. For each country, we try to pick the most
popular stock price index (based on Internet searches). We obtain daily data and convert to
quarterly data by averaging over all (trading) days within the quarter. We then divide this with
our core CPI measure (see above) to obtain a real stock price series.

     United States: GFD ticker “_SPXD” (S&P500 Index)

     United Kingdom: GFD ticker “_FTSED” (UK FTSE100 Index).

     Australia: GFD ticker “_AXJOD” (Australia S&P/ASX 200 Index).

     South Korea: GFD ticker “_KS11D” (Korea SE Stock Price Index (KOSPI)).

     Germany: GFD ticker “_GDAXIPD” (Germany DAX Price Index).

     New Zealand: GFD ticker “_NZ15D” (NZSX-15 Index).

     France: GFD ticker “_FCHID” (Paris CAC-40 Index).

     Denmark: GFD ticker “_OMXC20D” (OMX Copenhagen-20 Index).

     Finland: GFD ticker “_OMXH25D” (OMX Helsinki-25 Index).

     Sweden: GFD ticker “_OMXS30D” (OMX Stockholm-30 Index).

     Israel: GFD ticker “_TA125D” (Tel Aviv SE 125 Broad Index).

     Italy: GFD ticker “_BCIJD” (Milan SE MIB-30 Index).

     Spain: GFD ticker “_IBEXD” (Madrid SE IBEX-35 Index).

     Ireland: GFD ticker “_ISEQD” (Ireland ISEQ Overall Price Index).

     Belgium: GFD ticker “_BFXD” (Belgium CBB Bel-20 Index).

     Netherlands: GFD ticker “_AEXD” (Amsterdam AEX Stock Index).

     Norway: GFD ticker “_OSEAXD” (Oslo SE All-Share Index).

                                               104
        Japan: GFD ticker “_N225D” (Nikkei 225 Stock Index).

        Switzerland: GFD ticker “_SSMID” (Swiss Market Index).

        Canada: GFD ticker “_GSPTSED” (Canada S&P/TSX 300 Index).


Earnings. We obtain monthly data on the price-earnings ratio of publicly traded …rms from the
GFD (typically constructed for a broad sample of stocks chosen by the GFD). We then combine
this information with our nominal price index (using the price at the last trading day of the month)
to construct a monthly series for earnings. We convert this to a quarterly measure by averaging
over the months within the quarter. We then divide this by our core CPI measure to obtain a
quarterly real earnings series for publicly traded …rms.
    GFD ticker for the price earnings ratio typically has the form “SY-three digit country code-PM”
(e.g., the ticker for the United States is “SYUSAPM”). One exception is the United Kingdom for
which the corresponding GFD code is “_PFTASD” (UK FT-Actuaries PE Ratio).

Credit expansion. Our measure of bank credit is based on Baron and Xiong (2017), who construct
a variable, credit expansion, de…ned as the annualized past three-year change in bank credit to GDP
ratio. Mathematically, it is expressed as
                                           bank credit          bank credit
                                             GDP       t          GDP       t 12
(F.1)              credit expansion =                                              4,
                                                           12
where t denotes a quarter. Baron and Xiong (2017) construct this measure by merging data from
two sources. Their main source is the “bank credit” measure from the BIS, which covers a large
set of countries but is generally available only for postwar years. For this reason, Baron and Xiong
(2017) also supplement it with the “bank loans”measure from Schularick and Taylor (2012), which
covers fewer countries but more years. Since our panel starts in 1990, we ignore the second source
and rely entirely on the BIS measure.
    Speci…cally, we use the quarterly BIS database on credit to the non…nancial sector (publicly
available at https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm). We obtain the measure “bank credit to
the private non…nancial sector” expressed in units of percentage of GDP (the corresponding BIS
code is “Q:5A:P:B:M:770:A”), which enables us to construct the variable in (F:1). We verify that
our variable is highly correlated with the measure constructed by Baron and Xiong (2017) (who
generously shared their data with us)— the correlation coe¢ cient for the available country-quarters
is 0.975.
    Following Baron and Xiong (2017), we also construct a “credit expansion-std” variable by
standardizing the measure in (F:1) by its mean and standard deviation within each country. Since
Baron and Xiong (2017) focus on predicting stock prices, they calculate the mean and the standard
deviation using only past data so as to avoid any look-ahead bias. Since our focus is di¤erent, we
ignore this subtlety and calculate the sample statistics using the entire data for the corresponding
country (in the BIS database).




                                                105
                         Table F.1: Euro/ERM status by country and year

             Country     1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997-2017
            Belgium        1      1      1      1      1      1      1       1
            Denmark        1      1      1      1      1      1      1       1
            Finland        0      0      0      0      0      0      0       1
             France        1      1      1      1      1      1      1       1
            Germany        1      1      1      1      1      1      1       1
             Ireland       1      1      1      1      1      1      1       1
               Italy       1      1      1      0      0      0      0       1
           Netherlands     1      1      1      1      1      1      1       1
              Spain        1      1      1      1      1      1      1       1
            Australia      0      0      0      0      0      0      0       0
            Canada         0      0      0      0      0      0      0       0
              Israel       0      0      0      0      0      0      0       0
              Japan        0      0      0      0      0      0      0       0
              Korea        0      0      0      0      0      0      0       0
               NZL         0      0      0      0      0      0      0       0
            Norway         0      0      0      0      0      0      0       0
             Sweden        0      1      1      0      0      0      0       0
           Switzerland     0      0      0      0      0      0      0       0
                UK         0      1      1      0      0      0      0       0
               USA         0      0      0      0      0      0      0       0


Euro status. Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Spain adopted the
Euro in 1999. Denmark hasn’t adopted the Euro but is a member of the ERM.




                                              106
               Table F.2: Summary statistics by ERM for the baseline regression sample

                                       ERM sample                  Non-ERM sample                  Di¤erence
                                    Mean Std.Deviation            Mean Std.Deviation            Mean Std.Error
  log house prices (real)           0.0047         0.0181         0.0054        0.0187         -0.0007     (0.0023)

  log GDP (real)                    0.0047         0.0124         0.0065        0.0092         -0.0018     (0.0009)

policy interest rate (nominal)      0.0232         0.0196         0.0349        0.0289         -0.0117     (0.0038)

  log CPI (core)                    0.0041         0.0027         0.0046        0.0039         -0.0004     (0.0005)

  unemployment rate                 -0.0002        0.0038        -0.0002        0.0030         0.0000      (0.0003)

  log investment (real)             0.0043         0.0502         0.0070        0.0295         -0.0027     (0.0018)

  log consumption (real)            0.0038         0.0091         0.0069        0.0095         -0.0031     (0.0008)

earnings to price ratio             0.0626         0.0245         0.0584        0.0227         0.0042      (0.0034)

  log stock prices (real)           0.0042         0.0911         0.0111        0.0818         -0.0069     (0.0044)

credit expansion                    0.0148         0.0565         0.0136        0.0298         0.0012      (0.0083)

credit expansion-std                0.1047         1.2628        -0.0346        1.1128         0.1393      (0.2001)
Observations                          760                          1130                         1890
  represents quarterly change. Standard errors are Newey-West standard errors with a bandwidth of 20 quarters.




                                                    107
             Table F.3: Private housing wealth in 2005 (% of GDP) by Euro/ERM status

   Country (Euro/ERM)       Housing wealth       Country (Non-Euro/ERM)        Housing wealth
   Spain                             414.33      Australia                                301.32
   Italy                             271.25      USA                                      199.77
   France                            253.74      Korea                                    180.12
   Netherlands                       222.03      Japan                                    169.74
   Germany                           186.77      Canada                                   146.51
   Denmark                           168.45      Norway                                   139.48
                                                 Sweden                                   132.10
   Average                           252.40      Average                                  181.29
   GDP-weighted average              255.14      GDP-weighted average                     191.67




           Table F.4: Stock market capitalization in 2005 (% of GDP) by Euro/ERM status

       Country (Euro/ERM)       Market cap       Country (Non-Euro/ERM)        Market cap
       Finland                       102.48      Switzerland                        229.68
       Netherlands                    87.37      USA                                129.84
       Spain                          82.95      Canada                             126.75
       France                         80.07      UK                                 121.32
       Belgium                        74.47      Australia                          116.08
       Denmark                        67.30      Sweden                             103.83
       Ireland                        53.90      Korea                               96.16
       Italy                          43.08      Israel                              86.04
       Germany                        42.01      Norway                              79.94
                                                 Japan                               61.89
       Average                         69.22     Average                            115.16
       GDP-weighted average            61.84     GDP-weighted average               120.26




Data sources. We obtain housing wealth to GDP ratio from the World Inequality Database
(WID) which is publicly available at https://wid.world/. We construct the ratio by combining
yearly series on “private housing assets”(WID indicator, “mpwhou”) and “gross domestic product
(WID indicator, “mgdpro”).
    We obtain stock market capitalization to GDP ratio as yearly series from the GFD. The corre-
sponding ticker has the form “CM.MKT.LCAP.GD.ZS three digit country code” (e.g., the ticker
for the United States is “CM.MKT.LCAP.GD.ZS USA”).
    For both tables, we construct the GDP-weighted averages by using our relative GDP measure
(in 2005) described earlier in this section.

                                               108
           policy interest rate (pp)                  core cpi (percent)                   unemployment rate (pp)




                                                                                    .7
     .3




                                            0
     .2




                                            -.2 -.1




                                                                                    .3
     .1




                                            -.3




                                                                                    -.1
     0




           0        4        8         12             0       4        8       12          0       4       8        12


           GDP (percent)                              investment (percent)                 consumption (percent)
                                            .6
     .2




                                                                                    .2
                                            -.8
     -.3




                                                                                    -.2
                                                                                    -.6
                                            -2.2
     -.8




           0        4        8         12             0       4        8       12          0       4       8        12


           earnings/initial price (pp)                stock prices (percent)               house prices (percent)
     .2




                                            .8




                                                                                    .3
                                            -1.3
     -.1




                                                                                    -1
                                                                                    -2.3
                                            -3.4
     -.4




           0        4        8         12             0       4        8       12          0       4       8        12




Figure F.1: Impulse responses to one percent decrease in real house prices: Euro/ERM minus
non-Euro/ERM. The panels illustrate the di¤erences in coe¢ cients between the ERM and the non-ERM
samples corresponding to the baseline regression results in Figure VIII.




                                                                  109
          policy interest rate (pp)                 core cpi (percent)                   unemployment rate (pp)




                                                                                  .4
    0




                                             0




                                                                                  .2
    -.1
    -.2




                                             -.2




                                                                                  0
          0        4         8          12          0        4       8       12          0       4        8       12


          GDP (percent)                             investment (percent)                 consumption (percent)
    .1




                                             .2




                                                                                  0
    -.2




                                             -.7




                                                                                  -.4
                                             -1.6
    -.5




                                                                                  -.8
          0        4         8          12          0        4       8       12          0       4        8       12


          earnings/initial price (pp)               stock prices (percent)               house prices (percent)
    .4




                                                                                  1
                                             1.2
    .1




                                                                                  -.1
                                             -.5
    -.2




                                             -2.2




                                                                                  -1.2




          0        4         8          12          0        4       8       12          0       4        8       12




Figure F.2: Additional impulse responses to one percent decrease in real house prices when
credit expansion has been one standard deviation above average: Euro/ERM minus non-
Euro/ERM. The panels illustrate the di¤erences in coe¢ cients between the ERM and the non-ERM samples
corresponding to the regression results with credit interaction in Figure IX.




                                                                 110
            policy interest rate (pp)               core cpi (percent)                         unemployment rate (pp)
     .1




                                                                                        .8
                                             0
     -.1




                                                                                        .4
     -.3




                                             -.2




                                                                                        0
            0        4        8         12          0       4        8       12                0       4       8        12


            GDP (percent)                           investment (percent)                       consumption (percent)




                                                                                        .1
                                             .1
     0




                                                                                        -.5
                                             -1.7
     -.6




                                                                                        -1.1
                                             -3.5
     -1.2




            0        4        8         12          0       4        8       12                0       4       8        12


            earnings/initial price (pp)             stock prices (percent)                     house prices (percent)
                                             3.3




                                                                                        .1
     .2




                                                                                        -2.8
     -.2




                                             -.8
     -.6




                                             -4.9




                                                                                        -5.7




            0        4        8         12          0       4        8       12                0       4       8        12



                                             Euro/ERM                             Non-Euro/ERM



Figure F.3: Impulse responses to one percent decrease in real house prices: No time …xed
e¤ects. The panels illustrate the analogues of the baseline regression results in Figure VIII with the
di¤erence that time …xed e¤ects are excluded from the regressions.




                                                                111
                       policy interest rate (pp)                 core cpi (percent)                         unemployment rate (pp)




                                                                                                     .8
                 0




                                                          0




                                                                                                     .4
                 -.1
                 -.2




                                                          -.2




                                                                                                     0
                       0        4        8           12          0       4        8       12                0       4       8        12


                       GDP (percent)                             investment (percent)                       consumption (percent)
                 .2




                                                          .1




                                                                                                     0
                 -.4




                                                          -1.3




                                                                                                     -.5
                                                          -2.7




                                                                                                     -1
                 -1




                       0        4        8           12          0       4        8       12                0       4       8        12


                       earnings/initial price (pp)               stock prices (percent)                     house prices (percent)
                 .3




                                                          1.8




                                                                                                     0
                 0




                                                                                                     -2.6
                                                          -.5
                 -.3




                                                                                                     -5.2
                                                          -2.8




                       0        4        8           12          0       4        8       12                0       4       8        12



                                                          Euro/E RM                            Non-E uro/ERM



Figure F.4: Impulse responses to one percent decrease in real house prices: 1980-2017. The
analogues of the results in Figure VIII with a sample that starts in 1980Q1 (as opposed to 1990Q1).




                       policy interest rate (pp)                 core cpi (percent)                         unemployment rate (pp)
                                                          .1




                                                                                                     .4
                 .1




                                                          -.1




                                                                                                     .2
                 -.1




                                                          -.3




                                                                                                     0




                       0        4         8          12          0       4        8       12                0       4       8        12


                       GDP (percent)                             investment (percent)                       consumption (percent)
                                                                                                     .4
                                                          .5
                 .1




                                                                                                     -.1
                                                          -.5
                 -.2




                                                          -1.5
                 -.5




                                                                                                     -.6




                       0        4         8          12          0       4        8       12                0       4       8        12


                       earnings/initial price (pp)               stock prices (percent)                     house prices (percent)
                 .3




                                                                                                     1.1
                                                          1.2
                 0




                                                          -.4




                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                     -1.1
                 -.3




                                                          -2




                       0        4         8          12          0       4        8       12                0       4       8        12



                                                          E uro/ERM                            Non-Euro/ERM



Figure F.5: Additional impulse responses to one percent decrease in real house prices when
credit expansion has been one standard deviation above average: 1980-2017. The panels illustrate
the analogues of the results in Figure IX with a sample that starts in 1980Q1 (as opposed to 1990Q1).




                                                                             112
                  house prices (percent)                          stock prices (percent)
           .4




                                                           4.1
           -2.7




                                                           -1.4
           -5.8




                                                           -6.9




                  0           4            8   12                 0           4            8   12




Figure F.6: Impulse responses to one percentage point increase in the policy interest rate (for
the full sample). The panels illustrate the analogues of the baseline regression results in Figure VIII,
where we consider shocks to the policy interest rate as opposed to house prices. Speci…cally, we run the
analogue of the speci…cation in (58) (on the full sample) where the shock variable is the level of the policy
interest rate and the outcome variable is log house prices (left panel) or log stock prices (right panel). The
solid lines plot the coe¢ cients corresponding to the the policy interest rate variable. All regressions include
time and country …xed e¤ects; 12 lags of the level of the policy interest rate, contemporaneous value and
12 lags of the …rst di¤erence of log GDP, 12 lags of the …rst di¤erence of log house prices, and 12 lags of
the …rst di¤erence of log stock prices. The dotted lines show 95% con…dence intervals calculated according
to Newey-West standard errors with a bandwidth of 20 quarters. All regressions are weighted by countries’
PPP-adjusted GDP in 1990. Data is unbalanced quarterly panel that spans 1990Q1-2017Q4. All variables
except for the policy interest rate are adjusted for in‡ation. The sources and the de…nitions of variables are
described earlier in this appendix.




                                                     113
