NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TESTS OF EXCESS FORECAST
VOLATILITY IN THE FOREIGN
EXCHANGE AND STOCK MARKETS

Kenneth A. Froot

Working Paper No. 2362

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1987

I am grateful for discussions with Charles Engel, Jeff Frankel, and Julio Rotemberg,
and to Alberto Giovannini for help in obtaining data. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research programs in International Studies and Financial
Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research,

NBER Working Paper #2362
August 1987

Tests of Excess Forecast Volatility
in the Foreign Exchange and Stock Markets

ABSTRACT

Simple

regression tests that have power against the alternatives that. asset prices and

expected future asset returns are excessively volatile are developed and performed for
the foreign exchange and stock markets. These tests have a number of advantages over
alternative, variance hounds techniques. We find evidence that. both exchange rates and

stock prices are excessively volatile and that expected retuiriis on foreign exchange and

stocks move too much. We also investigate whether these findings ran he attributed to

time-varying risk premia, but in our tests the data provide little support for such an
alternative hypothesis.

Kenneth A. Froot
Sloan School of Management
MIT

Cambridge, MA 02139

Tests of Excess Forecast Volatility

in the Foreign Exchange and Stock Markets

Kenneth A- Front
Sloan School of Management.

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts 1)2130

Beginning with Robert Shiller (1981a). variance l,ouiir]s tests of iiiarket efficiency have gen-

erated an enormous anioiuit of research. Such tests are widely viewer! as an alternative technique
to their predecessors, simple regression tests of market efficiency. Surprisingly little energy, how-

ever, has been applied to examining whether particular regression tests ran uncover evidence for
the same types of alternative hypotheses as tests of variance bounds. This paper develops simple
regression tests with power against the alternative hypotheses that asset prices and expectations of

future asset returns are excessively volatile, and it applies these tests to the foreign exchange and
stock markets.

In the case of the foreign exchange market, several authors investigate the volatility of spot

rates.1 They construct variance bounds relations based on monetary models of exchange rate
determination, and their results provide no support for the view that exchange rates are excessively

volatile.2 But economists seem to plate little faith in these tests, regardless of the results, because

the models used to construct the variance inequalities perform

poorly when tested alone, and

because the assumptions of these models (such as purchasing power parity) are so egregiously

violated in the data. Among a wider audience. the belief that exchange rates are excessively
volatile is widely and unrehectively held, manifesting itself in rerent proposals for international
macroeconomic policy coordination and the adoption of exchange rate target 7.ones.

There is a similar lack of consensus on the presence of excess volatility in the stock market.
tSee Nuang (1981), Vander Kraat, awl Booth (1983), and Meesr' and Singleton (1983).
2 Huang (1981) and Vander Kraats (1983) attrih,itr the violation of their varianri' in.'qisahit.ie. to rxre,sive variability. A
recent, note by Behzad Diba (1987), however, shows that. their ren,lt, rr'sI. nil a romninh' calr,iIat.ioii erron ann that the hounds
are in fact ,ati,fieri once the error is corrected.
1

Early tests showed that. variance hounds based nit siniple present value iiiodets were strongly vio-

lated. A nmnher of later researchers however, poi ited out that the tine-series properties of prices
and dividends were crucial in these rejections.3 Recently. Campbell and Shiller (1987) allow real

prices and dividends to contain unit. roots and hnd that, while the pr'si value model of the
stock price can be statistically rejected, violations of the variance inequalities are not statistically
significant.

The regression tests of excess volatility we develop below liavr several advantages over methods

used previously in the examination of exchaiige rates and stork prices. First. they do not rely on
a complete specification of the underlying fimdainentals which ultimately (leterinine asset values.

Tins is important for assets such as foreign currencies, for which their is nu_dequate model of

fundamentals. Second, the tests do not require knowledge of the stochastic processes driving
the fimdamentais. The results of variance bounds tests for rxressive stork price variability, for

example inve been questioned based oii their assumptions about the driving processes. Third,

our stock price tests allow for a time-varying discotmt factor. This is nportant because many
observers have suggested that the constant discount rates employed in litany tests could account for

findings of excessive volatility. Fourth, our tests have equal power against the opposite alternative

hypothesis, that asset prices and expected returns are in.tujjiriently votatile. Fifth, the tests are
simple. Indeed, they are versions of particular efficient market tests with precise interpretations
given to the alternative hypotheses in each case. Finally. the tests appear to have power against
these alternatives. While we do not specifically compare their power with other test methodologies

in simulations, we use them on actual data and hnd substantial evidence of excessive volatility of
prices and of expected future returns in bot.h the foreign exchange and stock markets,
Of course, failures of market efficiency may he alternatively attributed to risk prenhia that vary

in ways not specified by the underlying model. We attempt to shed light oii the importance of this
alternative hypothesis in two ways. First, we employ survey data on exchange rate expectations in
order to get around the presence of the exchange rate risk prenhiutni that contaminates forward rates.

Second, we ask whether the volatility of stock market returns can account for the hypothesized
behavior of the equity premium. Both of these techniques suggest that our results are not primarily
'See Shiller (1981a), LeRoy and Porter (1981), !C1.'idon (iou), March and M.nnn (1986). V,Tr,t (1984), andMankiw, Romer
and Shapiro (1985).

2

a consequence ol time-varying risk premia.

The paper is organized as follows. In section 1. we discuss the relationship between variance bounds tests of asset price volatility and simple regressiohi tests of market efficiency. While
straightforward1 this relationship seems to be lost in the literature, We then propose in section II a
different definition of the concept that asset prices are "too volatile. ezeesp forecast volatility. This
definition ins clear economic meaning, encompasses the usual variance hoiuttls restrictions, and is

most directly put to use in a regression framework. In an effort to stress that the issues raised in
the first two sections are quite general1 sections Iii and IV apply the tests to the foreign exchange
market, and the U.S. stork market, respectively, Section V concludes.

1. Comparison of Regression Tests with Variance Bounds
Consider an attempt to forecast a stationary variable. 17. iii which the forecast is denoted by

f, and the prediction error by f:

= f, + 1•

(Li)

If the forecast is optimal, then equation (1.1) gives rise to tlit' usual upper and lower bounds on
the variance of the forecast and the prediction error:

var(f,) < var(f,)

(l.2a)

var(c,) < var(fI)

(1.2h)

Clearly, a violation of the tipper variance bound in equation (I .2a) implies that 1, is "too" variable.

In this section we relate this notion ef excessive variability hi the coefficients in simple regression

tests.
Under the alternative hypothesis that the forecast is not efficient, the variance of the prediction

error term, fg, may be expressed:

var(ct) = var(ffl

—

var(f,)

—

2cov(t,.f,)

(1.3a)

= var(ffl + var(f,) — 2cov(f,', 1,)

(1.3b)

From these two expressions, the necessary and sufficient conditions for tile variance bounds to be

satisfied are:

var(f) > var(f1) c=>
3

cov(c,,f,)
var(c,)

I

> ——
2

(1.4a)

var(I, ) > var(r,) <=>

cov(,, 1,)
var(fi)

1

> ——
2

(1.46)

In words, the upper hound iii equation (1.4a) is satisfied if and only if the coefficient, in a regression
of the forecast, f,, on the prediction error, q, yields a coefficient greater than —1/2. The second,

or lower, variance bound in equation (1.4h) is satisfied only when the coefficient, in the opposite
regression -. in which the prediction error, q, is projected onto f1

is greater than minus one half.

In practice, the latter regression is more convenient, to inn because the null hypothesis implies

that , is purely random. Either way, 1i tile regression test the joint. maintained hypothesis that
rational expectations holds and that the model used to generate the forecast 1, is tnie is rejected if
the coefficient is statistically different from zero.

A more complete comparison of the relationship between the regression parameters and the
variance inequalities is presented in Figure 1. In a regression of the predictioti error on the forecast,

q=a+flf,+,.

(1.5)

there is a direct mapping between the coefficient estimate and the validity of the lower bound
(equation (1.4bfl: if $ < —1/2 the lower hound is violated and if ft > —1/2 the lower bound is
satisfied. A finding that ft is positive indicates that both inequalities 1.4a and 1.4b are satisfied.

Notice that if var(f,) > var(ffl, the regression test will detect the violation, and the parameter
estimate will be negative. But the converse is not trite. If the paraiiieter estimate is negative, it

need not follow that the tipper bound is violated. The bottnnm half of Figure 1 shows that the
opposite regression test yields all the same conclusions. bitt for the opposite variance bounds.

Suppose for example that the variable we are trying to forecast, f. is identically zero for all
t. Then any variation in the forecast 1, will he ntirrored iii the forecast error, rg. Clearly, in this
special case both the forecast error and the forecast are excessively variable, so that 1)0th variance
bounds will be violated. The regression in equation (1.5). as well as time opposite regression of the

forecast on the prediction error, will yield ft = —1.

Figure 1 indicates that the unconditional variance bounds inequalities above have less power
to distinguish correlation between the forecast and the prediction error than do the regression tests:

the former require that ft c —1/2, whereas the latter allow us to reject whenever ft < 0. Such
correlation is a clear signal that forecasts can he made more efficient,. But while the relative power of
4

regression versus variance hounds tests has been discussed ('xtensively,1 it is not the only important.
issue in comparing these two test methodologies. First of all, roncentrating only on the subject

of power obscures the fact! that 1)0th types of tests are ha.qed on a single covariance restriction,
expressed in equation (1.4). Second of all, when there are several ways of testing the efficiency of
forecasts, it is worthwhile to ask how well each method distmguitslies among competing alternative

hypotheses, not. just! how well each distinguishes between the null hypothesis and a particular

alternative. For instance, one might pose as an alternative hypothesis that certain forecasts are
inufJieicntly volatile, Before rejecting out of hand such an alt eniative, it is worth recalling that
investigations of the term structure of interest rates have found repeatedly that long rates move too

little relative to short rates.5 Unlike regression tests, variance bounds tests are imahie to uncover
evidence of insufficient volatility in asset prices.

4See Flavin (1983), SidIler (198th), and Frankel and Stork (1987)).
Mankiw and Summers (1984), Shiller, Campbell and Srhornholtz (1983) and (mp)'r1I and Shiller (1984) conclude that
the long rate .rnderreact, to the short rate. Froot (1987a) iusrs sun'ev riata on intrrr,t rat rxprrtat.ioti, to rietermine whether
changing term premia can account For this result.

5

2. Excess Forecast Volatility
What makes a forecast "too' variable? While a violation of the upper variance bound in
equation (1.2a) is a striking example of inefficient forecashiig. its economic sigiiificance lies in the

fact that the prediction errors, t

arc

needlessly large. The mean scpiared prediction error could be

reduced simply by lowering the variance of the forecast around its mean. Similarly, violation of the

lower variance bound implies that! a marginal reduction in the variance of the forecast. will reduce

the mean squared prediction error. Thus the necessary and sufficient condition for a forecast, to
he excessively volatile is that a reduction in the variaice of the forecast reduces the mean squared

prediction error. An "insufficiently' volatile forecast is one that can be improved upon merely by
increasing the forecast variance.

It is intuitively clear that such a test for excessive or insufficient forecast volatility can be
implemented by running a regression. The derivative of tile Divan squared forecast error in equation
(1.4h) with respect. to the standard deviation of the forecast. Tç. holding all

8E() = 2c,(1 BVlf

(yr.

else

constant is:6

(2.1)

= —2pa.
where p is tile correlation coefficient between 1, and f,. and p is the correlation coefficient between
,

and 1,. From the last term in expression (2.1). there is excessive forecast volatility whenever p is

negative. Of course, the sign this last term is opposite to that. of the slope coefficient. in a regression

of the prediction error, q on f. Thusthe deftnitions of excessive and insufficient forecast volatility
provide a complete set of alternative hypotheses in regressions of r1 on I.

3. Excess Vailability of Exchange Rates
We now formulate a general exchange rate niodel that allows us to test for excessive volatility

in the spot. exchange rate. Consider a model in which the log of the spot rate is equal the sum of
51n taking thi, derivative, -we hold constant the variance or the forecasted varia),le, I. a. well a. the correlation between
f, and f. The intuition for such an experiment ran he seen as molto... Stippor. tb. r,rrent foreract is formed as a Unear
combination of information available contemporaneously, I,:

= a + I,b,,
where b1 is a HI vector of parameters. An increase in the variance olf, l,olriing var(f7) anti p ronst-aiit I., analogous to scaling

the vector up by a constant amount.

6

two things: an arbitrary transfonnatiori of a vector of fiiiidaiiieiitats. and a speculative term based
on expected future price changes, conditional on all currently available inform ation:7

c + aAS+I

=

(3.1)

where a is a positive parameter, and As÷1 is the expected percentage depreciatioii in the spot

rate between time t and t H- 1. There are a number of specific exchange rate models which at the

form of equation (3.1), each of which leads to a different interpretation of the parameter a and
the fundamentals term c, . For example, equation (3.1) ran he iiterpreted in terms of the flexibleprice monetary model of Mussa (1976), Frenkel (1976) and Bilsrm (1978). Then a corresponds to

the semi-elasticity of money demand with respect to the alteruativc' rate ofrctiirn (which would
be the interest differential, expected depreciation or the expected inflation differential), and C is
proportional to the log of the ratio ol the domestic Inruiry supply to the foreign money supply, plus

any other determinants of money demand.8 Variance hounds based on tins version of the flexibleprice monetary model are considered by Huang (1981). Meese and Singleton (1983), Vander Kraats

and Booth (1983) and Diba (1987).

Equation (3.1) is usually solved iteratively, so that the spot price is expressed solely in terms
of the expected future path of fundamentals:°

=

(1

+ ar'

(3.2)

A perfect. foresight price analogous to that of Shiller (1981a) would prevail if agents knew with

certainty the actual future path of c:

= (1

+ ar' (

(I

(33)

Under rational expectations the perfect loresight price. s. is tl1 sum of the forecast, s1, plus an
error term which is conditionally independent of contemporaneous information:

= s, + cg.

(3.4)

'flen.kel and Muna (1986) di,ciise various interpretution, of thi, gnteral modeL
'Equation (3.1) can also be interpreted in terms of the sticky-moiietary model of Donil,isrli (1970) and Frankel (1979),
portfolio balance modei. of the exchange rate, and in term, of a static (ArM moilel.

The solution given in equation (3.2) assume, that tbr transversalit.y condition hold,: flmj....rn (rt) + = 0. Thus
ratjonal bubbles will violate any variance hoimd, constnicted using the rornnihatioxi for • in equation (3.3).

7

To induce stationarit.y, a naive forecast can be subtracted front both sides:1°
—

= — , -1- ',.

(3.5)

The (liscllssion in the previous sections suggests a regression of the prediction error, t, on the
forecast, s1 — x1, to test for excessive volatility. Bitt, slice the error term is not observable there

is no direct way to implement such a test.. If the iteration in equations (3.2) and (3.3) stopped
at a finite terminal date, as in Mankiw, Homer and Shapiro (1085), then the error term would be
observable, but would be highly serially correlated.11

Even if the error and the perfect foresight spot rate are observable, there are several wellknown difficulties in implementing both the regressions and tests of variance bounds based on
equation (3.5). First, both tests assume that the vector o1ftndaiiientals (defined here as everything

influencing the currency but for expected future appreciation) is properly specified. In the case
of the exchange rate, there is little agreement on or evidence iii favor of a short list of important
macroeconomic variables. The monetary model, winch employs niolley supplies and measures of real

income, is notorious for producing unstable coefficient estimates and for failing to account for any

positive percentage of exchange rate movements.12 Even absent issues of imprecise measurement

of income and money, few macroeconomists would argue that money demand is an exact linear
function of these variables alone, or that purchasing power parity holds exactly in the short rim.

Second, even if the model of fundamentals is not contentions, variance hounds tests are not

robust to misspecification of the dynamic process of the forcing variables. The most obvious
illustration is in the stock market. Marsh and Merton (1986). for example. show how measured
variances will violate the tipper variance bound in every sample if dividends follow a nonstationary

process driven by lagged stock prices.'3 The same sort of criticism applies to variance bounds
relations in the foreign exchange market. In a direct analogy to the Marsh and Merton example1

if monetary policy is set in response to the (noustatioiiary) exchange rate and if the monetary
model is trite, then measured variance hounds will be violated in every sample. Without precise
knowledge of the stochastic process of c1, small sample biases will plague unbiased measurement of
'"Mankiw, Romer anti Shapiro (1985), and Frankel and Stock (1987) also use ,iivr Forecast., to i,,dsice stationarity.

'Scott (1985) rliscusses the serial correlation properties of such an error, anti 1,5cc it. in a regression test, of excessive volatility
in the stock market.
'See Frankel and Meese (1987) for the implications of the empirical failure. of this model.
'tcamphell and Shiller (1987) cannot reject. the hypothesis that. rcal iliviciends ront.ain a 'mit. ront..
8

the variances.14

These difficulties can be avoided by deriving tests which do not req ure iteration of equation

(3.1). Consider an alternative perfect foresight price. s.

winch

prevails if agents know with

certainty the subsequent. change in the spot rate:

= c1 + aAs,1

(3.6)

Under rational expectations, this perfect foresight spot rate is the sum of the forecast, B, plus an
error term that is conditionally independent, of contemporaneous inforuii ation
—

., =

, + (,

(3.7)

where we have subtracted the nive forecast from both s and s,.

The prediction error g now has a simple interpretation. in that it is proportional to the error
macic when predicting the subsequent spot rate:
C, = rt(s,..l —

(3,8)

The one period difference in dating of tile right- and left-hand sides of equation (3.8) implies one
need not wait many periods (or forever) to observe the perfect Foresight error: it. is known at time
t-l-1.15 In addition, the error is serially uncorrelated under the null hypothesis, a desirable property
for our regression tests.
While c is itself unobservable, we can nevertheless draw consistent inferences about its behav-

ior. Most of the models mentioned above. including the iiirmetary models tested by Huang (1981)

and Vander Kraats and Booth (1983), assume that covered and uncovered interest parity hold, i.e.

that assets denominated in different currencies are perfect substitutes. These assumptions imply
the forward discount. is equal to expected depreciation:

'

fd, = a1.

(3.9)

Papers discussing these problems include Marsh and Merton (1986). Icleirlon (1988), flaviu, (1983) Mankiw, Romer and
Shapiro (1985). Mattey and Meese (1987), and Frankel and Nicest (1987). See also Campisell and SlillIer (1987) who us., the
theoiy of co-integration to allow for nonstat.ionarity in asset prices and the forcing variables.
'" This removes one important criticism of the regression-based tests we develop below. Shiller (1081h), for erample, argues
that because asset. prices depend on the discounted value of an infinite stream of future fmidame,ial,, the perfect foresigM

error will not be fully known in a given sample and tints regression tests will stiffer fron, a "data alignment' problem. The
perfect foresight error in equation (3.6) is not subject to this problem.

9

where fd, is the log of the forward rate innus the log of the spot rate. Of course, if the forward
discount exceeds expected depreciation by a constant risk premium, we ran still draw inferences
about. the perfect, foresight prediction error. In this case the forecast error, ,, is aim affine transfor-

=

niation of the forward rate prediction error.

As,

—

winch is observable one period

later and is not dependent. on precise specification of the lundaniemital variables:
t, = a(4÷1)

-

aA.

(3.10)

The exchange risk premium term, A, is zero if equation (3.0) holds exactly.

From equation (3.7), the spot rate is too variable around :r, if the coefficient in a regression
of J'H on s1 — x is negative, ad not. variable enough if time coefficient is positive. This inference

holds even though the parameter a is unknown, In contrast, it is not possible to test. the validity

of variance bounds constricted from equation (3.7) unless the value of it is known. Indeed, the
appropriate magnitude of a has been a point of contention. Huamig (1081) and Vander Kraats and

Booth (1983) both find evidence that variance hounds are violated based on their assumed values

of the semi-elasticity of money demand, a. Deha (1087) argues iii response that the values these

authors chose for a are too low, and that the variance inequalities are satisfied for larger, more
plausible semi-elasticities. Our regression tests, however. can remain agnostic on the precise value

of a, as long as it is positive. The regressions also do not place any restrictions on the identity of
the fimdamental variables included in c,, or on the stochastic processes generating these variables.

Next we turn to candidates for the naive forecast. ,.

One

potential candidate is the log of the

lagged spot. rate, so that the deviation of the current spot rate from r1 is just the lagged percentage

change, As,. Another possible replacement for , would In' the long-rim equilibrium spot rate, S,
which evolves over time according to relative inflation rates iii the two countries. Note that. if the
long-nm eqmulibrium is constant., then the log of the spot rate is itself stationary, and, in terms of
equation (1.1), we can regress q on 1, directly.

3.1. Tests of Excessive Forecast Volatility in the Spot Exchange Rate
We can now test whether spot exchange rates are excessively variable. Our regressions in this
section will be of the form:

= a + j9(s, — x,) +
10

q,.

(3.11)

The null hypothesis is that the spot rate is an efficient forecast of r. or that a = /9 = 0, and the
error term,
is purely random. Before proceedi ig to the estimation, we make several general
points about the specification of equation (3.11).

First, in the discussion so far and in Tables Ia. lb and Ic below. We use the forward rate as a

proxy for the expected future spot rate, as in equation (3.9). This is useful because the monetary
model tested by Huang (1981), Vander Kraats and Booth (1983) and Diha (1987), as well as many

other exchange rate models, take the forward rate to he equal to the expected future spot rate.
Second, if this assumption is relaxed (as it would he in a IILOFe general model), tile forward

rate would be the sum of a time-varying risk prenuuui and the expected future spot rate. Since
the forward rate prediction errors will also include the risk ln'1niuin. biased estimates of /9 will

result. One solution to tins problem (other than assunung it away) woiilrl he to use in place of
the forward rate another data source that does not suffer from tltr' interference of a risk premium,
such as survey data on exchange rate expectations. By using these data in the second set of tables
below, we attempt to augment the generality of our estimates of /9 in equation (3.11) beyond those

that would be implied by restrictive models that assume the risk premium does not change over
time.'°
Third, some estimates of equation (3.11) already appear in the literature, only with a different

interpretation attached to the alternative hypothesis, 9

11. Indeed, Frankel and Froot (1987)

present estimates of equation (3.11) for all of the candidates for X mentioned iii the preceding
section. They interpret the results in the same way as have previous authors: as statements about
the behavior of expectations, instead of statements about the behavior of the spot rate. To see this
alternative interpretation, posit a particular model of expectatiniis formation:
= (1 — t91)s, + 01z,.

(3.12)

which says that the expected future spot rate is formed as a weighted average of the contempora-

neous spot rate and the other element, x1. The actual spot procss is then assumed to follow:
81-4-i = (1 — 02)s, +

i92z +

(3.13)

16 To guarantee consistent estimate, of fl we asqump that the media,, c,irvry rrpone is rqiial to "t.l,r (unobservable) market
expectation plus random measuremeS error.
11

Equation (311) ran he obtained by subtracting equation (3.14) from (3.13). so that /9 = 6 —

It follows that if expectations place too little wright on the 'otIirr information x1 (or too much
weight.

on the conteinjioraneous spot rate) relative to what

is rational. /9 <

0. In the case where

x1 is the long-run equilibrium spot rate, for example, a finding that /9 is negative implies that
expectations are insufficiently regressive.

Fourth, several issues of econometrics should 1w mentioned before we proceed. Equation
(3.11) and other equations that follow can he estimated using OLS with with standard errors

calculated using Hansen's (1982) Generalized Method-of-Moments (CMM). Where appropriate,

the covariance matrix estimators allow for serial correlation induced under the null hypothesis
by overlapping observations. Due to the downward finite-sample bias of tlieheteroskedasticityconsistent 0MM covariance estimates, we report two sets of shindard errors for the coefficients.
The upper set are calculated assuming the residuals are Ijoinoskedastic. and the lower set. allow

for unknown conditional heteroskedasticity. if we wish to lw on the safe side, we should weigh
this downward bias more heavily than a Toss in power. and therefore draw inferences based on

the larger of the two reported standard errors.17 We use Seeiiungly Unrelated Squares (SUR)

to estimate parameter estimates for all the currencies combined in Tables la. lb and ic. SUR
is consistent and asymptotically efficient in the absence of conditional heteroskedasticity and the
presence of contemporaneous correlation. Finally, in all of the regressions each currency was given

its own constant terms, which we do not report to save spare.

3.2. Results
We

-

now turn to the estimation of equation (3.11). Tables Ia. lb. and lc employ the forward

rate as a measure of the expected future spot rate for each of the various Z'5 discussed above.
The data are monthly observations on six currencies from Jiiw 1973 to Febniary 1987. Tables
2a through 2c follow tile same pattern, hut instead use exchange rate survey data from Money

Market Services (MMS) to measure expected depreciation during the period from January 1984 to
February 1986
Table la tests the case in which the long-nm equilibrium spot rate is treated as an arbitrary

1See Froot (1987b) for evidence of the downward bia, in hct.rn,krila.tirity.rniicit.ont standard rrrnr. The bia, is present

regerdlen of the prnenc of conditional heteroAeda.tirit.

12

constant, so that the log level of the spot rate is presumed Iv, be stationary. Each of the point estimates of

is negative, indicating excessive volatility. The tiieasured coefficients for the individual

currencies are not very precise, however. To check whether an SITU. estimator was appropriate,
White (1980) tests of conditional heteroskedasticity were performed for each currency, and none
rejected the hypothesis that the residuals are homoskedastic. When we combine all six currencies,

however, the data reject the hypothesis that 5 = 0 at the 5 percent. level. In Table lb. we use
a second measure of the long-rim equilibrium spot rate, allowing it to evolve over time according

to inflation differentials. Table ic replaces x1 with the log of the lagged spot rate. Both tables
report results very similar to those in Table Ia: all of the point estimates of 5 are negative, and
the estimates for the combined currencies are significantly less than zero.

One possible explanation for the negative coefficients in Tables la-Ic is that they are induced

by errors in the measurement of the spot rate. The average of the hid and ask rates, winch we
used in the regressions, will overstate or understate the relevant price by a maximum of about
0.1 percent. Such measurement error by itself generates a negative regression coefficient since it is

present in both the left- and right-hand side variables. The magnitude of this effect is given by:

var(v,)

0.000001

var(A,)

0.0011

0M009

where 0.0011 is the sample average variance of monthly exchange rate changes. It appears that
this source of measurement error would not he enough to explain imiore than a small fraction of the
magnitude of the estimated coefficients.
Tables 2a though 2c use survey data with forecast horizous of one month or less in place of the

forward rate.19 If the forward rate contains a time-varying risk premium which is responsible for

the negative parameter estimates, then we would expect very different estimates here. h fact, of
the estimates in all three tables is negative, and the magnitudes are comparable to those in Tables

la, lb and ic. Several of the estimates are even slightly more significant: we can reject /9 = 0 at
the five percent level in two cases-20
The OLS regression errors turn out to he bel.eroskrdastic when crinditioning on the Forward discount, but not when
conditioning on the contemporaneous spot rate, previous spot. ra e changes, or ,leviatinx.s from the long-rut. equilibrium (Table!
1 a, ib and Ic, respectively).

' The sun'eys are conducted by 1fl4S on a weekly or l,iweekly l,asis For four c,lrrencies (the pound, DM, Swiss franc, and
y'n) against the dollar, See Ftoot and Frankel (1986) and Domingi.er (1986) for a slearsiption ol these data.
20 Frankel and Froot (1967) present similar tests for slineys with forecast, horizons of three months or longer. They also find
negative estimate, of fi, which can he interpreted in the present context a.. evidence of excessive volatility.

13

3.8. Tests of Excessive Speculation
Tue framework set. tip In the first two sections also allows its to ask whether expected depreciation us excessively or insufficiently variable. Consider a legiessiohi of the expertational error on

expected depreciation:
Asf+I —

=n+

where the null hypothesis is again that = /? =

0,

flAs÷1 -f t

(3.14)

and that the residual is purely random. The

alternative hypothesis in this regression is exactly what Bilson (1981) termed "excessive spent-

lation:" a finding that /9

C

0 implies investors would do better to move their expectations of

the future exchange rate toward the contemporaneous spot rate. thereby reducing the variability

of expected depreciation. Indeed, if the spot rate follows a random walk, expected depreciation
should he reduced toward zero. A prime motivation for investigating the variability of expected
depreciation comes from equation (3.1): if expected depreciation moves too much, this may cause

the spot rate to be too variable.

If we take the forward discount to measure expected depreciation. then equation (3.14) is
equivalent to the usual test of forward rate ianhiasedness. Table .3 presents estimates of this speci-

fication on monthly data for the duration of the floating rate period. The estimates reaffirm what
many papers testing forward rate unhiasedness have found: that the optimal forecast of the future

spot rate change places negative weight on the forward rate.21 If one is to accept that the risk
prenutim is constant (or, somewhat more weakly. uncorrelated with the forward discount) then
the significantly negative estimates of /9 reported in Table 3 indicate that expected depreciation
is excessively volatile. Indeed, many of the coefficients in Table 3 are significantly less than 1/2,

indicating that the lower variance hound in equation (1 .41i) is violated. Huang (1984) compares

directly the variance of the forward rate prediction error with the variance of spot rate changes.

Although he finds that the point estimate variance of the forward rate error is greater (so that
the lower variance hound is violated), he cannot reject the hypothesis that. the variances are equal.

In the same paper, he is able to reject using regression tests of the form of equation (3.14). This
suggests that the regression framework may in practice have more power not only in detecting the
alternative of a nonzero covariance between the forecast and the forecast error but also in detecting
21

Hodrick (1951) gives a thorough summary of th lit,eratur, tnting mr I'ias I,, lii. Forwarri ercha,ige rate.

14

statistically significant. violations of variance bounds.

Most authors interpret the results (rolli regressions such as those in Table 3 as evidence of
a time-varying risk premium contained in the forward discount.,22 Once again, we can put. the
survey data on expected depreciation to use because they are not contaniinat.ecl by a risk premium.

Regressions of equation (3.14) are reported in Front. and Frankel (1986) for 3 different survey
sources over a variety of time periods and forecast horizons.23 All of the estimates of fi

are all

highly significant and negative, suggesting that the results reported in Table 3 are not evidence
of a time-varying risk premium, and that they reflect instead excessively volatile expectations of
future depreciation.

4. Tests of Excessive Forecast Volatility n the U.S. Stock Market
Next we develop our regression tests of excessive volatility hi the stork market. A necessary
first order condition from a representative investor's utility maximization states that the real stock

price must equal the expected future ratio of marginal utilities. weighted by future stock prices:
mg1(p,÷1 +
=
(4.1)
dv))

where P, is the nominal stock price at time t, d1 is the current dividend payment, q is the price
of the consumption good, and mg+1 = —6

the discounted ratio of the marginal utility of

consumption in between periods t and t + 1.24 The associated first order condition for a nominally
riskless bond is:

=
(1 +
(4.2)
E1(m1+11)
Combining equations (4.1) and (4.2) and solving For P, we have that the nominal stock price is
equal to the discounted value of the next period price plus dividends:

where A =

cov(m'

P7 + d,
(1 + i,)(l + A)
I + r1.), and r,+1 is the realized return on stocks.

(4)
The perfect foresight

price is then:

=

1'+ + d,
(1+i,)(I--A)

(4.4)

See for example Hansen and Hodrick (1983), Hodrick and Srivast,ava (1984) and Fama (1984).
See section 4, particularly Table,6 and 7. We rio not. report the rstimat.-, tier" both },ecause they are reported elsewhere
and, in any case, are similar to thos. in table 3.
"The way equation (4.1) is written, the forthcoming dividenri or coupon payment. j.q fully known at. time S. This is done
merely t.o simplify the exposition; the following discussion al5o applies when the rash flows over the intervening period are

uncertain.
15

We focus on nominal magnitudes in equations (4.3) and (4.4) in order to avoid using aggregate
price data winch contain more noise than data on stork prices and dividends. Notice that. the risk
premium, A. is the sum of three components:

COV,

_______

11+rt+ij

/

I

=COVIçrnI+I.

+ r,1

I + r,

I
+ covf(m.f+i.

+Et(rnc+t)covs(ri+i

I
(45)

The first. term is the covariance of marginal utility with the subsequent real return on stocks the

usual reward for risk when returns are expressed in real terms. The second term is the covariance

of stock returns and inflation. The third term is the covariaiic' of marginal utility with inflation.
For the time being we allow the discount factor. ((1 + A)(i + i,W' to vary only with the nominal
interest rate, holding A (and therefore the conditional covarialires in equation (4.5) constant). Later
we consider a generalization of this model, in which tin' conditional covariances can also vary with

price-dividend ratios and nonunal interest rates.

-

The prediction error of the contemporaneous stork price is:

=
—
—

— P7÷1

(1+A)(1+i,)

—

— P,

(4.6)

P,1(1 — (1 + A)(1 + I,)) + d1
(1-4-A)(I+i,)

Dividing through by z1 yields an equation in which each tenti is stationary:

1v,

r

P,

Z1

Z

P,

(4.7)

If the correlation of the modified prediction error on the left-hand side of equation (4.7) with
negative, stock prices are excessively volatile around x. Although tims' prediction error,

is

is

not

observable, we can observe the left-hand side of equation (4.7) up to a term proportional to
Using equation (4.6), we have our regression equation:

41 = a + flp, + ti,+i
where p1 = (r,41

—

(4.8)

i,)(P,/zj) is the adjusted excess return on stocks over short-term nominally

riskless bills, and p, = P1/zg. The joint hypothesis that equation (4.3) holds and expectations are
16

rational implies that. a =

0, fi = A and the residual is purely raiicloiu . Equation

(4.8) simply tests

whether the one period excess return on stocks over Thills is systematically related to the current
level of stock prices.

For stocks, the natural candidate for z is the conteiiiporaiic'oiis dividend payment, d,. The
hypothesis that the price-dividend ratio is nonstationary appears to be strongly rejected, so that
the usual asymptotic clistrihutioii theory can he applied iii the regressions heIow.2 We therefore
ask whether stock prices are excessively volatile around cluTeilt rlivideiids. Indeed, there is already

some evidence that when the price-dividend ratio is low, rationally expected future excess returns
are high.2°

There are four main advantages to using equations (4.3) and (4.4) as opposed to an iterated
version which expresses the price as a weighted average of r'xpecterl future dividends. First it is

easy to allow the discount factor ((1 + A)(1 + I,)) to vary over time. By contrast, iterated models

quickly become intractable when the discount factor varies.27 It seems intuitively plausible that
discount factors vary considerably; allowing for this source of variation may well reverse many prior

findings of excessive variability in stock prices. A second advantage to allowing for a time-varying
discount factor is that the specification in equation (4.4) can then be consistent with a wide range of

i.it.ility functions. Most infinitely iterated solutions to equation (4.3) use a constant discount factor,
and consequently, the associated perfect foresight price is consistent with utility maximization only

if agent.s are risk neutral or if consiunption is perfectly fixed over time. The third advantage of
tlus simple specification is that we can remain agnostic on the time-series behavior of the price and
dividend processes, so long as the price-dividend ratio is stationary. A Fourth advantage is that. our
regression equation (4.8) is insensitive to the price level. The excess nominal return, i'T+1, is equal

to the excess real return bitt for a constant term due to Jenseiis inequality (the sum of the last
two terms in equation (4.5)). Similarly, the price-dividend ratio is unaffected by the current price
of consumption goods.
3See Campbell and Shiller (1987).
36 See Flood, Hodrick and Kaplan (1980), Campbell and ShiVer (1987, arni flnia and French (1987) for evidence on the
ability ol the price'dividendratio to predict future stock returns. ICeim and Stambaugli (1986) 'ase a variety of proxies for stock
prices, such as the stock prices of smalI'capitalization firms, to predict future returns on the market. They find evidence of
substantial predictive power. In fact, their estimated coefficies.s are all negative. though they (to not. interpret this as evidence
ci excessive volatility.

"In their study of the behavior of the dividend'price ratio. Campl'rll anti Shill.'r (1987) avoid the added complexl' by

linearizing an infinitely iterated model.

17

4.1. Results
Table

4 presents our estimates of equation (4.8). The data on stork returns, both inclusive

and exclusive of dividends, are the Center for Research in Seriirities Prices (CR.SP) monthly valueweighted index, which nins from 1926 to 1985. Monthly interest rates on 11.5. government securities

with approximately one month to maturity come from Ihbots011 Associates (1086).28 The first row

of Table 4 uses monthly data for the entire 60 year sample period. Monthly dividend measures
contain noise, however, since firms do not change their dividend payments each month. One way

to avoid this problem is to follow Campbell and Shiller (1987) and Marsh and Merton (1987) by

aggregating the data up to the annual level. Estimates of equation (4.8) on annual data over
the same period are presented in the second row of Table 4. The estimate of fi is negative and
statistically different from zero at the five percent level. Unfortunately in this regression, excess
returns on stocks were calculated using a one-month riskless rate rolled over, because the Ibbotson

data do not contain a riskless annual rate. A second, and perhaps jnon' satisfactory, means of
eliminating the measurement error in monthly dividends would 1 n' to employ a moving average of

dividend payments over the last 120 months. We term this naive forecast d0. and use it for the
regressions reported in rows 4 through 9 of Table 4. This pi'orNllire has the advantage of allowing

us to use the monthly data, so that the excess returns are computed above the appropriate riskless

rate. The estimates for the entire sample period, reported in row 4, are negative and statistically
different from zero at the five percent level.

4.2. Excessive Volatility of Expected Stock Market Returns
Analogously to section 4.2, we next ask whether ripener! rcfltrn., on the stock market are

excessively volatile. in terms of the hrst two sections, the perfect foresight variable, f,' can be
interpreted as the realized gross nominal return on storks, and the forecast, 1,, can he interpreted

as the expected gross return. Equation (4.6) implies that the expected retuni is (approximately)

equal to the nominal interest rate plus the premium. A. Thus our regression of q on f1 can he
accomplished in this case by regressing the excess return oii stocks on a constant and the nominal

interest rate:

= a + $1, + 'U-fl
This

(4.9)

standard data set is used by Marsh and Mrrton (1987), Famq anti French (1987), Campbell and Shiller (1987), and
T'oterha and Summer, (1987) among other,.

18

where

=

— j,.

implies that a =

A

The joint hypothesis that. equation (43) holds and expectations are rational

and /9 =

The alternative hypothesis is that /9 is less or greater than zero:

that expected stock market. returns are excessively or insufficiently volatile, respectively.
Table 5 presents estimates of equation (4.8). The first VOW reports the results from weekly data

over the period 1973-84, using a seven-day eurodollar interest ra!e. The estimate of /9 is -3.98, and
is statistically different. from zero at the one percent. level. Once again, the finding that /9 < —1/2

indicates that the lower variance hound is violated so that the forecast error has greater variance
than actual excess returns. The second row of Table 5 itsesase yen-clay interest rate on repurchase
agreements collateralized by ftS. government securities, which is available from DPI beginning in
1980. The coefficient here is statistically less than —1/2 at the one percent level. In rows 3 through

9 of Table 5 we report estimates of equation (4.9) for longer horizons (one month and one year)
over the full Ibbotson sample and over 10 year siibsamples. All bitt one of the estimates of /9 are
less than zero1 though none is as large or statistically sigiiihcant as in the weekly data.303'

43. Excessive Forecast Volatility or Time-Varying Equity Premia?
Naturally, an alternative explanation for the statistically significant coefficients in Tables 4 and

5 is that the eqnity premium, A, varies over time. Uufortunately, we have no survey data on stock
returns to which we-can appeal. Nevertheless we can gain a crude sense of whether a time-varying

equity premium could he responsible for the results. If the foregoing negative coefficients were
generated by a risk premium, then when nominal interest rates or price-dividend ratios are high,

expected excess returns are low. Lower expected excess returns imply that the equity premium,

.1 + r,÷1), must he high. In view of the large amoimt of predictable variation in
stock market variances and the consistently low variability of consumption, mitch of the variation
in the equity premium is likely to he due to changes in volatility iif stock ietimrmis.32 Indeed, Malkiel

(1979) and Pindyck (1984) argue that market movements largely reflect movements in perceived
we include the second-order term, M1, then the null hypothesis implies n = /I = A.
10The findings in Table 5 appear to he independent of' those in Table 4. When the exress market return is regressed
simultaneously on the price-dividend ratio and the interest rat.., isoth eneffiripigs remain virtually unchanged from those
reported in the tables above. Indeed, the. correlation between tlw pdre-.liviillrnil ratio a,;t flip short-term interest rate in the
1926-85 sample is only 0.07.
' A number of authors have found evidence of a negative correlation l,etwrrn short-term nominal interest rates and subsequent

stock market. return! both in the U.S. and in other industrialized countries as well (see Fama and Schwert, 1977 and Solnik,
1983). This is usually interpreted to mean t.h5t stock return, respond negat.i'eIy to .'xpect.-cl inflation, An intertemporal model
of asset pricing, which posits correlation between contemporaneosi.. returns and future exported returns is usually invoked to
explain this correlation.
Merton (1980) consider, a model in which erpert.ed excess returns on the market are proportional to the variance.

19

stork market volatility.33

This alternative hypothesis would then imply that tin' expected volatility of stoc.k returns is

negahvely correlated with the price-dividend ratio and the interest rate. To test for this pattern,
we regress a measure of

volatility on price-dividend ratios and then on interest rates:

= a1 + siP, + 71,11

&2,I+1 = (Y2 + 8211 + P721+1

where

(4.lOa),

(4.1Db),

is the unexpected return oii the stork ]uarket front equation (4.8), and &2v+1 is

unexpected return on the stork market from equation (4.0). TIn' time-varying equity premium
hypothesis iniplies that & < 0. Under rational expectations and the assumption that equation

(4.10) is a complete model of the expected future variance. the error terms are attributable to
news, and are therefore conditionally independent of iiiforniatirnt available at time t. In case the

error term contains left-out (orthogonal) variables we report standard errors using a covariance
matrix estimator due to Newey and West (1985) which allows for unknown serial correlation.
Table Ga and 6h present estimates of equations (4.1(M) and (4.1Db), respectively. The estimates

of 8 in Table Ga for different samples are of different signs. but only the estimate in the first row is

statistically significant at the 5 percent level and it is positive. Table Gb reports estimates of the
regression of unexpected returns on the interest rate. Here the estimates of 82 for the seven-day
holding periods are positive at the 5 percent level. On the other hand. the estimates for monthly
and annual holding periods are statistically less than zero. Fot' tin' shorter holding periods, there is
no evidence that the findings of excessively volatile expected returns ran be interpreted as variation
in the equity premia.34

The' analysis of Fot.erha and Summer, (197) argues against this alternative hypothesis. It show, that while volatility
ritang., are substantial, they do not appear to he persistent enough to explain large movement, in stork prices.
5401o'annini and Jorion (1987) regress the srpared return, on a rn,mhrr of as,et,s on seven-day nominal interest rate,1 and
report results similar to those in Table 6k Th.-y also find a signillrantlv positive relationship.

20

5. Conclusions
We have developed several simple regression tests of eXcessIve volatility in the foreign exchange

market. awl the 15.3. stock market. These tests are easy to implement and are free of many the
small-sample difficulties that plague tests of variance bounds relations.
In the foreign exchange market, we find evidence (based 1)11 new results and reinterpretations of

old results) that exchange rates are excessively volatile. This Rnding holds whether expected future

spot rates are measured using the forward rate or survey data oji exchange rate expectations. One
potential explanation for such excessive volatility is that expected depreciation is too variable. We
cite and confirm an abundance of earlier evidence suggesting that expected exchange rate changes
are indeed too volatile. Once again, this conclusion holds regardless of whether the expected future

spot rate is measured using the forward rate or survey data.
We also find analogous evidence of predictable variation in excess stock iiiarket returns, which

within our model can he interpreted as excessive stork price volatility and excessive volatility in

expected stock market returns. For shorter holding periods. We find 110 evidence that changes
in perceived volatility could account for tile inovenients iii equity premia required to explain this
excessive variation. Thus we join a host of other authors who reject the simple representative agent

model of stock prices, hut this time in favor of the specific alternative that expectations and stock
prices are too variable.

21

6. References
Bhlson, J., "Rational Expectations and the Exchange Rate." iii The Economic,, of Exchange
Rates: Selected Readings, 'ed. LA. Frenkel and H- Johnson. Addison- Wesley, 1978.
.

'The Speculative Efficiency Hypothesis, .lournal of Business, Vol. 54, pp. 433-451.

Campbell, J.Y. and Ri. Shiller, "The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of flthire Dividends and Discomt Factors: rnirneo, 1987.
,

"Cointcgration and Tests of Present Value Models. forthcoming, Journal of

Political Economy, 1987.

, "A Simple Account of the Behavior of Long-Terni Interest Rates," American
Economic Review, Vol. 74, No. 2. pp. 44-48. 1984.

Diba, B.T., "A Critique of Variance Bounds Tests for Monetary Exchange Rate Models,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 19. pp. 104-111., 1987.

Dorninguez, K., "Are Foreign Exchange Forecasts Rational: New Evidence from Survey Data,"
Economics Letters, Vol. pp. , 1986.

Dornhusch, It., "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynaniics.' Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 84, pp. 1161-74. 1976.
Farna, E.F., "Forward and Spot Exchange Rates
pp. 697-703, 1984.

.Inurpvjl of Monetary Economica, Vol. 36,

Fama, E.F., and KR. Ftench, "Permanent and Temporary Components of Stock Prices,"
Center for Research in Securities Prices Working Paper No. 178, University of Chicago,
1987.

Faina, E.F. and G.W. Schwert, "Asset Returns and Inflation." .lournal of Financial Economic.,,
Vol. 5, pp. 319.38, March 1977.

Flavin, M., "Excess Volatility in the Financial Markets: A Reassessment of the Empirical
Evidence,' Journal of Political Economy, Vol. Ol.pp. 029-56. 1983.
Flood, R.P., R.J. Hodrick, and P.l(aplan. "An Evaluation of Recent Evidence on Stock Market
Bubbles," NBER Working Paper No. 1971. 1986.

Frankel, LA., "On the Mark: A Theory of Floating Exchange Rates Based on Real Interest
Differentials," American Economic Review. pp. 610.622. 1970.

Fran]cel, iA. and K.A. Froot, "Using Survey Data to Test Standard Propositions Regarding
Exchange Rate Expectations, American Economic Review, Vol. 77, 1, pp. 133-153,
1987.

Frankel, iA. and R. Meese, "Are Exchange Rates Excessively Variable?," forthcoming in
Macroeconomics Annual, 1987, ed. S. Fischer, MIT Press. 1987.

Frankel, J.A. and 3. Stock, "Regression vs. Volatility Tests of Foreign Exchange Markets,"
Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol 6. pp. 49-56, 1987.
Frenkel, J.A. "A Monetary Approach to the Exchange Rate': Doctrinal Aspects and Empirical
Evidence1" Scandinavian Journal of Economic..,. Vol. 78, pp. 200-24, 1976.
22

Frenkel, .1.A. and ML. Mussa, "Asset. Markets, Exchange Rates, and the Balance olPayments,"
iii R.W. Jones and PB. Kenen eds., Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 2, North.
Holland, 1985.

Froot, K.A., "New Hope for the Expectations Hypothesis of the Term Structure of Interest
Rates," Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 1987a.
, "Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimation with Cross-Sectional Dependence and
Heteroskedasticity in Cross-Sectional Financial Dat.a. Massachusett.s Institute of Tech-

nology, 1987b.

Froot, K.A. and .1k Frankel, "Interpreting Tests of Forward Discount Bia.q Using Survey Data
on Exchange Rate Expectations,' NBER Working Paper. no. 1963, 1086.

Ciovannini, A. and P. Jorion, "Interest Rates and Risk Preinia ii] the Stork Market and in
the Foreign Exchange Market,' Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 6, pp.
107-24, March 1987.

Hansen, L.P., "Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moinent.s Estimators,"
Econorrtetrica, VoL 50, pp. 1029-1054. 1982.

Hansen, LI'. and H..,). Hodrick, "Forward Rates as Optimal Predictors of Future Spot Rates:
An Econometric Analysis,' Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 88. pp. 829-53, 1980.

Hodrick, R.J., "The Empirical Evidence on the Efficiency of Forward and Futures Foreign
Exchange Markets," forthcoming in Fundamental. of Pure an.d Applied Economics, (Cur,
Switzerland: Harwood Academic Publishers), 1987.

Hodrick, R.J., and S. Srivastava, "An Investigation of Risk and Return in Forward Foreign
Exchange," Journal of International Money and Finance. April 1984, 3, pp. 5-30.
Huang, R.D.1 "The Monetary Approach to Exchange Rates in alt Efficient Foreign Exchange
Market: Tests based on Volatility.' Journal of Finance, Vol. 36. pp. 31-41, 1981.
, "Some Alternative Tests of Forward Exchange Rates as Predictors of Future
Spot Rates," Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 3. pp. 153-67, 1984.

Ibbotson Associates, Stocks, Dond,i, Bills and Inflation.: IPRG Yearbook, Ibbotson Associates,
Chicago, 1986,
Keiin DII., and R..F. Stambaugh, "Predicting Returns in the Stork and Bond Markets," Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 17, pp. 357-90. 1986.

Kleidon, A.W., "Variance Bounds Tests and Stock Price Vahtation.' ,lournal of Political Econonz,', Vol. 94 pp. 953.1001, 1986.

LeRoy, S.F. and RD. Porter, "The Present.Value Relation: Tests Based on Implied Variance
Botmds," Econometrica, Vol. 49, pp. 555-574. 1981.
Malkiel, B.G., "The Capital Formation Problem in the U.S.,' .Iournal of Finance, Vol. 34, pp.
369-81, May 1976.

Mankiw, NC., D. Romer and M.D. Shapiro, "An Unbiased Reexamination of Stock Market
Volatility," Journal of Finance, Vol. 40, pp 677-87. 1985.

Mankiw, NC. and L.H. Summers, "Do Long-Term Interest Rates Overreact to Short-Term
23

Interest Rates?," firookinys Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1. PP. 223-242, 1984.
Marsh, T. and R. Merton, "Dividend Variability and Variance Bounds Tests for the Rationality
of Stock Market Prices,' American Economic Review, Vol. 76. Pp. 483-498, 1986.
"Dividend Behavior (or the Aggregate Stork Market., Journal of Business,
Vol. 60, pp. 1-40, 1987.

Mattey, J. and R.A. Meese, "Empirical Assessment of Present Value Relations,' forthcoming
in Econometric Reviews, 1987.

Meese, WA. and K..!. Singleton, "Rational Expectations and P1w Volatility of Floating Exchange Rates,' International Economic Review. Vol. 24, Pp. 721-33, 1983.

Merton, R.C., "On Estimating the Expected Return (in the Market, .lournal of Financial
Economics, Vol. 8, Pp. 323-61, December 1980.

Mussa, ML., "The Exchange Rate, the Balance of Payments and Monetary and Fiscal Policy
under a Regime of Controlled Floating," Scandinavian. .Ioutrnal of Economics, Vol. 78,
pp. 229-48, 1976.
Newey, W., and K. West., "A Simple, Positive Definite. Hetrroskedast.icity and Autocorrelation
Consistent Covariance Matrix,' Woodrow Wilson School Discussion Paper, No. 92, May
1985.

Pindyck, 11.5., "Risk, Inflation, and the Stork Market.' American Economic Review, Vol. 74,
pp. 335-51. June 1984.

Poterba, 3M. and L.H. Summers, "The Persistence of Volatility and Stock Market Fluctuations," American Economic Review, Vol. 76, Pp. 1142-1151, 1986.

Scott, L.O., "The Present Value Model of Stock Prices: Regression Tests and Monte Carlo
Results," The Review of Economics and Statistics, pp. 599-605, 1985

Shiller, R.J., "Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to he Justified by Subsequent Changes in
Dividends?." American Economic Review. Vol. 71. Pp. 421-436, 1081a.
, "The Use of Volatility Measures in Assessing Market Efficiency," Journal
of Finance, Vol. 36, pp. 291-311, 1981h.

Shiller, 11.3., J.Y. Campbell and K.L. Schoenholtz, "Forward Rates and Future Policy: Interpreting the Term Stricture of Interest R.ateq Brookinqs Papers on Economic Activity,
No. 1, pp. 223.742, 1983.

Solnik, B., "The Relation Between Stock Prices and Inflationary Expectations," Journal of
Finance, Vol. 38, pp. 35-48, March 1983.
Vander Kraats, RH. and L.D. Booth, "Empirical Tests of the Monetary Approach to Exchange
Rate Determination," Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 2, pp. 255-78,
1983.

West, K., "A Specification Test for Speculative Bubhles, Princeton University, 1984, revised
1986.

White, H., "A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct Test
for Heteroskedasticity," Econornetriea, Vol. 48, pp. 817-38, May 1980.
24

1

var(ft

*
)

-t

>

var(f)

violation of

var(c)

of

var(ft*) >

violation

—1/2

U

+

1

+

of

of

)

var(f)

> var(ft)

var(f*) >

var(f

var(ft*) > var(ct)

0

var(f

*
)

>

var(c)

_______________________________ __________________

=

Regression

Regression

Figure

Table la

Regressions of
a +

5s+

t÷

F test

a0
5

Currency

DM

—.0224
(.01829)
(.02042)

Pound

-

.0179

(.01214)
(.01489)

Yen

-.0048
(.01548)
(.01512)

Canadian
Dollar

-.0096

Lira

-.0087

(.00911)
(.00894)

(.00662)
(.00683)

.0136

French
Franc

-

All
Currencies
Above

-.0080

(.00988)
(.01074)

frzO

1W

-1.224
—1.096

1.497
0.625

2.11

.00

163

-1.478
-1.205

2.184
0.690

1.86

.01

163

-0.309
-0.317

0.096
0.310

1.79

.00

163

-1.051
—1.071

1.104
0.890

2.07

.00

163

-1.316
-1.276

1.732
0.981

1.96

.00

163

-1.377
-1.266

1.895
0.792

2.08

.01

163

_2.413**

2.395**

1.97

.00

983

B2

DF

(.0033)

Notes: All estimates are monthly data from April 1973 to February 1987. The first six
regressions are estimated using OLS, with standard errors (in parentheses) calculated
using GMM under homoskedasticity, and using White1s heteroskedasticity correction,
respectively. The last regression combines all six currencies, and is estimated using
SUB.
represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Table lb
Regressions of
a +

+

B(s—

F test
Currency

Dli

B

-.0182
(.01839)
(.02029)

t:O

cO

-0.990
-0.897

0.985

OW

P2

OF

2.16

.00

162

0.603

Pound

-.0175
(.01217)
(.01451)

-1.439
-1.207

2.069
0.840

1.91

aOO

162

Yen

-.0085
(.01585)
(.01502)

-0.535
—0.565

0.286
0.518

1.82

.00

162

Canadian
Dollar

-.0067

-0.949
-0.969

0.901
0.744

2.10

.00

162

Lira

-.0087
(.00665)
(.00694)

-1.311
-1.257

1.720
0.976

1.99

.01

162

French

—.0135

1.861
0.784

.01

162

(.00990)
(.01072)

-1.364
-1.259

2.11

Franc

All

-.0075

_2.25**

2.477**

1.99

.00

977

Currencies
Above

(.0033)

(.00918)
(.00899)

-

Notes: All estimates are monthly data from April 1973 to February 1987. The first six
regressions are estimated using OLS, with standard errors (in parentheses) calculated
using GMM under homoskedasticity, and using Whites heteroskedasticity correction,
respectively. The last regression combines all six currencies, and is estimated using
SIJR.
represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Table lc

Regressions

a

of

+

+

F test

Currency
DPI

t:frrO

- .0152

(.01384)
(.01406)

Pound

-

.0084

(.00765)
(.00812)

Yen

- .0047

(.01151)
(.00966)

Canadian
Dollar

- .0037

Lira

— .0047

(.00707)
(.00648)

(.00387)
(.00409)

French
Franc

-

.0094

(.00739)

frO

DW

It2

DF

-1.096
-1.079

1.202
0.588

2.12

.00

163

-1.093
-1.030

1.195
0.703

1.86

.00

163

-0.410
-0.488

0.168
0.430

1.79

.00

163

-0.519
—0.566

0.269
0.635

2.11

.00

162

-1.204
-1.140

1.450
0.771

1.99

.00

162

-1.258
-1.160

1.583
0.669

2.11

.00

162

2.258**

1.98

.00

980

(.0080 2)

All
Currencies
Above

(

0P035

0019)

Notes: All estimates are monthly data from April 1973 to February 1987. The first six
regressions are estimated using OLS, with standard errors (in parentheses) calculated
using GHM under honioskedasticity, and using White's heteroskedasticity correction,
respectively. The last regression combines all six currencies, and is estimated using
SUR.
represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 2a

Regressions of

1L+J a +

5s+

e1
P test

Data Set

Dates

14715 1 week

10/84 -

1*15 2 week

1/83 -

B

2/86

-.02983
(.02931)

10/84

-1.018

-.08062

rO
B0

DW

1.02

1.87

.02

242

365***

1.89

.16

182

1.20

NA

.14

171

R2

DR

ii2

DR

(.03270)

FIMS 1 month

10/84 -

2/86

- .02277

-0.268

(.08505)

Table 21,
Regressions of

+ B(s—

+

F test
a=O

Data Set

7*15 1 week

r:5=O

50

NI

-1.509

1.26

1.69

.03

242

-.06511
(.11867)

-0.549

2.30***

1.85

.20

182

.14297

-0.845

1.32

NA

.15

171

Dates

10/84 —

2/86

5

—.19004
(.12596)

10/84

71715 2 week

1/83 —

MNS 1 month

10/84 — 2/86

-

(.16909)

represent significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels,
respectively. Estimates are aggregated over 4 currencies, the pound, deutsch mark,
Swiss franc, and yen. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are GMH without
heteroskedasticity correction. Overlapping observations in the one month data are
acounted for by allowing the residuals to follow an HA(3) process.
Notes: The symbols "c,

Table 2c

Regressions of

)+

a +

V test

Data Set

tillS

1

week

Dates

10/84 - 2/86

?UIS 2 week

1/83 —

10/84

PINS 1 month

10/84 —

2/86

a0
fr0

DII

1.655

1.88

.036

222

1.90

.163

182

.13

151

—.0544
(.0349)

-1.559

-.07461
(.03134)

_2.381**

357***

-.11421

—1.155

1.23

NA

DF

(.09891)

Notes: The symbols *, **, ***, represent significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels,
respectively. Estimates are aggregated over 4 currencies, the pound, deutsch mark,
Swiss franc, and yen. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are GPill without
heteroskedasticity correction. Overlapping observations in the one month data are
accounted for by allowing the residuals to follow an NA(3) process.

Table 3

Regressions of
a+

+

F test
a0
Currency
DPI

B

-3.0069
(1.05820)

fr'O

DW

R

DF

_2.842***
_2.723***

8.074***
3.700**

2.19

.04

163

16.107***
9.241***

2.04

.08

163

(1.06129)

Pound

-3.0902
(0.76997)
(0.71580)

_4.013***
_4.317***

Yen

—0.6741
(0.46414)
(0.52760)

_1.452*
-1.278

2.109
1.157

1.86

.01

163

Canadian
Dollar

-2.0268
(0.65302)

_3.104***
_3.184***

9.633***
6.136***

2.19

.05

163

_2.923***
_2.756***

3543***

2.03

.04

163

_2.816***
_2.283**

7931***

2.18

.04

163

2.07

.03

983

(0.636 55)

Lira

-1.3784
(0.47159)
(0.50022)

4.087**

French
Franc

-1.7532
(0.62255)
(0.76800)

All
Currencies

-1.5201

_4.240***

3.042***

1.897*

Above

(0.35854)

_3.448***

(0.44087)

2.576*

Notes:
All estimates are monthly data from April 1973 to February 1987. The first six
regressions are estimated using OLS, with standard errors (in parentheses) calculated
using GMM under homoskedasticity, and using White's heteroskedasticity correction,
respectively. The last regression combines all six currencies, and is estimated with
OLS.
represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

table 4
OLS Regressions
-

=a

+

"Naive"

B(P/x)

+

F test

Forecast

dates

t:B=O

u0

DW

R2

DF

6=0

1926-85
monthly

at

at

.0031

(0.0033)
(0.0045)

1926-85
yearly

—0.0098

1936-85
monthly

0.0005

(0.0042)
(0.0041)

(0.0031)

0.928
0.682

_2.335**
_2.410**

0.03
0.02

1.89

.00

717

573***

1.83

.07

56

4.92***

0.147
0.108

2.78**
4.61***

1.95

.00

597

_2.192**
_2.156**

6.80***
7.51***

1.88

.01

597

_2.332**
_2.306**

3.30**
2.99*

1.87

.04

117

-1.407
-1.293
-

1.03

1.76

.01

117

0.95

-1.016
-1.170

3.40**
3.21**

1.67

.01

117

-1.040
-1.014

4g5***

1.80

.00

117

-0.740
-0.692

1.33

2.05

.00

117

(0.0042)

a

1936-85
monthly

—0.0154
(0.0070)
(0.007 1)

d

°

1976—85

—0.1070

monthly

(0.0459)
(0.0464)

a

°

1966—75

-0.0341

monthly

(0.0242)
(0.0263)

d

1956—65
monthly

-0.0256

(0.0252)
(0.0219)

a

1946-55
monthly

-0.0275
(0.0264)

6.49***

(0.0271)

d

°

1936-45

monthly

-0.0255
(0.0345)

1.31

(0. 0369)

Notes: Standard errors (in parentheses) are computed using GMM under the
of homoskedasticity and also allowing for conditional
heteroskedasticity, respectively. *1
significance at the 10, 5 and 1
percent levels, respectively. dt respresents current dividends, d0 is an average of the
past 120 months of dividends.

assumption

, * represent

Table 5
Regressions of
= a +

dates

B

t:Ø0

6i +

F Test

u0

ow

B2

OF

B=O

1973-84

-3.9752
(1.2865)
(1.1980)

3.090***
_3.318***

6.91***
6.47***

1.99

.01

602

1980-86
weekly

-6.2372

_3.178***
_3.077***

5.50***
6.06***

1.98

.03

310

1926-85
monthly

-1.3623

_1.759*
_1.745*

6.14***

1.78

.00

717

1926—85
yearly

—1.4216
(0.8405)
(0.7502)

_1.691*
—j•995*

S.36***
4.16**

1.99

.03

57

1976-85

-1.5010

.00

117

(1.5249)
(1.5787)

1.23
1.53

2.01

monthly

-0.984
-0.951

1966-75
monthly

-2.6972
(3.7199)

-0.725
-0.512

0.26
0.18

1.84

.00

117

_2.073**
_2.632***

5.30***
6.41***

1.75

.03

117

1.89

.00

1t7

2.22

.00

117

1.52

.00

117

weekly

(1.9628)
(2.0268)

(0.7746)
(0.7806)

5.00'

(5.2715)

1956—65
monthly

1946-55
monthly

1936-45
monthly

1926—35
monthly

-9.4751
(4.5716)
(3.6000)
5.4463

0.456

4.42**

(7.6623)
(8. 2318)

0.419

5.25***

-4.5518
(36.6668)
(33.9483)

-0.124
-0.134

1.27

—4.7814

—0.788

0.60

(6.0698)
(5.4677)

-0.874

0.47

1.40

Notes Standard errors (in parentheses) are computed using GMM under the
assumption of hornoskedasticity and also allowing for conditional
heteroskedasticity, respectively. *1
represent significance at the 10,
percent levels, respectively.

5 and 1

Table 6a
OLS Regressions of

;.t+i't/xt) =

"Naive" Forecast
Xt

Data Se t
Dates

dt

1926—85

dt

6

t:61=o

0.0011
(0.0004)
(0.0003)

monthly

1926-85
annual

+

a1+ 6i(Pt/xt)

2.632***
3.442***

-0.0002

i

DII

.01

1.59

.07

1.42

.01

1.90

(0.0001)
(0.000 1)

d0

1936—85
monthly

—0.0011
(0.0006)
(0.0007)

-1.538

Table 6b
-

OLS Regressions of

=

.

t

Independent Variable

Data Set

7 day repurchase
agreements

1980-85

7 day Eurodollars

Dates

weekly

1973-84
weekly

a+ 62i

+

2

62

t:620

0.1534
(0.0696)
(0.0636)

2.204**
2.412**

.01

1.89

0.1420

2.200**
3.336***

.01

1.71

(0.0646)
(0. 0426)

30 day Us
securities

1926-85
monthly

-0.3432
(0.1508)
(0.1345)

_2.276A*
_2.553**

.01

1.43

30 day Us
securities,
rolled over

1926-85
annual

-0.5496

-j•793*
_2.201**

.04

1.80

(0.3065)
(0.2496)

The symbols,*,**,*** represent significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels,
respectively. Standard errors (in parentheses) are computed using GM?! with and without
a heteroskedasticity correction.
Notes :

