NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRIVATE EQUITY AND FINANCIAL FRAGILITY DURING THE CRISIS
Shai Bernstein
Josh Lerner
Filippo Mezzanotti
Working Paper 23626
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23626

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2017

*Stanford University and National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER); Harvard University
and NBER; Northwestern University. We thank the Harvard Business School’s Division of
Research for financial support. We also thank seminar participants at Columbia, Duke, LBS,
MIT, and Northwestern for helpful comments, especially Sabrina Howell, David Robinson, and
Morten Sorensen. One of the authors has advised institutional investors in private equity funds,
private equity groups, and governments designing policies relevant to private equity. All errors
and omissions are our own. Emails: shaib@stanford.edu, josh@hbs.edu, and
filippo.mezzanotti@northwestern.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Shai Bernstein, Josh Lerner, and Filippo Mezzanotti. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Private Equity and Financial Fragility during the Crisis
Shai Bernstein, Josh Lerner, and Filippo Mezzanotti
NBER Working Paper No. 23626
July 2017
JEL No. E32,G24
ABSTRACT
Do private equity firms contribute to financial fragility during economic crises? We find that
during the 2008 financial crisis, PE-backed companies increased investments relative to their
peers, while also experiencing greater equity and debt inflows. The effects are stronger among
financially constrained companies and those whose private equity investors had more resources at
the onset of the crisis. PE-backed companies consequentially experienced higher asset growth and
increased market share during the crisis.

Shai Bernstein
Stanford Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
shaib@stanford.edu
Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 214
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jlerner@hbs.edu

Filippo Mezzanotti
Kellogg School of Management
4389 Global Hub
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60201
filippo.mezzanotti@kellogg.northwestern.edu

1

Introduction

The recent global financial crisis increased the attention paid by policy makers, regulators,
and academics to financial stability. While much attention has been devoted to deficiencies in the
banking system in this and earlier crises (Bernanke and Gertler, 1990; Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009;
and Fahlenbrach, Prilmeier, and Stulz, 2012), high levels of corporate debt have also triggered
concerns. Highly leveraged firms may enter financial distress during a crisis, exacerbating
cutbacks in investment and employment and contributing to the persistence of the downturn
(Bernanke, et al., 1988; and Bernanke, 1983).
The practices of the private equity (PE) industry in particular have raised concerns. In the
three years leading up to the crisis (between 2006 and 2008), global PE groups raised almost $2
trillion in equity1, with each dollar typically leveraged with more than two dollars of debt (Kaplan
and Stromberg, 2009). This phenomenon was not confined to the recent crisis. Private equity
markets are prone to distortions introduced by credit cycles. As documented by Axelson, et al.
(2013), periods characterized by booming financial markets also experienced greater private equity
fundraising, higher transaction valuations, and critically more leverage.
The impact of PE investment patterns on the economy during periods of financial turmoil,
however, remains poorly understood. On the one hand, the cyclicality of private equity activity,
combined with the leveraging of their portfolio companies, may exacerbate the negative effects of
shocks to the financial sector, aggravating the boom and bust dynamic of the economy. In line
with this idea, the Bank of England suggests that buyouts should be monitored for macroprudential reasons, because “the increased indebtedness of such companies poses risk to the

1

http://www.preqin.com

2

stability of the financial system.”2 Moreover, the pressure to complete deals during boom times
may lead to the financing of lower-quality firms (Kaplan and Stein, 1993), leaving PE-backed
companies more exposed to changes in underlying economic conditions. Finally, the increased
fundraising and investment during boom periods may reduce the ability of private equity groups
to effectively monitor and fund their portfolio companies once economic conditions deteriorate.
These concerns have led to efforts to cap the amount of leverage used in PE transactions by the
U.S. Federal Reserve Bank and the European Central Bank.
Alternatively, PE-backed companies may be resilient to downturns, and therefore play a
stabilizing role during bad times. In particular, these companies may be better positioned to obtain
external funding when financial markets are dysfunctional. First, PE groups have strong ties with
the banking industry (Ivashina and Kovner, 2011) and may be able to use these relationships to
access credit for their firms during periods of crisis. Second, because PE groups raise funds that
are drawn down and invested over multiple years—commitments that are very rarely abrogated—
they may have “deep pockets” during downturns. These capital commitments may allow them to
make equity investments in their firms when accessing other sources of equity is challenging.
Motivated by these alternative hypotheses, this paper seeks to understand whether private
equity contributed to the fragility of the economy in the United Kingdom (UK) during the recent
financial crisis. The UK is a perfect environment to study this question. First, the UK had the
largest private equity market as a share of GDP before the crisis (Blundell-Wignall, 2007)— with
PE assets at about 11% of GDP3 — and one of the largest in absolute value. In line with these
numbers, the Bank of England estimated that before the crisis, PE-backed companies had issued

2

Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 2013Q1
This number is obtained by dividing the total fundraising between 2004 and 2008, as estimated by the European
Venture Capital Association and PEREP Analytics, by GDP in 2008 (as reported by the World Bank).
3

3

more than 10% of all non-financial corporate debt in the UK.4 Second, the UK provides detailed
income statement and balance sheet information for almost every active company, whether public
or private (Brav, 2009; and Michaely and Roberts, 2012). Similar financial data are not available
in the United States. Finally, the UK experienced a severe credit market freeze during the 2008
crisis, with a dramatic decline in private sector investment and lending (Riley, Rosazza,
Bondibene, and Young, 2014). As illustrated in Figure 1, aggregate investment declined by more
than 20% during 2008 in the UK, which simultaneously experienced a sharp credit contraction
(Figure 2).
To address the above questions, we study the relative evolution of PE-backed and non-PE
companies in the wake of the financial crisis. We focus on the financial decisions and performance
of these firms during this period, in an attempt to understand whether private equity exacerbates
or dampens the sensitivity of the economy to credit cycles.
Our main analysis focuses on a final sample of almost five hundred companies that were
backed by PE prior to the financial crisis. Using a difference-in-difference approach, we study how
the financial decisions and performance of the PE-backed companies were affected by the onset
of the crisis relative to a control group. The control group employs companies that were operating
in the same industry as the PE-backed companies and had similar size, leverage, and profitability
in 2007, following the methodology of Boucly, Sraer, and Thesmar (2011).5 The matching firms
had similar trends in the years leading to the crisis along dimensions such as investment, revenue,
returns on assets, equity contributions, and debt issuances. Therefore, this approach allows us to

4

Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 2013Q1
As we discuss in the paper, the main results are confirmed also when using a similar matching procedure but
excluding leverage as a matching variable.
5

4

explore differences that stem from organization structure, rather than their balance sheet or
investment characteristics.
We start by comparing the PE-backed companies and their peers’ behavior during the
financial crisis. We find that PE-backed companies decreased investments less than non-PEbacked companies did during the financial crisis, with between five and six percent greater
spending, an effect that is strongly statistically significant. Looking at the timing of the effects, the
two groups did not differ significantly in the pre-crisis period, but the investment rate of the PE
group substantially diverged from the control group beginning in 2008. In fact, the divergence of
the PE group occurs exactly when aggregate investments and credit growth in the UK started to
decline sharply.
We then show that the higher investments by PE-backed companies reflect the fact that
these firms appear to have been less bound by financial constraints. We find that debt issuance
over assets was four percentage points higher for PE-backed companies during the crisis, and
similarly, equity issuances over assets increased by two percentage points relative to their peers.
At the same time, the cost of debt, measured by interest expense over total debt, was relatively
lower for PE-backed companies during the crisis. As before, these effects appeared first in 2008
and continued through the remainder of the period (with varying levels of statistical significance).
The idea that private equity firms can help relax the financial constraints of portfolio
companies is also consistent with two additional findings. First, the positive effect on investment
is particularly large among companies that were ex-ante more likely to be financially constrained
during the crisis. We find this result using various proxies of financial constraints, such as size,
industry dependence on external finance (Rajan and Zingales, 1998), and pre-crisis leverage.

5

Second, the increase in investment is larger when the private equity sponsor had more
resources available at the onset of the crisis to help the portfolio company. To explore this
dimension, we exploit the heterogeneity across private equity firms. First, we focus on the amount
of dry powder—capital raised but not yet invested – that is available to investors at the time of the
financial crisis. Second, we look at to whether their most recent fund was at an earlier stage at the
time of the financial crisis. These tests are based on the underlying assumption that PE firms that
are at the early years of their fund and with more dry powder have more resources—both financial
and operational—to invest in their portfolio companies during the crisis. Our results confirm this
hypothesis.
Taken together, these results illustrate that PE-backed companies do not appear to be more
sensitive to the onset of the financial crisis. Rather, during a period in which capital formation
dropped dramatically, PE-backed companies invested more aggressively than peer companies did.
This ability to maintain a high level of investment appears related to the superior access of PEbacked companies to financing, in terms of both equity and debt issuances, and the lower cost of
debt.
The results are robust to a battery of checks. Throughout the analysis, we control for firm
fixed effects, and thus remove time-invariant characteristics of the control and treatment firms. We
also show that the results are not driven by non-parallel trends in the pre-crisis period and they are
not affected by the addition of company controls. Second, our main results generally do not change
when we exclude companies whose private equity deals were management buyouts (MBOs), a
class of transactions in which the engagement of private equity firms is traditionally lower. Third,
it does not appear that the results simply reflect differences in attrition between PE and non-PE
companies. Fourth, the results remain unchanged if we control for time-varying industry shocks

6

around the crisis. Lastly, we also confirm that the results are robust to alternative matching
estimators. In particular, we find that removing leverage from the variables used to match
companies does not affect our results.
In the final part of the paper, we examine the performance of PE-backed companies during
the financial crisis. We find that PE-backed companies experienced a greater growth in their stock
of assets in the years after the crisis, consistent with the greater investment seen above. Similarly,
we find that PE-backed companies increased their market share in the industry during the crisis.
At the same time, PE-backed companies did not underperform their peers: that is, they did not
become relatively less profitable, whether measured by the ratios of EBITDA to revenue or net
income to assets. These findings are contrary to what would be expected if companies were
pursuing value-destroying investments during this period.
We also examine the exit patterns of PE-backed companies relative to the control group
during the crisis period. We find that PE-backed companies were not more likely to go bankrupt,
but they were more likely to be sold through non-distressed M&A transactions. Overall, these
results regarding exits—while by their nature limited—again seem to be inconsistent with the
hypothesis that PE financing increases the financial fragility of the portfolio firms.
This paper relates to an extensive body of work examining the behavior of financial
institutions during the financial crisis and their consequences for operating firms (e.g., Ivashina
and Scharfstein, 2010; and Ben-David and Franzoni, 2012). The conclusions, though, are more
benign here than many of the studies examining other financial institutions, including banks, rating
agencies, and hedge funds. The role of private equity groups seems more akin to those of the
Japanese banks during the 1980s documented by Hoshi, Kashyap, and Scharfstein (1990, 1991),
where better information and aligned incentives allowed bank-affiliated firms to overcome the

7

capital constraints that limited investments of their peers without such relationships. During the
financial crisis, the greater alignment and relatively longer time horizons of private equity
investors may have allowed firms to more successfully respond to the economic dislocations.6 The
paper is also related to an extensive literature that explores the effects of private equity ownership
on firm outcomes (e.g., Bernstein, et al., 2016; Bernstein and Sheen, 2016; Boucly, Sraer, and
Thesmar, 2011; Cohn and Towery, 2013; Davis, et al., 2013; John, Lang, and Netter, 1992; Kaplan,
1989; and Lichtenberg and Siegel, 1990).
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present the data used in this study.
Section 3 then describes the empirical approach employed in the paper. Sections 4 and 5 present
the main results on investment and performance, discussing the possible mechanisms behind our
results and presenting a battery of robustness tests. Finally, Section 6 summarizes our results and
conclusions.

2

Data

2.1

Sample Construction

We start our data construction by extracting from Capital IQ all UK companies backed by
private equity before the financial crisis. We identified private equity deals in Capital IQ by
searching for events such as “going private,” “leveraged buyout,” “management buyout,” and
“platform.” In so doing, we excluded “growth buyouts,” “venture capital” and “expansion
capital” investments, where investors generally buy a stake in the company using little or no
leverage. Since we are interested in studying the behavior of UK PE-backed companies around

6

The high-degree of diversification among different types of limited partners (LP) of buyout funds may explain why
they were able to support their portfolio companies during the crisis. In contrast, Illig (2012) argues that that venture
capital funds had difficulties in raising capital and had to defer capital calls during the crisis because their LPs base
was less diversified and more concentrated among endowments.

8

the financial crisis, we selected only firms that (i) were headquartered in United Kingdom at the
time of the deal; (ii) had received a PE investment by the end of 2007 and (iii) did not experience
an exit by the PE group by the end of 2008.7
We then further filter our data, keeping only those firms that had balance sheet and
income statement information in Amadeus, a Bureau Van Dijk (BvD) data set of European
companies. Amadeus collects data from the “Companies House,” the United Kingdom official
national registrar office. As already pointed out by other authors (Brav, 2009; Michaely and
Roberts, 2012), the United Kingdom is a perfect setting for studies of private companies.
According to current regulations, every registered limited company is required to provide
financial and income information annually to the public register.
The extent of the requirement to disclose financial information in the UK, however, varies
with the size of the company. Small (and some medium-sized) companies are allowed to file
abbreviated accounts.8 Since the amount of information small firms disclose to Companies House
(and hence in the Amadeus dataset) is quite limited, we excluded this group from our analysis. The
reliability of the source and its coverage of the remaining private firms is a key strength of our
study. Most of the companies in our sample consist of middle-sized private enterprises, for which
similar financial data are not available in the United States.9
We supplement Amadeus data with Orbis, another data product from BvD. While both
Amadeus and Orbis collect information from the Companies House, Amadeus generally removes
firms from the sample after a few years of inactivity. This is not the case for Orbis. Since the post7

During 2008, there were 28 exits of PE firms. The results remain unchanged if we include them in the sample.
Since 2008, a small company is defined as one meeting at least two of the following criteria: total assets less than
£3.26 million, annual turnover less than £6.5 million, and an average number of employees fewer than 50. This
group usually reports only assets, revenue, and profits.
9
One limitation of this data set is that balance sheet items are always reported at the book value.
8

9

financial crisis period was characterized by an increase in firm exit, using only Amadeus would
have generated selection concerns that could undermine the reliability of our results.10
Therefore, we further restrict the sample to firms meeting the following criteria: (i)
matched to Amadeus; (ii) not a small firm, as defined by the Companies House; and (iii) not
operating in the financial (SICs 600-699), public (SICs 900-999), or utility sectors ( SICs 489493).11 This led to an initial sample of 987 unique firms. Once we exclude firms that did not meet
minimum data requirements for the matching process described below, the sample includes 722
firms.12

2.3

Other Data

We supplement the data from Amadeus/Orbis to identify potential acquisitions and
bankruptcies during the crisis. We start by constructing two different variables that identify
whether a firm went out of business. In particular, we generate a dummy “Out of Business,” which
is equal to one if the firms’ information is missing in Amadeus/Orbis by 2011, suggesting that the
firm no longer exists.13 On its own, the interpretation of this variable is unclear, since a firm can
exit from the company registry for many different reasons, such as bankruptcy or acquisition.
We thus further refine this measure by generating a dummy— “Bad Exit”— that identifies
companies that went out of business unambiguously because of distress. We generate this variable
using the firm status history, available through Orbis. The data provider collects information from

10

Orbis and Amadeus are essentially the same data product. The main two differences are the deletion of exited
firms, as discussed above, and the interface used to distribute the data.
11
This industry sample selection is common to the private equity literature. Similarly, Michaely and Roberts (2012)
apply similar filter with the same data set.
12
We require that companies have data on industry, return on assets, capital expenditures, asset, and leverage in
2007.
13
In particular, we look at the total assets variable to identify company exits. Information on total assets is always
required by UK reporting rules, and therefore when this field is missing, the company no longer exists.

10

the Companies House and assigns to each firm a status, such as active, dissolved, dormant, or in
liquidation, which may change over time. We define a company status as a “bad exit” if (a) the
firm was not active by 2011 and (b) before disappearing from the data, its status implied that the
firm was in liquidation or in insolvency proceedings.
Similarly, we use Capital IQ to identify potential profitable exits by looking at firms
involved in M&A transactions from 2008 onwards. Since M&A transactions may also arise
because of distress, we provide an alternative measure by excluding companies that were involved
in M&A but were also identified in the same period as in distress, as discussed above.
Lastly, we also collect information on the history of the PE investors for each portfolio
company, in order to identify when the PE investors raised their last fund before the crisis. The
younger the last fund at the onset of the crisis, the more likely that the private equity firm will have
more financial and operational resources available, since the PE firm had less time to deploy capital
and commit time to existing portfolio companies. In order to compile this information, we
manually search the private equity firms in ThomsonOne and Capital IQ and collect information
about their fundraising history.14
We also construct a measure of PE firm “dry powder,” a proxy for the dollar amount of
financial resources that the PE investors have available by the time of the crisis. To generate this
measure, we collect in ThomsonOne the fundraising and investment history for the PE investors
during the 2001-2007 period, and calculate aggregate fundraising and investments.15 The dry

14

If a portfolio company has more than one PE firm, we conservatively use the most recent fundraising year among
all investors.
15
In order to measure capital investments of PE investors, we sum the total equity investment made over the
specified period. The estimated equity investment in each case is estimated in the following manner. If available, we
use the estimated equity investment as reported by ThomsonONE. When this is not available, we estimate the equity
investment by the fund as the total amount of equity invested in the firm divided by the total number of funds
investing in the round. When ThomsonONE does not report the total equity invested, we use the value of the deal
minus the debt (we assume debt to be zero when missing). Since the fund used for investment is not always
reported, we use the total investment made by the PE group over the period.

11

powder measure is the difference between the PE firm fundraising and investment. Using this
variable, we construct a dummy “high dry powder” that is equal to one if the company’s PE
investors are in the top quartile for dry powder. If a company has more than one PE, we use the
shareholder with most resources.

3

Empirical Strategy

To understand how the crisis affected the financial and investment policies of PE-backed
companies, we develop a difference-in-difference design where we compare PE-backed companies
to a control group of non-PE backed companies around the financial crisis. We first describe how
we construct the sample of matched firms and then discuss the empirical specification.

3.1

Constructing a Matched Control Group

Private equity-backed companies are clearly not a random sample of the population: for
instance, they are likely to be larger and more leveraged than the average firm. Therefore, the first
step in the analysis is to identify a proper control group for the set of PE-backed companies.
Following Boucly, Sraer, and Thesmar (2011), we identify a suitable control group through
a matching procedure for each PE-backed company in our sample. We identify a set of control
firms that operate in the same industry and had a similar size, leverage, and profitability in 2007.
This procedure involved two steps. First, for all private equity-backed companies in our data, we
selected every company in the Amadeus/Orbis sample that (a) belonged to the same two-digit SIC;
(b) had a return on assets (ROA), defined as net income over total assets, within a 30% bracket
around our PE firm; (c) had assets within a 30% bracket around our PE firm; and (d) had leverage

12

within a 30% bracket around our PE firm. Second, if this first step identified more than five firms,
we selected the closest five, based on quadratic distance computed based on the variables.
Overall, this procedure is a more conservative version of Boucly, Sraer, and Thesmar
(2011), since we add an additional variable to the matching—leverage—and use a narrower
matching bandwidth.16 Using this methodology, we were able to match 434 of the 722 firms,
generating a total sample of 1,984 firms. In the robustness section, we present an alternative
matching procedure that is closer to Boucly, Sraer and Thesmar (2011), by eliminating leverage
in the matching procedure.17
For every firm in the final sample, we extract from Amadeus/Orbis the full set of income
and financial information available for the period from 2004 to 2011. Using these data, and
following Brav (2009) and Michaely and Roberts (2012), we construct several measures of firm
activity. In particular, we calculate capital investments as the change in assets plus the reported
depreciation. Furthermore, we identify equity injections in the company by measuring the change
in equity minus profit. Similarly, debt issuance is computed as the change in total liabilities in the
year. All these variables are normalized by total assets. In addition, we measure firm leverage as
total liabilities over total assets, and cost of debt as the ratio of total interest expenses to total debt.
In order to limit the influence of outliers, we winsorize all ratios at 1%. The Data Appendix
provides more information about the variables and the sample.
Panel A of Table 1 shows the industry distribution of PE-backed companies in the sample.
We compare it with the universe of the UK firms, after we eliminate small businesses and

16

The other difference is that we measure size in terms of assets and not employment. The reason for this choice is
that employment variable in Amadeus is significantly less populated than assets. However, in a robustness test, we
added employment as a fourth variable in our matching procedure and show that this does not affect the results.
17
In a previous version of the paper, we have used wider matching boundaries (50% instead of 30%), which is in
line with Boucly, Sraer, and Thesmar (2011). In general, these changes increase the size of our final sample and
marginally reduced the quality of the matches, but did not affect the main results.

13

companies in the financial or regulated sectors. The majority of the sample firms are in either the
services (38%) or manufacturing (32%) industries. Other important industries include wholesale
trade, construction, and retail. The sample industry distribution is relatively close to the universe
of companies: the major difference is that PE-backed companies tend to be more concentrated in
manufacturing, and less represented in the construction industry and services. Both treatment and
control samples have the same industry distribution due to the matching procedure.
In Panel B of Table 1, we compare the characteristics of firms in the treatment and the
matched control group in 2007. The average firm in the sample is a mid-sized firm with around
$80 million in revenue. Across the two groups, firms have very similar ROA, investment, leverage,
and equity and debt issuances. These differences are insignificant, with small economic magnitude.
The only exception is that PE-backed companies are slightly larger than the control group in terms
of revenue. Overall, this matching procedure suggests that differences in funding patterns across
the treated and control groups mostly disappear when we compare firms with similar sizes,
leverage ratios, and profitability within the same industry.18
Since this paper relies on a difference-in-difference analysis, it is important to explore the
assumption of pre-crisis parallel trends. We explore whether this assumption holds in the
observables in Panel C. In particular, we compare one and two-year growth rates ending in 2007
for the main firm characteristics considered so far. We find that the differences in the growth rates
between the two groups are not significantly different from zero across all observables. Similar
patterns can be seen graphically in Figures 3, 4, and 5, in which both treatment and control firms
follow similar trends in the years leading to the crisis.

18

One residual concern regards the presence of listed firms in the control group. In principle, listed firms may have
been differentially affected by the financial crisis and this feature may have partially affected the result. However,
we have only 19 control firms (<2%) that are public.

14

Overall, these analyses suggest that PE-backed companies were similar in 2007 to the
control group. In principle, this is not a necessary condition for our identification—which instead
hinges on the presence of parallel trends between the two groups—but it allows us to exclude the
possibility that differences in behavior around the crisis were due to differences in other observable
characteristics. Later in the paper, we further show that our results are also stable when we augment
our model with a set of controls for firm characteristics in 2007, which should absorb any residual
differences in observables across the two groups.
Moreover, the two groups present similar growth paths before the crisis, which alleviate
concerns that PE-backed companies were outperforming the control group before the crisis. As we
discuss below, our estimates are consistent with the assumption of parallel trends between treated
and control groups during the pre-crisis period leading to the crisis, the main identification
assumption in our difference-in-difference design. A more formal and direct test of the parallel
trend assumption will be discussed in Section 4.

3.2

Identification Strategy

We estimate this model using a panel data set from 2004 to 2011, a symmetric window
around the 2008 shock.19 The choice of 2008 as the first year of the crisis is in line with a large
body of empirical evidence on the crisis (e.g., Duchin, Ozabas, and Sensoy, 2010; Kahle and Stulz,
2013), as well as official statistics on the UK provided by the Bank of England. As we show in
Figure 1, aggregate investment in the UK declined by more than 20% between the beginning of

19

For consistency, both PE-backed companies and each corresponding control group enter in the sample at the same
time, which is 2004 or the year of the PE deal if after 2004.

15

2008 and mid-2009. At the same time, credit availability experienced a sharp contraction starting
in the first quarter of 2008 (Figure 2).20 We estimate the following equation:
!"# = %# + %" + '( )* ,-./" ∗ 1.-2-2 + 34"# + 5"#

(1)

where !"# is an outcome variable measured for company - at time 6, (%" ,%# ) are a set of company
and year fixed effects, )* ,-./" is a dummy for the companies that are backed by PE investors,
and Crisis is a dummy for the period from 2008 to 2011.

Furthermore,

we

augment

our

specification with a set of firm covariates 4"# . Lastly, we cluster standard errors at the firm level
(Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan, 2004).
The inclusion of firm fixed effects removes time-invariant differences between treatment
and control firms. However, the causal interpretation of the results crucially depends on the parallel
trend assumption. In particular, we need to assume that PE-backed companies would have
experienced the same change in behavior as non PE-backed companies in the absence of the
financial crisis.21 The parallel trend assumption is intrinsically untestable, since we cannot observe
the true counterfactual in the absence of the shock. However, we can strengthen the interpretation
of our analysis by providing evidence consistent with this assumption, exploring pre-shock trends.
First, it is important to recognize that our treatment and control groups are similar, at least
in terms of observable characteristics. By construction, both groups have the same industry
distribution, and as we discussed before, profitability, investment, and leverage are similar across
these groups. Even more importantly for the parallel trend assumption, the PE and non-PE
companies have similar growth rates in the years leading up to the crisis, as we illustrate below.

20

Statistics are taken from the Bank of England “Trends in Lending - April 2009” (2009).
For instance, it would be problematic if treated firms differed from untreated firms along some characteristics that
would be affected by the financial shock independently from their status as a PE-backed company.
21

16

Pushing this argument one step further, we can formally examine the time-varying behavior
of the treatment effects for the main outcomes in our analysis by estimating:
!"# = %# + %" +

'7 )* ,-./" + 34"# + 5"#

(2)

where we estimate a different '7 for every year between 2004 and 2011, using the last year before
the crisis, 2007, as the reference year. If our parameter '7 in the standard equation is correctly
capturing the causal effect of the crisis on private equity firms—rather than a differential trend
between the two groups—then we expect the effect of private equity to appear only at the onset of
the crisis. In the next section, we will show evidence consistent with this argument.
In the paper, we take two additional steps to strengthen the analysis further. First, we
augment our specifications with controls that capture the heterogeneity across firms in important
characteristics before the crisis. In particular, we control for firm size (log of revenue), growth of
revenue, normalized cash flow (cash flow over assets), profitability (ROA), and leverage. To avoid
concerns regarding the endogeneity of controls (Angrist and Pischke, 2008; and Gormley and
Matsa, 2014), these variables are measured in the pre-crisis period (2007) and then interacted with
the crisis dummy to allow them to have a differential impact around the shock. These controls
further alleviate concerns regarding the presence of some unbalanced observable characteristics
across treatment and control groups before 2008.
Second, as a robustness test for our main results, we also add a full set of time-varying
industry fixed effects, which can account for changes in industry demand and other industry
considerations around the financial crisis. In particular, we interact two-digit industry fixed effects
with the post dummy. We discuss this, as well as additional robustness tests, in Section 4.2.

17

4

Investment and Funding

4.1

Main Results

We start by examining whether companies backed by PE investors were more or less
affected by the financial crisis. While overall investments dropped significantly in the UK during
the crisis period, it is important to understand whether PE-backed companies experienced even a
more severe decline during the crisis.
We start our analysis by studying the change in investment policies in PE- and non PEbacked companies. In column (1) of Table 2, we find that PE-backed companies decreased
investments less than non-PE backed companies around the financial crisis. This effect is not only
statistically significant, but also large in economic magnitude. Normalized by assets, the PE firms
saw their investments increase almost 6% relative to the non-PE companies in the post-crisis
period. In column (2), we find that the results are unchanged—in terms of both size and statistical
significance—when we add the standard set of firm-level controls.22
In Figure 3, we plot the year effects estimates around the crisis—and the corresponding
standard errors—separately for the PE-backed companies and matched companies. As illustrated
in the figure, both treated and control firms followed similar paths before the crisis: the estimates
are not statistically different from one another. Hence, the estimates seem to satisfy the parallel
trends assumption. Once the crisis ensued, both the PE-backed companies and the matched
companies decreased investments dramatically during 2008 and 2009. However, the PE-backed
companies decreased their investments significantly less during the crisis years, consistent with
the evidence in Table 1. This higher level of investment persisted in the years after the crisis.

22

Since we focus on the PE treatment effects around the crisis and therefore after the PE investments, our results do
not account for the potentially positive impact of the initial private equity investment on operation and financing.
Since the effects of the initial investment has been generally found to be positive (e.g. Kaplan, 1989), our estimates
may under-estimate the overall effect of PE on the portfolio companies.

18

Similar conclusions arise from Column (1) of Table 3, where we estimate equation (2) to
capture year-by-year PE effects (we add company controls in column (2)). This analysis formally
estimates the significance of the differences between the two groups, confirming the lack of
statistically significant patterns before the crisis. In contrast, note that investments by PE-backed
companies substantially diverged from the control group at the same time as the sharp decline in
aggregate investments and credit in the UK, as illustrated in Figures 1 and 2. This positive
difference persists in the next few years. We plot the estimates in column (2) graphically in Panel
A of Figure A.1 in the Appendix.
Overall, the results so far suggest that companies backed by private equity firms were more
resilient in the face of the financial crisis than a similar set of non-PE backed companies, therefore
contradicting the claim that PE firms increased financial fragility. Next, we move to explore the
mechanism behind this finding. One hypothesis is that private equity firms help their portfolio
companies to maintain high investment levels by relaxing their financial constraints, particularly
during periods of financial upheaval. This can happen in two ways. First, private equity firms have
fund commitments that are rarely abrogated and may therefore be in a better position to inject
equity into the companies if access to financial markets is barred. Second, private equity firms
have strong ties with banks (Ivashina and Kovner, 2011) and should therefore find it easier to
access credit markets during periods of turmoil. We find evidence that is generally consistent with
both these channels in Table 2.
We find that net equity contributions increased more for PE-backed companies than for the
control group around the crisis (Table 2, Columns 3 and 4).23 Normalized by assets, equity

23

Notice that we define equity contribution by looking at the changes in equity that are not explained by profit (see
Data Appendix). Therefore, we cannot distinguish whether positive effects are due to raising more capital or paying
out fewer dividends.

19

contributions during the financial crisis were 2% higher for PE-backed companies relative to nonPE firms. As illustrated in Figure 4, equity contributions for both classes of firms dropped
significantly during the crisis. However, the decline was smaller for PE-backed companies. This
suggests that PE funds were willing to support the operations of their portfolio companies by
injecting equity into the firms. As illustrated in Columns (3) and (4) of Table 3, there are no
divergent trends before the crisis. This divergence in financial policy appeared only in 2008. We
plot these estimates in the Appendix, in Panel B of Figure A.1.
At the same time, Column (5) of Table 2 illustrates that PE-backed companies also
experienced a relative increase in debt issuance.24 While on average debt issuance over assets
declined during the financial crisis, this decline was 4% smaller for PE-backed companies. The
result is similar when adding controls, as illustrated in Column (6). These patterns can be observed
in Figure 5. In the years leading to the crisis, PE-backed companies and matched companies
followed similar, parallel trends. Both treated and control companies experienced a significant
decline in debt issuances during the crisis. PE-backed companies, however, experienced a relative
increase in debt issuance in 2008, exactly when lending conditions and aggregate investment
started to decline in the UK. We find similar results when estimating equity issuances on a yearly
basis in Columns (5) and (6) of Table 3. Again, we plot these estimates graphically in the
Appendix, in Panel C of Figure A.1.
While overall debt issuance was greater, PE companies did not materially increase their
leverage, as is evident from columns 7 and 8 in Table 2. The PE coefficient in this regression is
positive, but it is non-significant and small in magnitude. This null result reflects the joint increase
in equity and debt. However, in columns (9) and (10) of Table 2, we find that the relative cost of

24

As discussed in the data section and in the Appendix, this is measured as the change in total debt, scaled by assets.

20

debt, measured by the ratio of interest expense of total debt, declined for the PE-backed companies.
This is also illustrated over time in Columns (7) and (8) of Table 3, confirming that the relative
decline in cost of debt appears first in 2008, the onset of the financial crisis.
One concern regarding the interpretation of the results is that by matching on leverage (in
addition to other variables), we may have captured firms that are somewhat unrepresentative due
to their high leverage. For this reason, we repeat the main analyses using an alternative matching
that does not rely on leverage, but only on size, ROA, and industry. This matching estimator allows
the two groups to have different leverage ratios in the pre-crisis period. This approach has two
main advantages. First, this matching is closer to the approach of Boucly, Sraer, and Thesmar
(2011). Second, using fewer matching variables allow us to match a larger number of observations.
In Table 4, we repeat the analysis with the alternative matching methodology. We find that
all results remain unchanged. In Columns (1) and (2), we find as well that PE-backed companies
experience a smaller decline in investment during the crisis and the effect is still highly statistically
significant. Similarly, we find similar results with respect to equity contribution (Columns 3 and
4) and debt issuances (Columns 5 and 6). The only difference with our main results is a positive
increase in the relative leverage ratio for PE-backed companies (Columns 7 and 8), but the effect
is small in magnitude and only of borderline significance. Moreover, as is the case in the main
results, we still find a decline in interest expense during the crisis for PE-backed companies.
Overall, these analyses suggest that private equity firms alleviated financing constraints of
portfolio companies during the financial crisis, allowing them to invest more when credit markets
were frozen and economic uncertainty high. In particular, private equity firms appear to have taken
advantage of their fund structures and bank relationships to provide both equity and debt financing
to their portfolio companies, with the latter at a lower cost.

21

4.2

Robustness

In this section, we examine a set of robustness analyses. First, we drop management
buyouts from the main sample. At least historically in the UK, MBOs were characterized by lower
engagement of private equity firms. If their inclusion completely drove the results, the
interpretation and generalization of the analysis might be subtler. To explore whether this is the
case, we eliminate MBOs from the sample and repeat the main analysis. As we show in Table A.1
in the Appendix, we find similar. In columns (1) and (2), we find that the effect on investment
when MBOs are dropped is even larger than the effect in our baseline model. Similarly, we confirm
the expansion in equity contribution and debt issuance, the relative stability in the leverage ratio,
and the decline in interest expense. Therefore, the exclusion of MBOs does not affect the results.
Second, we explore whether the main results can be driven by attrition. As usual with panel
data, the endogenous exit of firms from the data may bias results. Exit may be particularly
problematic if PE-backed companies are more likely to enter into distress or be targeted in M&A
transactions. To start, note first that as illustrated in Table 3, the shift in investment and financing
policies occurred in 2008, immediately at the onset the financial crisis and arguably concerns about
attrition may take place only later. We can also illustrate this pattern more directly by estimating
our standard model using data from 2007 and 2008 only (Table A.2), in which we find similar
results. In other words, much of the shift in corporate policy happened soon after the onset of the
crisis.
Another alternative robustness test to revisit attrition bias concerns is to focus only on firms
that did not exit the sample. In Table A.3, we take this conservative approach and drop every firm
that exited the database before 2011. This approach leads to approximately 15% fewer

22

observations in the sample.25 Even with this reduced sample, the main results remain unchanged.
PE-backed companies appear to experience a lower decline in investment and a relative increase
in equity contributions and debt issuance. At the same time, the leverage ratio stays constant, and
interest expense declines.
Third, we show that our results are robust to changes in industry dynamics. One concern is
that PE-backed companies may be more or less sensitive than the control group to changes in
demand that are contemporaneous to the shock. In principle, this should not be a problem, because
the treatment and control groups are matched across industries. Nonetheless, we augment our
analysis with a full set of (two-digit) industry fixed effects interacted with the crisis dummy. This
set of fixed effects can control non-parametrically for changes in demand and other time-varying
industry characteristics. As we show in Table A.4 in the Appendix, despite the large number of
fixed effects that the model introduces, the main results remain unchanged. The estimates are still
close in magnitude and statistical power to the one presented before.

4.3

The Heterogeneity of PE-Backed Companies

The results so far are consistent with the idea that private equity can play an important role
during financial turmoil by relaxing the financial constraints faced by their portfolio companies.
In this section, we provide more evidence consistent with this hypothesis by focusing on
financially constrained firms.
We use several measures as proxies for financing constraints. First, we study how the effect
of PE backing on investment differs between large and small firms (Table 5, Panel A). Consistent
with the idea that small companies are more likely to be financially constrained, small businesses

25

For every PE-backed company, there are up to five matched control firms. There are 310 companies that exit
before 2011, which corresponds to 245 groups of companies that are dropped.

23

have been shown to be more sensitive to credit market shocks (Petersen and Rajan, 1994;
Chodorow-Reich, 2014; and Bottero, Lenzu, and Mezzanotti, 2015). In our sample, we identify
large firms by looking at the top quartile of employment at 2007, the last year in our pre-shock
period, and classify remaining firms as small. Using this measure, we show in Columns (1) and
(2) that the positive effect on investment is stronger for small companies.
Second, we find similar results when we look across companies that operate in industries
that are more likely to depend on external finance, identified using the standard Rajan-Zingales
(RZ) index (Rajan and Zingales, 1998). In particular, we define more financially dependent firms
as companies operating in two-digit SIC industries characterized with an above-median share of
capital expenditure that is externally financed.26 In principle, firms that were more dependent on
external finance should have been more affected by the financial crisis, given the dramatic decline
in credit availability. Therefore, if private equity provides some relief to financial stresses,
companies in industries characterized by larger RZ indices should benefit more from PE.
Consistent with this idea, in Columns (3) and (4) of Panel A of Table 5, we find that the positive
effect of being backed by private equity is larger for firms in more financially dependent industries.
Third, we find similar results when comparing firms that were more leveraged entering
into the crisis. In general, firms with higher leverage are characterized by lower financial flexibility
and higher interest payment burdens. Therefore, they face more risks when credit markets dry up.
Comparing companies based on their 2007 leverage levels, we define high-leverage firms if they
are at the top quartile of the leverage distribution at the onset of the crisis. We find that companies
with high pre-crisis leverage experienced lower investment post-crisis. But high leverage

26

In line with the literature, this measure is computed using data from US corporations between 1980 and 2008,
available through Compustat. In particular, for each two-digit SIC industry, we measure the RZ index as the median
of CAPEX minus cash flows from operation, scaled by CAPEX.

24

companies backed by PE investors increased investments significantly more than their non-PE
counterparts (Table 5, Panel A, Columns 5 and 6). The presence of a PE investor counter-balanced
the negative effect of high leverage on investments.27
Similarly, we find that the effect of PE on debt issuance seem to be stronger among
financially constrained companies (Table 5, Panel B). This is true when looking across size
(Columns 1 and 2) and dependence on external finance (Columns 3 and 4). When sorting by
leverage (Columns 5 and 6), however, the result is positive but not statistically significant. In Panel
C of Table 5, we explore the case of equity issuances. While the coefficients are generally in the
expected direction, they are not statistically significant. This suggest that financially constrained
firms particularly benefited from debt issuances to alleviate financing constraints. By way of
contrast, equity contributions benefited all PE-backed companies similarly.
Overall, these results suggest that the positive effect of private equity on investments was
stronger among firms that are more likely to be financially constrained. Differences in funding
strategies in response to the financial crisis—particularly with regard to debt—seem to explain this
result.

4.4

The Heterogeneity of PE Firms

To further explore the underlying channel of the findings, we exploit heterogeneity across
the private equity groups themselves. We focus on the differences in the firms in their financial
and operational resources that were available by 2007, at the onset of the financial crisis. We look
at this hypothesis in two ways.

27

Clearly, leverage at 2007 is endogenous to many firm characteristics, in particular debt capacity. If anything, firms
that expect to respond more successfully to a negative credit shock should ex-ante employ more debt. Therefore, it is
reasonable to think that the results are actually characterized by a downward bias.

25

First, we compare PE groups based on the amount of “dry powder” that they had available.
As we discuss in the data section, we have collected information from ThomsonOne about amount
of capital that PE firms had raised, but not invested, in the pre-crisis period. Firms with more
capital available may be better positioned to provide liquidity to their portfolio companies and may
be able to commit more time and attention to portfolio companies since they deployed less capital.
As discussed in the data section, we used Capital IQ and ThomsonOne to identify the PE investors
in each PE-backed company. We divided the PE-backed companies in two groups, depending on
whether they had PE investors that were on the top quartile of dry powder in 2007.
In Table 6, we present the results. We naturally restrict the sample to PE-backed companies
only, since the variation is at investor level is therefore available only for PE-backed companies.
In Columns (1) and (2), we find that firms whose PE investors had considerable amount of dry
powder at the beginning of the crisis increased their investment level relatively more. The result
is both statistically and economically significant: a high dry powder firm experienced a 10%
increase in investment (normalized again by assets) relative to the control group. Consistent with
this result, we find that this group of PE firms were also more active in financing their portfolio
companies. Companies financed by high dry powder groups had 5% greater debt issuances
(Columns 5 and 6) and, importantly, 7% larger equity injections (Columns 9 and 10), consistent
with their greater availability of capital.
Second, we test this hypothesis using an alternative measure, which is whether the PE
group’s most recent fund was of a relatively recent vintage in 2008. This analysis is based on the
underlying assumption that PE firms with younger funds have more resources available—both
financial and operational—to provide to their portfolio companies. Over the course of the first
three to five years of the fund, PE firms deploy capital and commit their time and attention to

26

portfolio companies. Therefore, PE funds that are younger at the onset of the crisis could direct
more financial and operational resources to portfolio firms. We identify the year in which these
investors raised their last fund before the financial crisis. We use a dummy that equals to one if
the fund was formed in the years between 2002 and 2007.28
In Table 6, we also find a larger increase in investment when PE investors had raised a
fund more recently (Columns 3 and 4), suggesting the importance of the availability of resources
for the PE group. We find similarly strong patterns with respect to debt issuances, which have
increased much more for companies where the investors had raised a fund more recently (Table 6,
Columns 7 and 8). The effects are both economically and statistically significant. The results for
equity contributions are similarly positive and statistically significant in Column 11. When adding
firm controls in Column 12, however, while coefficients remain similar, they are no longer
statistically significant.
Overall, the results in this section are consistent with the hypothesis that portfolio
companies with PE investors that had more resources at the onset of the crisis, financial and
operational, managed to increase investments in portfolio companies during the crisis.

5

Performance and Company Outcomes Analysis

5.1

Company Performance

In this section, we attempt to understand to what extent greater investment increased the
long-term prospects of PE-backed companies. We examine this question by looking at various
measures of company performance. Were the investment by PE-backed companies imprudent or

28

The result is also robust when using a continuous measure of fundraising time, the year of the last fund raised
before 2007.

27

wasteful, we would expect that these decisions would have had detrimental effects on their
performance.
In Columns (1) and (2) of Panel A in Table 7, we find that PE-backed group assets grow
faster than the matched firms’. This is consistent with prior findings that illustrate that PE-backed
companies increased their relative investment during the crisis. Next, we turn to explore
accounting measures of firm performance around the crisis period. In Columns (3) and (4), we
explore EBITDA scaled by revenue, and in Columns (5) and (6), ROA, defined as net income over
assets. In both cases, we do not find that PE-backed companies experienced worse performance
relative to the matched firms during the crisis.
This analysis suggests that the average performance of PE-backed companies was not
differentially affected by the financial shock: the increase in investment of PE-backed companies
did not lead to a low quality or excessively risky projects. However, given the long-term nature of
the returns in many corporate capital expenditures, these accounting measures of performance may
fail to fully capture the underlying changes in asset quality and company value around the crisis.
Therefore, next sections will explore two alternative dimensions of firms’ performance. First, to
capture the potential benefits of an increased investment, we explore how firms’ market shares
evolve around the crisis. Second, we examine exit patterns—both positive (M&A acquisition) and
negative (bankruptcy)— in the post-crisis period.

5.2

Market Share

The increase in investment may yield long-term profitability (and valuation) benefits if it
allows the firm to capture a larger share of its market. We explore this hypothesis in Panel B of
Table 7. For each firm in our sample, we measure its market share as the firm’s sales relative to

28

the total operating revenue in its industry (using the three-digit SIC codes).29 Then, using a logspecification, we explore the change in market share of PE-backed companies relative to their
peers during the crisis.
In Columns (1) and (2), we explore this question focusing on market share outcomes in the
first two years in the crisis (2008 and 2009), where we found the largest divergence in investment
and funding policies. In other words, using market share as a dependent variable, we repeat the
standard difference-in-difference model using the 2004-2009 period. We find that in the crisis
period, PE-backed companies experienced an 8% increase in market share relative to the control
group. In Columns (3) and (4), we show that results are also similar when we use the full sample
period (2004-2011), albeit smaller and less precisely estimated.30
In order to explore what may drive this slight difference in the result, in Columns (5) and
(6), we employ the fully interacted model where we examine the effect of being a PE-backed
company on every year in our panel. Consistent with our previous results, we find that PE-backed
companies experience a larger increase in market share in 2008 and 2009, but this effect becomes
smaller and statistically non-significant in 2010 and 2011. This is consistent with the fact that the
change in investment and funding policy were mostly concentrated in the 2008 and 2009, a period
during which the financial turmoil and credit market freeze were most severe.
Overall, our results suggest that PE-backed companies may have channeled their
investment towards an increase in market share rather than increasing their short-term profitability.

29

The total operating revenue of the industry is constructed using only medium and large firms in the
Orbis/Amedeus data, as previously discussed. Results are also similar using the SIC two-digit industry classification.
30
In Appendix Table (A.5), we show that these results are robust to an alternative specification. In particular, rather
than using the full panel, we employ only cross-sectional variation. In particular, in Columns (1) and (2), we show
that PE-backed companies were more likely to have larger market share in 2009 relative to 2007 (conditional logit
model). Similarly, in Columns (5) and (6), we look at the growth in market share over the same period and we find
that this growth in market share was 6% higher.

29

In the next section, we look at exit patterns as another relevant dimension to understand firms’
performance.

5.2

Exit Analysis

In this section, we examine exit patterns in the post-crisis period. In particular, we compare
the relative likelihood that PE-backed companies entered distress, went bankrupt, or were
successfully acquired. This will provide an additional perspective on the performance of PEbacked companies during the crisis, potentially capturing dimensions not easily captured by
accounting measures or market share.
As we discussed in the Section 2, we define “bad exits” when firm exit the sample after a
status of financial distress or bankruptcy. We identify “potentially profitable exits” as company
acquisitions without prior company distress. Thus, we examine how post-crisis exit patterns
differed across PE-backed and non-PE companies. The variation under study is only crosssectional, as we explore the status of the sample firms in 2011. Therefore, the difference-indifference design is not suitable for these tests. To make PE and non-PE-related companies
comparable in the cross-section, we control for industry fixed effects and firm characteristics. Even
with these adjustments, a causal interpretation of these results requires much stronger assumptions
than the previous set of results.
In particular, we estimate the following equation:
*8-6" = %"9:(") + ' )* ,-./" + =4" >?@ + 5"#
where *8-6" is a firm-level dummy that identifies the type of exit activity (“bad” or “potentially
profitable”), %"9:(") are industry-level fixed effects at two digit SIC level, )* ,-./" is a dummy
variable identifying PE-backed companies, and 4" >?@ are the firm-level characteristics measured
30

before the crisis (2007). Since the outcome here is only cross-sectional and discrete, we estimate
this model using a conditional logit model. To facilitate interpretation, all the results are presented
as marginal effects at the mean.
In Panel C of Table 7, we show the main results. We find that PE-backed companies were
more likely to experience a potentially profitable exit (Columns 1 and 4). The results are similar
with and without controls, but the magnitude is a bit smaller with controls. The most conservative
estimates suggest that PE-backed companies were about 30% more likely to be acquired in the
post-crisis period. At the same time, PE-backed companies were not more likely to go out of
business or enter into distress in the post-crisis period (columns 5-8). The results are not only
insignificant, but also small in magnitude.
Overall, in the post-crisis period, PE-backed companies were more likely to be targeted in
a potentially profitable M&A transaction, and also were not more likely to go out of business.
Despite the limitations of the cross-sectional analysis, the results are inconsistent with the
hypothesis that PE financing increased the financial fragility of the PE-backed companies.

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we have studied how PE-backed companies responded to the turmoil caused
by the 2008 financial crisis by exploring their investments, financing, and performance. One of
the main objectives of this analysis is to explore whether PE-backed companies increased the
fragility of the economy during the financial crisis, as recently articulated by the Bank of England
and others. Furthermore, this analysis can improve our understanding about the relationship
between economic cycles and financial intermediaries more generally.

31

We find that PE-backed companies decreased investments relatively less than the control
group during the financial crisis. This result can be explained by the ability of PE-backed
companies to utilize the resources and relationships of their private equity sponsors to raise equity
and debt funding in this difficult period, and to lower their cost of capital, as captured by the
interest expense. Furthermore, we find that the positive investment effects of private equity were
particularly large in companies more likely to be financially constrained at the time of the crisis
and more likely to occur when PE firms have more resources. The increase in investment during
the crisis led to increased asset growth, market shares, and ultimately a higher probability to be
acquired. Altogether, these results are inconsistent with the hypothesis that private equity
contributed to the fragility of the economy during the recent financial crisis.

32

References
Angrist, J. D. and Pischke, J., Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's Companion.
Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2008.
Axelson, U., Jenkinson, T., Strömberg, P. and Weisbach, M. S., “Borrow cheap, buy high? The
determinants of leverage and pricing in buyouts.” Journal of Finance, 2013, 68, 2223–67.
Ben-David, I., Franzoni F. and Moussawi R., "Hedge fund stock trading in the financial crisis of
2007–2009." Review of Financial Studies, 2012, 25, 1–54.
Bernanke, B., “Nonmonetary effects of the financial crisis in the propagation of the Great
Depression.” American Economic Review, 1983, 73, 257–275.
Bernanke, B. and Gertler, M., “Financial fragility and economic performance.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 1990, 105, 87–114.
Bernanke, B., Campbell, J., Friedman, B. and Summers, L., “Is there a corporate debt
crisis?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1988, no. 1, 83–139.
Bernstein, S., Lerner, J., Sorensen, M. and Stromberg, P., “Private equity and industry
performance.” Management Science, 2016, forthcoming.
Bernstein, S. and Sheen, A., "The operational consequences of private equity buyouts: Evidence
from the restaurant industry." Review of Financial Studies, 2016, 29, 2387–2418.
Bertrand, M., Duflo, E. and Mullainathan, S., “How much should we trust differences-indifferences estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119, 249–275.
Blundell-Wignall, A., “The private equity boom: Causes and policy issues.” Financial Market
Trends: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2007, no. 92, 59–86.
Bottero, M., Lenzu, S. and Mezzanotti, F., “Sovereign debt exposure and the bank lending channel:
impact on credit supply and the real economy.” Bank of Italy Working Paper, 2015.
Boucly, Q., Sraer, D. and Thesmar, D., “Growth LBOs.” Journal of Financial Economics, 2011,
102, 432–453.
Brav, O., "Access to capital, capital structure, and the funding of the firm." Journal of Finance,
2009, 64, 263-308.
Chodorow-Reich, G., “The employment effects of credit market disruptions: Firm-level evidence
from the 2008–9 financial crisis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129, 1–59.

33

Cohn, J., and Towery, E., “The determinants and consequences of private equity buyouts of private
firms: Evidence from US corporate tax returns.” Working Paper, 2013.
Cumming, D., Siegel, D. and Wright, M., “Private equity, leveraged buyouts and governance.”
Journal of Corporate Finance, 2007, 13, 439–460.
Davis, S., Haltiwanger, J., Handley, K., Jarmin, R., Lerner, J., & Miranda, J., “Private equity, jobs,
and productivity.” American Economic Review, 2014, 104, 3956–3990.
Duchin, R., Ozbas O. and Sensoy B., "Costly external finance, corporate investment, and the
subprime mortgage credit crisis." Journal of Financial Economics, 2010, 97, 418–435.
Fahlenbrach, R., Prilmeier, R. and Stulz, R. M., “This time is the same: Using bank performance
in 1998 to explain bank performance during the recent financial crisis.” Journal of Finance,
2012, 67, 2139–2185.
Gormley, T. A. and Matsa, D. A., “Common errors: How to (and not to) control for unobserved
heterogeneity.” Review of Financial Studies, 2014, 27, 617–661.
Harris, R., Siegel, D. and Wright, M., “Assessing the impact of management buyouts on economic
efficiency: Plant-level evidence from the United Kingdom.” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 2005, 87, 148–153.
Hoshi, T., Kashyap, A. and Scharfstein, D., “The role of banks in reducing the costs of financial
distress in Japan.” Journal of Financial Economics, 1990, 27, 67–88.
Hoshi, T., Kashyap, A. and Scharfstein, D., “Corporate structure, liquidity, and investment:
Evidence from Japanese industrial groups.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1991, 106,
33–60.
Hotchkiss, E., Smith, D., and Strömberg, P., “Private equity and the resolution of financial
distress.” Working Paper, 2015.
Illig, R., “The Dog That Didn't Bark: Private Investment Funds and Relational Contracts in the
Wake of the Great Recession.” Michigan Journal of Private Equity & Venture Capital Law,
2012.
Ivashina, V. and Kovner, A., “The private equity advantage: Leveraged buyout firms and
relationship banking.” Review of Financial Studies, 2011, 24, 2462–2498.
Ivashina, V. and Scharfstein D., "Bank lending during the financial crisis of 2008." Journal of
Financial Economics, 2010, 97, 319–338.

34

John, K., Lang, L., and Netter, J., “The voluntary restructuring of large firms in response to
performance decline,” Journal of Finance, 1992, 47, 891–917.
Kahle, K. and Stulz R., "Access to capital, investment, and the financial crisis." Journal of
Financial Economics, 2013, 110, 280–299.
Kaplan, S., “The effects of management buyouts on operating performance and value.” Journal of
Financial Economics, 1989, 24, 217–254.
Kaplan, S. and Stein, J., “The evolution of buyout pricing and financial structure in the 1980s.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1993, 108, 313–357.
Kaplan, S. and Stromberg, P., “Leveraged buyouts and private equity.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 2009, 23, 121–46.
Lichtenberg, F. and Siegel, D., “The effects of leveraged buyouts on productivity and related
aspects of firm behavior,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1990, 27, 165–194.
Michaely, R. and Roberts, M., "Corporate dividend policies: Lessons from private firms." Review
of Financial Studies, 2012, 25, 711–746.
Petersen, M. and Rajan, R., “The benefits of lending relationships: Evidence from small business
data.” Journal of Finance, 1994, 49, 3–37.
Rajan, R. and Zingales, L., “Financial dependence and growth.” American Economic Review,
1998, 88, 559–586.
Reinhart, C., and Rogoff, K., This Time is Different. Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2009.
Riley, R., Rosazza Bondibene, C. and Young, G. “The financial crisis, bank lending and UK
productivity: Sectoral and firm-level evidence.” National Institute Economic Review,
2014, no. 228, R17–R34.

35

Figure 1: Investment in United Kingdom around the financial crisis
This figure shows the quarterly business investment volume in the United Kingdom (seasonally adjusted). Currency
values are at 2013. The measure does not include expenditure on dwellings, land and existing buildings and costs of
ownership transfer of non-produced assets. The data is available at the “Office of National Statistics” in the
UK.(https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/grossdomesticproductgdp/bulletins/businessinvestment/quarter3julytosept20
16revisedresults).

36

Figure 2: Lending growth in UK around the financial crisis
This figure shows the growth rate in the stock of lending by UK monetary financial institutions to private non-financial
corporations (PNCF) or non-financial businesses. The stock of lending is the total amount of outstanding net lending.
Series included are PNFC M4Lx (seasonally adjusted), sterling loans to PNFCs (seasonally adjusted), all currency
loans to PNFCs (seasonally adjusted), all currency loans to non-financial businesses (non-seasonally adjusted). PNFC
M4Lx is the lending to PNFCs, which includes loans, securities, reverse repos, overdrafts, and commercial paper. The
other three measures each includes loans, reverse repos and overdrafts. The data is available at the official statistics
of the Bank of England and they are reported in the report “Trends in Lending (2014).”
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/other/monetary/trendsinlending2014.aspx .

37

Figure 3: Effect of PE-backed companies on investment over time
This figure illustrates the change in investment separately for both PE and non-PE companies in our sample.
Specifically, the figure reports %# of the following equation: !"# = %# + %" + 5"# , estimated separately for PE and nonPE companies, where %# capture year fixed effects, and %" firm fixed effects. The year 2007 is used as base period
and therefore the corresponding coefficient is normalized to zero. The estimates are plotted with standard errors above
and below the point estimates. Standard errors are clustered at firm-level.

38

Figure 4: Effect of PE-backed companies on equity contributions over time
This figure illustrates the change in equity contributions separately for both PE and non-PE companies in our sample.
Specifically, the figure reports %# of the following equation: !"# = %# + %" + 5"# , estimated separately for PE and nonPE companies, where %# capture year fixed effects, and %" firm fixed effects. The year 2007 is used as base period
and therefore the corresponding coefficient is normalized to zero. The estimates are plotted with standard errors above
and below the point estimates. Standard errors are clustered at firm-level.

39

Figure 5: Effect of PE-backed companies on debt issuances over time
This figure illustrates the change in debt issuances separately for both PE and non-PE companies in our sample.
Specifically, the figure reports %# of the following equation: !"# = %# + %" + 5"# , estimated separately for PE and nonPE companies, where %# capture year fixed effects, and %" firm fixed effects. The year 2007 is used as base period
and therefore the corresponding coefficient is normalized to zero. The estimates are plotted with standard errors above
and below the point estimates. Standard errors are clustered at firm-level.

40

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Panel A reports the industry distribution at the macro industry level (1-digit SIC) for the PE sample and the whole
universe of medium and large UK firms, but excluding financial, insurance, regulated or public administration. In
Panel B reports the summary statistics of sample firms in 2007 across treated (PE-backed companies) and non-treated
firms (non-PE companies). The last column reports the mean difference across the two groups. Level variables are in
millions of dollars. Panel C reports the one-year and two-year growth in the characteristics in 2007. The last column
reports the mean difference across the two groups. More information on variable definition is available in the
Appendix. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.

Panel A: Industry distribution
Industry Distribution

PE Sample

Full Sample

Mining

1%

2%

Construction

6%

15%

Manufacturing

32%

17%

Wholesale Trade

12%

11%

Retail Trade

7%

6%

Transportation

4%

6%

Services

38%

44%

Panel B: Firms’ characteristics in 2007
PE Sample

Matched Sample

N

Mean

Median

SD

N

Mean

Median

SD

Mean Diff.

Revenue (M$)

432

98.05

35.30

240.81

1527

77.64

29.86

184.49

20.41*

ROA
Investment/Asset

434
434

0.09
0.19

0.09
0.20

0.23
0.18

1550
1550

0.09
0.20

0.09
0.20

0.22
0.18

0.01
-0.01

Equity Contr/Asset

415

-0.02

0.01

0.13

1513

-0.01

0.01

0.13

-0.01

Net Debt Iss. /Asset

415

0.09

0.10

0.23

1513

0.11

0.08

0.24

-0.01

Debt/Asset

434

0.71

0.70

0.39

1550

0.69

0.67

0.39

0.02

41

Panel C: Firms’ trends in 2007
PE Sample
N

Mean

Revenue

423

ROA

427

Investment/Asset

Matched Sample

Median

SD

N

Mean

Median

SD

Mean Diff.

0.37

0.18

1.34

1456

0.35

0.17

1.17

0.02

0.71

-0.03

5.21

1483

0.79

0.07

4.48

-0.07

386

1.54

0.10

5.86

1434

1.37

0.05

5.20

0.17

Equity Contr/Asset

372

-0.59

0.39

15.96

1376

-0.93

0.09

13.73

0.34

Net Debt Iss. /Asset

376

2.95

0.32

15.09

1428

2.25

0.20

12.86

0.70

Debt/Asset

418

0.02

-0.03

0.34

1516

0.02

-0.02

0.31

0.01

Revenue

393

0.56

0.33

2.08

1362

0.71

0.34

2.33

-0.15

ROA

400

1.10

0.05

8.33

1388

1.40

0.11

6.97

-0.29

Investment/Asset

339

1.85

0.61

6.22

1333

2.39

0.94

6.06

-0.54

Equity Contr/Asset

330

0.43

1.09

23.44

1274

0.70

1.05

18.95

-0.28

Net Debt Iss. /Asset

343

3.45

0.65

18.73

1359

2.94

0.76

13.99

0.51

Debt/Asset

382

0.01

-0.04

0.46

1442

0.04

-0.04

0.60

-0.03

One Year Growth

Two Year Growth

42

Table 2: Investment and funding policies
This table reports the estimates of a difference-in-difference fixed effect model on the investment and funding variables. All specifications include firm and year
fixed effects. The main parameter of interest is the interaction between the crisis dummy and PE-backed company dummy variable. Odd columns contain the
baseline regression and even columns augment the baseline model with a set of firm level controls measured before the crisis and interacted with the post
dummy. These variables include firm size (log of revenue), growth in revenue, cash flow over assets, ROA, and leverage. In Columns (1) and (2) the outcome is
investment scaled by assets; in Columns (3) and (4) is net equity contribution over assets; in Columns (5) and (6) is the net debt issuance scaled by assets; in
Columns (7) and (8) is the total leverage; in Columns (9) and (10) on average interest rate. More information on the variables are available in the Appendix.
Standard errors are clustered at firm level. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.
(1)
(2)
Investment/Assets
PE firm x Crisis

(3)
(4)
Net Equity Contr./Assets

(5)
(6)
Net Debt Iss./Assets

(7)
(8)
Leverage

(9)
(10)
Interest Rate

0.059***
(0.013)

0.056***
(0.013)

0.022***
(0.007)

0.021***
(0.007)

0.042***
(0.011)

0.039***
(0.011)

0.013
(0.015)

0.012
(0.014)

-0.003**
(0.001)

-0.003**
(0.001)

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects
Firm Control

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Observations
Clusters

12456
1984

11910
1878

12469
1981

12003
1876

12903
1982

12274
1876

13205
1984

12553
1878

10222
1841

9831
1743

R-squared

0.160

0.161

0.040

0.059

0.090

0.104

0.011

0.029

0.016

0.022

43

Table 3: Investment and funding policies over time
This table reports the estimates from a time-varying fixed effects model. All specifications include firm and year
fixed effects. Specifically, the table reports !" of the following equation: #$" = &" + &$ + !" () +,-.$ + /$" where
&" capture year fixed effects, and &$ firm fixed effects. E columns augment the baseline model with a set of firm
level controls measured before the crisis and interacted with the post dummy. These variables are firm size (log of
revenue), growth in revenue, cash flow over assets, ROA, and leverage. In Columns (1) and (2) the outcome is
investment scaled by assets; in Columns (3) and (4) the outcome is net equity contribution over assets; in Columns
(5) and (6) is the net debt issuance over assets; in Columns (7) and (8) is average interest rate. More information on
the variables is available in the Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at firm level. *** denotes significance at the
1% level, ** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.
(1)

(2)

Investment/Assets
PE firm x y2004

(3)

(4)

Net Equity
Contr./Assets

(5)

(6)

Net Debt Iss./Assets

(7)

(8)

Interest Rate

0.015

0.018

-0.000

0.002

-0.026

-0.028

0.001

-0.000

(0.029)

(0.029)

(0.013)

(0.013)

(0.027)

(0.028)

(0.003)

(0.003)

0.032

0.032

-0.015

-0.013

0.001

0.000

-0.002

-0.002

(0.026)

(0.026)

(0.015)

(0.016)

(0.023)

(0.023)

(0.002)

(0.002)

0.010

0.009

-0.009

-0.010

-0.020

-0.024

0.002

0.002

(0.024)

(0.025)

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.024)

(0.024)

(0.002)

(0.002)

PE firm x y2008

0.084***

0.087***

0.025**

0.025**

0.046**

0.043**

-0.003**

-0.003**

(0.022)

(0.022)

(0.013)

(0.012)

(0.021)

(0.020)

(0.001)

(0.001)

PE firm x y2009

0.057**

0.050**

0.008

0.006

0.029

0.022

-0.002

-0.002

(0.024)

(0.024)

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.021)

(0.021)

(0.002)

(0.002)

0.067***

0.064***

0.014

0.013

0.037**

0.032*

-0.003*

-0.004**

(0.021)

(0.021)

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.018)

(0.018)

(0.002)

(0.002)

0.068***

0.064***

0.021*

0.018*

0.019

0.019

-0.002

-0.003

(0.021)

(0.021)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.020)

(0.020)

(0.002)

(0.002)

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

PE firm x y2005
PE firm x y2006

PE firm x y2010
PE firm x y2011

Firm Control

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Observations

12456

11910

12469

12003

12903

12274

10222

9831

Clusters

1984

1878

1981

1876

1982

1876

1841

1743

R-squared

0.160

0.161

0.040

0.059

0.090

0.104

0.016

0.021

44

Table 4: Main results with alternative matching sample
This table reports the estimates of a difference-in-difference fixed effect model on the investment and funding variables using an alternative matching estimator
based only on ROA, industry and size. All specifications include firm and year fixed effects. The main parameter of interest is the interaction between the crisis
dummy and PE-backed company dummy variable. Odd columns contain the baseline regression and even columns augment the baseline model with a set of firm
level controls measured before the crisis and interacted with the post dummy. These variables include firm size (log of revenue), growth in revenue, cash flow
over assets, ROA, and leverage. In Columns (1) and (2) the outcome is investment scaled by assets; in Columns (3) and (4) is net equity contribution over assets;
in Columns (5) and (6) is the net debt issuance scaled by assets; in Columns (7) and (8) is the total leverage; in Columns (9) and (10) on average interest rate.
More information on the variables are available in the Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at firm level. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the
5%, and * at the 10%.

(1)

(2)

Investment/Assets
PE firm x Crisis

(3)

(4)

Net Equity Contr./Assets

(5)

(6)

Net Debt Iss./Assets

(7)

(8)
Leverage

(9)

(10)

Interest Rate

0.057***

0.053***

0.025***

0.022***

0.040***

0.037***

0.026*

0.024*

-0.003***

-0.004***

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.015)

(0.015)

(0.001)

(0.001)

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects
Firm Control

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Observations

16318

15672

16347

15790

16872

16150

17259

16512

12808

12369

Clusters
R-squared

2598
0.153

2477
0.153

2596
0.040

2475
0.076

2596
0.075

2475
0.103

2598
0.009

2477
0.026

2356
0.011

2251
0.015

45

Table 5: Heterogeneity across firms’ financial constraints
These tables estimate standard difference-in-difference fixed effect model and repeat the specification of Table 2 while
exploring various proxies of financing constraints in 2007. All specifications include firm and year fixed effects. In
each table, the interaction term in Columns 1 and 2 is based on firm size, and equal one if the firm is at the top quartile
of firm employment versus the rest of the sample. The interaction in Columns 3 and 4 is based on dependency on
external finance, measured by RZ index (Rajan and Zingales, 1998). The interaction equals one if dependence on
external finance is above the median, and zero otherwise. In Columns 5 and 6, the interaction is based on firm leverage.
The interaction equals one if firm leverage is at the top quartile within the sample. Panel A reports the results using
investment as an outcome, Panel B uses instead debt issuance over assets as dependent variable and lastly Panel C
reports the results with net equity contributions over assets. Even columns augment the baseline model with a set of
firm level controls measured before the crisis and interacted with the post dummy. These variables are firm size (log
of revenue), growth in revenue, cash flow over assets, ROA, and leverage. More information on the variables are
available in the Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at firm level. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at
the 5%, and * at the 10%.

Panel A - Investment / Assets
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

PE firm x Crisis

0.014
(0.020)

0.011
(0.020)

0.030**
(0.014)

0.023
(0.014)

0.023
(0.017)

0.023
(0.018)

Interaction x Crisis

-0.025*
(0.013)

-0.016
(0.015)

-0.047***
(0.012)

-0.041***
(0.012)

-0.055***
(0.012)

-0.038***
(0.014)

Interaction x Crisis x PE

0.053**
(0.026)

0.051**
(0.026)

0.067**
(0.027)

0.077***
(0.026)

0.072***
(0.025)

0.064***
(0.025)

External
Dependence
Yes
No
No
12456
1984
0.161

Yes
Yes
Yes
11910
1878
0.162

Interaction Variable
Year Fixed Effects
Firm Fixed Effects
Firm Control
Observations
Clusters
R-squared

Small
Yes
Yes
No
11539
1824
0.160

Yes
Yes
Yes
11105
1742
0.162

46

High Leverage
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
12456
11910
1984
1878
0.162
0.162

Panel B - New Debt Issuances / Assets
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

PE firm x Crisis

-0.004
(0.019)

0.003
(0.019)

0.014
(0.013)

0.012
(0.012)

0.036***
(0.013)

0.033**
(0.013)

Interaction x Crisis

-0.015
(0.014)

-0.030**
(0.014)

-0.049***
(0.012)

-0.035***
(0.011)

-0.152***
(0.011)

-0.096***
(0.013)

Interaction x Crisis x PE

0.055**
(0.024)

0.046*
(0.024)

0.062***
(0.024)

0.062***
(0.024)

0.028
(0.021)

0.023
(0.021)

Yes
Yes
Yes
12274

High Leverage
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
12903
12274

Interaction Variable
Year Fixed Effects
Firm Fixed Effects
Firm Control
Observations

Yes
Yes
No
11891

Yes
Yes
Yes
11400

External
Dependence
Yes
No
No
12903

Clusters
R-squared

1823
0.089

1741
0.101

1982
0.091

1876
0.105

1982
0.105

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.035***
(0.012)

0.026**
(0.012)

0.016*
(0.009)

0.013
(0.009)

0.011
(0.012)

0.013
(0.012)

Interaction x Crisis

-0.006
(0.007)

0.014
(0.008)

0.002
(0.007)

-0.002
(0.006)

0.067***
(0.006)

0.044***
(0.006)

Interaction x Crisis x PE

-0.016
(0.016)

-0.008
(0.015)

0.015
(0.015)

0.016
(0.014)

0.011
(0.015)

0.009
(0.014)

External
Dependence
Yes
No
No
12469
1981
0.040

Yes
Yes
Yes
11989
1873
0.059

High Leverage
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
12469
11989
1981
1873
0.053
0.064

Small

Panel C - Net Equity Contr./Assets
(1)
PE firm x Crisis

Interaction Variable
Year Fixed Effects
Firm Fixed Effects
Firm Control
Observations
Clusters
R-squared

Small
Yes
Yes
No
11564
1823
0.045

Yes
Yes
Yes
11183
1739
0.063

47

1876
0.109

Table 6: Heterogeneity across funds
This table reports the estimates from a difference-in-difference fixed effect model, while exploring heterogeneity across resource availability of PE firms backing
the company. The analysis is a cross-section estimated using only the set of PE-backed companies. High Dry Powder is a dummy variable equals to one if PE
investors are at the top quartile for amount of dry powder at 2007, defined based on the amount of capital raised but not invested. The variable 1(Fund 02-07) is a
dummy variable equals to one if the PE firm raised its latest fund between 2002 and 2007. All specifications contain firm and year fixed effects. Even columns
augment the baseline model with a set of firm level controls measured before the crisis and interacted with the post dummy. These variables are firm size (log of
revenue), growth in revenue, cash flow over assets, ROA, and leverage. More information on the variables are available in the Appendix. Standard errors are
clustered at firm level. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Investment/Assets
Post*High Dry Powder

(7)

(8)

(9)

Net Debt Iss./Assets

(10)

(12)

Net Equity Contr./Assets

0.105**

0.086**

0.053*

0.062**

0.070***

0.055**

(0.048)

(0.041)

(0.031)

(0.03)

(0.025)

(0.022)

Post*1(Fund 02-07)

(11)

0.075*

0.090**

0.064**

0.073***

0.036*

0.030

(0.039)

(0.036)

(0.026)

(0.026)

(0.021)

(0.021)

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Control

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Observations

1582

1539

1582

1539

1589

1546

1589

1546

1565

1527

1565

1527

Adjusted R-squared

0.108

0.117

0.106

0.117

0.064

0.068

0.064

0.068

0.028

0.048

0.023

0.044

48

Table 7: Performance Analysis
Panel A reports a standard difference-in-difference fixed effect model exploring various performance measures. All
specifications include firm and year fixed effects. In Columns (1) and (2) the outcome is one year assets growth; in
Columns (3) and (4) is total EBITDA scaled by revenue; in Columns (5) and (6) is ROA. Standard errors are clustered
at firm level. In Panel B, the dependent variable is firm market share, measured as the log of share of firms’ revenue
scaled by total revenue at the level of three-digit SIC industry. Columns (1) and (2) estimate the standard model, but
using only data from 2004-2009. Columns (3) and (4) instead uses the full sample period of 2004-2011. Lastly,
Columns (5) and (6) report the coefficient from the time-varying regression. Standard errors are clustered at firmlevel. In Panel C, we report the marginal value (at the mean) of a conditional logit model where we study the effect of
being a PE-backed company on various exit outcomes. Even columns have firm level controls at 2007. In Columns
(1) and (2) the outcome is a dummy equal to one if the company was the target of an M&A activity in the post-crisis
period; in Columns (3) and (4) the outcome is instead a dummy equal to one if the company was a target of an M&A
activity and the company does not exit from the data in the same time frame; in Columns (5) and (6) the outcome is
the dummy equal to one if the company exit the data set in the post period; lastly in Columns (7) and (8) the outcome
is a dummy if the company exit the data and it reported some financial difficulties before the exit. In all three panels,
even columns augment the baseline model with a set of firm level controls measured before the crisis and interacted
with the post dummy. These variables are firm size (log of revenue), growth in revenue, cash flow over assets, ROA,
and leverage. See the Appendix and the paper for more info on the variables. *** denotes significance at the 1% level,
** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.

Panel A- Accounting Performance
(1)

(2)

(3)

Assets Growth
PE firm x Crisis

(4)

(5)

EBITDA/REV

(6)
ROA

0.148***

0.124***

-0.009

-0.010

-0.003

-0.004

(0.040)

(0.038)

(0.013)

(0.014)

(0.009)

(0.008)

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Control

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Observations

13180

12528

12507

12137

12865

12364

Clusters

1984

1878

1960

1878

1984

1878

R-squared

0.026

0.042

0.001

0.015

0.005

0.041

49

Panel B: Market Share

PE firm x Crisis

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.081**

0.079**

0.050

0.055*

(0.035)

(0.034)

(0.034)

(0.033)

(5)

PE firm x y2004

0.039

0.048

(0.057)

(0.059)

0.035

0.047

(0.050)

(0.049)

PE firm x y2005
PE firm x y2006
PE firm x y2008
PE firm x y2009

-0.035

-0.020

(0.036)

(0.035)

0.094***

0.106***

(0.031)

(0.034)

0.072**

0.088***

(0.031)

(0.033)

0.039

0.052

(0.037)

(0.039)

PE firm x y2010
PE firm x y2011

Sample

2004-2009

(6)

-0.007

0.005

(0.053)

(0.055)

Whole Sample

Whole Sample

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Control

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Observations

9090

8847

12697

12326

12697

12326

Clusters
R-squared

1960
0.035

1878
0.087

1960
0.021

1878
0.064

1960
0.021

1878
0.064

(1)

(2)

Panel C - Exit Outcomes

Marginal Eff.
PE Firm

Industry (2-digit) F.E.

1{M&A}

(5)

(6)

1{Exit}

(7)

(8)

1{Bankruptcy}

0.351***

0.325***

0.351***

0.318***

0.058

0.039

0.092

0.099

(0.023)

(0.101)

(0.024)

(0.100)

(0.085)

(0.087)

(0.103)

(0.106)

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Firm Controls 2007
Observations

(3)
(4)
1{M&A, No
Distress}

Y
1635

1635

Y
1635

50

1635

Y
1368

1368

Y
1360

1360

Appendix
A.1

Data and variable construction

Aside from Capital IQ, all the data in the paper come from the Amadeus/Orbis database,
produced by Bureau Van Dijk. To minimize the chances that data errors could drive our results,
we winsorize at 1% every ratio and growth rate used in the analysis. The winsorization was
undertaken over the full sample of Amadeus/Orbis, companies. All variables in levels are in
millions of dollars.
The main variables we used in the analysis are the following: (a) Investment/Assets, where
investment is constructed as the change in assets over the past year, plus depreciation; (b) (Net)
Equity Contribution/Assets, where the equity contribution is measured as the difference in total
equity (shareholder value) over the past year, minus the profit; (c) (Net) Debt Issuance/Assets,
where the debt issuance is measured as the overall change in debt; (d) Leverage, which is simply
total debt (short- and long-term) divided by assets; (e) ROA, which is net income over assets; (f)
EBITDA/Assets, where EBITDA is the earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and
amortization; (g) the Logarithm of Market Share, where market share is the ratio of the firm
revenue in a specific year and the total revenue of all medium and large firms in the same SIC twodigit industry.
In the paper, we use different methodologies to determine companies that are more or less
likely to be financial constrained at the time of the financial crisis. First, we use size by looking at
the top quartile of revenue in 2007, across the sample. Second, we identify firms that are in the top
quartile of leverage in 2007. Third, we identify companies operating in industries that are more
dependent on external finance. The index is constructed using all firms in Compustat between

51

1980 and 2007: we construct a score for every two digit SIC code, which is the median of CAPEX
minus operating cash flow, scaled by CAPEX.

52

Figure A.1 : Effect of PE-backed companies over time
This figure reports the time-varying effect of being a PE-backed company on the main outcomes. Panel A reports the
effect on investment, Panel B on debt issuance and Panel C on equity contribution. Specifically, this Figure reports
the !" of the following equation:#$" = &" + &$ + !" () +,-.$ + /$" . As explained in the paper, the year 2007 is used
as base period and therefore the corresponding coefficient is normalized to zero. The central dot reports the point
estimate while the straight vertical lines report the 90% confidence interval. The confidence interval is constructed
using standard errors clustered at firm level. More info on this measure is available in the paper and in the Appendix.

Panel A - Investment

Panel B – Equity Contributions

53

Panel C – Debt Issuance.

54

Table A.1: Robustness excluding MBO
This Table reports a robustness test, where we estimate the standard difference-in-difference fixed effect model on the main outcome variables dropping the PEbacked companies whose deal is identified as a management buyout (MBO) and the corresponding matched companies. Every specification contains a set of firm
and year fixed effects. The main parameter of interest is the interaction between the crisis dummy and a dummy identifying PE-backed companies. Odd columns
contain the baseline regression where instead even columns augment the baseline model with a set of firm level controls measured before the crisis and interacted
with the post dummy. These variables are firm size (log of revenue), growth in revenue, cash flow over assets, ROA, and leverage. In Columns (1) and (2) the
outcome is investment scaled by assets; in Columns (3) and (4) is net equity contribution; in Columns (5) and (6) is the net debt issuance; in Columns (7) and (8)
is leverage; in Columns (9) and (10) is ROA. More information on the variables is available in the Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at firm level. *** denotes
significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.
(1)

(2)

Investment/Assets
PE firm x Crisis

Year Fixed Effects
Firm Fixed Effects
Firm Control
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

(3)
(4)
Net Equity
Contr./Assets

(5)

(6)

Net Debt Iss./Assets

(7)

(8)

Leverage

(9)

Interest Rate

0.068***
(0.017)

0.072***
(0.017)

0.022**
(0.010)

0.018**
(0.009)

0.047***
(0.015)

0.053***
(0.015)

0.022
(0.020)

0.022
(0.020)

-0.003
(0.002)

Yes
Yes
No
8295
0.157

Yes
Yes
Yes
7965
0.159

Yes
Yes
No
8316
0.039

Yes
Yes
Yes
8028
0.064

Yes
Yes
No
8557
0.085

Yes
Yes
Yes
8181
0.103

Yes
Yes
No
8764
0.009

Yes
Yes
Yes
8376
0.029

Yes
Yes
No
6711
0.016

55

(10)

-0.003*
(0.002)
Yes
Yes
Yes
6483
0.021

Table A.2: Robustness using only 2007-2008
This table reports a robustness test, where we estimate the standard difference-in-difference fixed effect model on various outcomes using only data from 2007 and
2008. This corresponds to the last year before the crisis and the first one in the crisis. Every specification contains a set of firm and year fixed effects. The main
parameter of interest is the interaction between the post dummy and a dummy identifying PE-backed companies. Odd columns contain the baseline regression
where instead even columns augment the baseline model with a set of firm level controls measured before the crisis and interacted with the post dummy. These
variables are firm size (log of revenue), growth in revenue, cash flow over assets, ROA, and leverage. In Columns (1) and (2) the outcome is investment scaled by
assets; in Columns (3) and (4) is net equity contribution; in Columns (5) and (6) is the net debt issuance; in Columns (7) and (8) is leverage; abd in Columns (9)
and (10) is ROA. More information on the variables is available in the Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at firm level. *** denotes significance at the 1%
level, ** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.
(1)

(2)

Investment/Assets
PE firm x Crisis

Year Fixed Effects
Firm Fixed Effects
Firm Control
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

(3)
(4)
Net Equity
Contr./Assets

(5)

(6)

Net Debt Iss./Assets

(7)

(8)

Leverage

(9)

(10)
Interest Rate

0.083***
(0.022)

0.085***
(0.022)

0.027**
(0.013)

0.029**
(0.012)

0.047**
(0.021)

0.039*
(0.021)

0.004
(0.010)

0.001
(0.010)

-0.003**
(0.001)

-0.003**
(0.001)

Yes
Yes
No
3924
0.385

Yes
Yes
Yes
3715
0.399

Yes
Yes
No
3860
0.139

Yes
Yes
Yes
3672
0.262

Yes
Yes
No
3892
0.234

Yes
Yes
Yes
3696
0.296

Yes
Yes
No
3948
0.002

Yes
Yes
Yes
3737
0.020

Yes
Yes
No
3183
0.009

Yes
Yes
Yes
3019
0.020

56

Table A.3: Robustness using only companies not experiencing exit
This table reports a robustness test, where we estimate the standard difference-in-difference fixed effect model on various outcomes using only data only for groups
of matched firms where no company is identified as leaving the data by 2011 (survivorship bias free). Every specification contains a set of firm and year fixed
effects. The main parameter of interest is the interaction between the post dummy and a dummy identifying PE-backed companies. Odd columns contain the
baseline regression where instead even columns augment the baseline model with a set of firm level controls measured before the crisis and interacted with the post
dummy. These variables are firm size (log of revenue), growth in revenue, cash flow over assets, ROA, and leverage. In Columns (1) and (2) the outcome is
Investment scaled by asset; in Columns (3) and (4) is net Equity Contribution; in Columns (5) and (6) is the net Debt Issuance; in Columns (7) and (8) is leverage;
in Columns (9) and (10) is ROA. More information on the variables is available in the Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at firm level. *** denotes significance
at the 1% level, ** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.

(1)

(2)

Investment/Assets
PE firm x Crisis

Year Fixed Effects
Firm Fixed Effects
Firm Control
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

(3)
(4)
Net Equity
Contr./Assets

(5)

(6)

Net Debt Iss./Assets

(7)

(8)

Leverage

0.044***
(0.014)

0.040***
(0.014)

0.017**
(0.008)

0.016**
(0.008)

0.030**
(0.013)

0.025**
(0.012)

0.003
(0.014)

0.000
(0.014)

Yes
Yes
No
9658
0.160

Yes
Yes
Yes
9271
0.160

Yes
Yes
No
9700
0.046

Yes
Yes
Yes
9367
0.061

Yes
Yes
No
10020
0.090

Yes
Yes
Yes
9567
0.102

Yes
Yes
No
10242
0.029

Yes
Yes
Yes
9776
0.040

57

(9)

(10)
Interest Rate

-0.002
(0.001)

-0.003*
(0.001)

Yes
Yes
No
7963
0.020

Yes
Yes
Yes
7683
0.026

Table A.4: Robustness adding time-varying industry fixed effects
This table reports a robustness test, where we estimate the standard difference-in-difference fixed effect model on various outcomes adding set of fixed effects
generated as the product of industry (two digit SIC) and the post dummy. Every specification contains a set of firm and year fixed effects. The main parameter of
interest is the interaction between the post dummy and a dummy identifying PE-backed companies. Odd columns contain the baseline regression where instead
even columns augment the baseline model with a set of firm level controls measured before the crisis and interacted with the post dummy. These variables are firm
size (log of revenue), growth in revenue, cash flow over assets, ROA, and leverage. In Columns (1) and (2) the outcome is investment scaled by asset; in Columns
(3) and (4) is net equity contribution; in Columns (5) and (6) is the net debt issuance; in Columns (7) and (8) is leverage; and in Columns (9) and (10) is ROA.
More information on the variables is available in the Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at firm level. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5%,
and * at the 10%.

(1)

(2)

Investment/Assets
PE firm x Crisis

(3)
(4)
Net Equity
Contr./Assets

(5)

(6)

Net Debt Iss./Assets

(7)

(8)

Leverage

(9)

(10)

Interest Rate

0.055***

0.053***

0.022***

0.021***

0.039***

0.037***

0.012

0.013

-0.002*

-0.003**

(0.013)

(0.013)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.015)

(0.014)

(0.001)

(0.001)

Industry X Year
FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Control

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Observations

12456

11910

12469

12003

12903

12274

13205

12553

10222

9831

R-squared

0.163

0.163

0.042

0.060

0.093

0.105

0.019

0.040

0.021

0.026

58

Table A.5: Robustness of Market Share Results
This table reports a robustness test on the market share results. All regressions are cross-sectional regressions, where
we compare firms across PE and non-PE backed companies. In Columns (1)–(4), we estimate a conditional logit
model, where the outcome is a dummy equal to one if the market share of the firm increased over 2009 and 2007
(Columns 1 and 2) or over 2011 and 2007 (Columns 3 and 4). The reported beta are marginal effect at the average and
the model is estimated with SIC two-digit fixed effects. In Columns (5)-(8), we estimate an OLS model where the
outcome is the growth rate in market share between 2009 and 2007 (Columns 5 and 6) or 2011 and 2007 (Columns 7
and 8). The market share growth is winsorized at 1% to reduce the influence of outliers. Odd columns contain the
baseline regression where instead even columns augment the baseline model with a set of firm level controls measured
before the crisis and interacted with the post dummy. These variables are firm size (log of revenue), growth in revenue,
cash flow over assets, ROA, and leverage. More information on the variables is available in the Appendix. Standard
errors are clustered at firm level. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Market Share Increase - Dummy
2007-2009
PE Firm

Industry (2-digit)
F.E.

(7)

(8)

Market Share Growth
2007-2009

2007-2011

0.054**

0.032*

0.042

0.017

0.046*

0.063**

0.027

0.054

(0.024)

(0.018)

(0.027)

(0.012)

(0.027)

(0.031)

(0.049)

(0.050)

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Firm Controls 2007
Observations

2007-2011

(6)

Y
1639

1639

Y
1564

1564

59

Y
1655

1655

Y
1565

1565

