                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE WELFARE EFFECTS OF LONG-TERM HEALTH INSURANCE CONTRACTS

                                     Benjamin R. Handel
                                         Igal Hendel
                                     Michael D. Whinston

                                      Working Paper 23624
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23624


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2017




We thank Neale Mahoney and Nathan Hendren, as well as seminar participants at Arizona,
Bocconi, EIEF, Harvard, the MIT Public Finance lunch, the April 2017 NBER joint public
finance/insurance conference, Penn, Princeton, Stanford, Toulouse, UCLA, UNC, and
Washington University for their comments. All authors are grateful for support from NSF grant
SES-1259770. We thank Soheil Ghili for outstanding research assistance. All authors are grateful
for support from NSF grant SES-1259770. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Benjamin R. Handel, Igal Hendel, and Michael D. Whinston. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Welfare Effects of Long-Term Health Insurance Contracts
Benjamin R. Handel, Igal Hendel, and Michael D. Whinston
NBER Working Paper No. 23624
July 2017
JEL No. G22,I13

                                          ABSTRACT

Reclassification risk is a major concern in health insurance. We use a rich dataset with individual-
level information on health risk to empirically study one possible solution: dynamic contracts.
Empirically, dynamic contracts with one-sided commitment substantially reduce the
reclassification risk present with spot contracting, achieving close to the first-best for consumers
with flat net income paths. Gains are smaller for consumers with net income growth, and these
consumers prefer ACA-like community rating over dynamic contracts. However, lower risk
aversion, sufficient switching costs, or government insurance of pre-age-25 health risks can raise
welfare with dynamic contracts above the level in ACA-like markets.


Benjamin R. Handel                                Michael D. Whinston
Department of Economics                           Sloan School of Management
University of California, Berkeley                and Department of Economics
508-1 Evans Hall #3880                            Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Berkeley, CA 94720                                100 Main St
and NBER                                          Cambridge, MA 02142
handel@berkeley.edu                               and NBER
                                                  whinston@mit.edu
Igal Hendel
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
igal@northwestern.edu
    The Welfare E¤ects of Long-Term Health Insurance
                        Contracts
                Ben Handely, Igal Hendelz, and Michael D. Whinstonx

                                        January 2017
                                   (This Draft: May 2017)


                                             Abstract
          Reclassi…cation risk is a major concern in health insurance. We use a rich dataset
      with individual-level information on health risk to empirically study one possible solu-
      tion: dynamic contracts. Empirically, dynamic contracts with one-sided commitment
      substantially reduce the reclassi…cation risk present with spot contracting, achieving
      close to the …rst-best for consumers with ‡at net income paths. Gains are smaller for
      consumers with net income growth, and these consumers prefer ACA-like community
      rating over dynamic contracts. However, lower risk aversion, su¢ cient switching costs,
      or government insurance of pre-age-25 health risks can raise welfare with dynamic
      contracts above the level in ACA-like markets.



1     Introduction
Consumers face substantial health risks over their lifetime. Much of this risk involves
conditions, such as diabetes, heart disease, and cancer, that lead to higher expected medical
expenses over signi…cant periods of time. Development of these conditions can expose
individuals who buy short-term insurance coverage to substantial premium increases – so-
called “reclassi…cation risk” – greatly reducing the extent to which their health risks are
insured.
      We thank Neale Mahoney and Nathan Hendren, as well as seminar participants at Arizona, Bocconi,
EIEF, Harvard, the MIT Public Finance lunch, the April 2017 NBER joint public …nance/insurance con-
ference, Penn, Princeton, Stanford, Toulouse, UCLA, UNC, and Washington University for their comments.
All authors are grateful for support from NSF grant SES-1259770. We thank Soheil Ghili for outstanding
research assistance.
    y
      Department of Economics, UC Berkeley; handel@berkeley.edu
    z
      Department of Economics, Northwestern University; igal@northwestern.edu
    x
      Department of Economics and Sloan School of Management, M.I.T.; whinston@mit.edu


                                                  1
     The state-by-state health insurance exchanges set up under the A¤ordable Care Act
(ACA), and many similar markets worldwide, respond to this problem through pricing
regulations that enforce community rating and guaranteed issuance, thereby prohibiting dis-
crimination against consumers who have developed “pre-existing conditions.”Unfortunately,
while such bans can eliminate reclassi…cation risk, requiring identical pricing for consumers
with di¤erent ex ante risk levels can create adverse selection, leading to under-provision of
insurance [Handel, Hendel and Whinston (2015), Patel and Pauly (2002)].
     In this paper, we explore the extent to which long-term contracts, without pricing regu-
lation, could o¤er a way to reduce reclassi…cation risk without incurring welfare losses from
adverse selection. Speci…cally, we characterize optimal long-term contracts theoretically,
and then use data on the preferences, income paths, and health transitions of a population
of employees at a large …rm to assess the welfare achievable through long-term contracts,
and compare it to other possible approaches, such as the annual contracts with community
rating present in the ACA.
     We model the insurance contracting problem as one of symmetric learning as in Harris
and Holmstrom (1983), who study labor markets, and Hendel and Lizzeri (2003), who study
life insurance markets. In the model, consumers seek to insure against negative health shocks
over their lifetimes. Consumers and insurers symmetrically learn those shocks over time. If
only spot contracts are available, risk-averse consumers fully insure within-period risk but
premiums re‡ect the information revealed over time, implying that consumers fully bear
the risk of persistent health shocks. If both consumers and …rms can commit to long-term
contracts ex ante, prior to information revelation, then the e¢ cient (…rst-best) allocation,
which involves full insurance, is possible. However, in practice, consumer commitment over a
long time horizon is unlikely.1 As a result, the empirically relevant contracting environment
is likely one with one-sided commitment on the part of insurers, and we focus on this case.
We assume as well the presence of capital market imperfections preventing consumers from
borrowing, due for example to a lack of collateral.2 As shown in Harris and Holmstrom
(1983) and Hendel and Lizzeri (2003), the competitive equilibrium in markets with one-sided
commitment only partially insures reclassi…cation risk.
     We show theoretically that optimal unilateral commitment contracts o¤er consumers a
minimum guaranteed consumption level over time, as a function of their risk preferences and
income paths. This minimal guarantee is bumped up to a new level within a contract when
  1
    See, for example, the discussions in Diamond (1992), Cochrane (1995), and Pauly, Kunreuther, and
Hirth (1995). Another reason the …rst best may be unattainable, which we do not model, is moral hazard.

  2
   Were consumers able to borrow freely, the …rst best could be achieved by having consumers pay all
premiums up front. This …nanical imperfection likely stems from similar factors as those that prevent
committing consumers to make large ex post payments to an insurer.



                                                  2
necessary to meet competitive o¤ers from other insurers. The improved terms are necessary
to ensure that consumers won’t leave the long-term contract after receiving a positive shock.
These consumption ‡oors are the counterpart of the downwardly rigid wages in Harris and
Holmstrom (1983), whose model we generalize and apply to the context of health insurance.
As there, optimal contracts involve “front-loading” – here premium payments in excess of
expected medical costs – to lock consumers into the contract and allow insurers to both
break even and o¤er insurance against reclassi…cation risk. We also show that these optimal
contracts can be equivalently o¤ered as guaranteed premium path contracts, and when o¤ered
in this form are self-selective, in the sense that consumers with di¤erent lifetime income paths
and risk preferences prefer the contracts designed for them.3
    We apply this model empirically using an individual-level panel data set on the medical
claims of the employees (and their dependents) of a large …rm. The key data are diagnostic
codes of each individual in the sample, which we combine with professional software designed
to predict future medical expenditures to produce a measure of an individual’s health status.
We thus observe the medical expense risk that consumers face within the typical one-year
span of health insurance contracts. (Notably, we know the same information that insurers use
at underwriting.) A key ingredient to study dynamic contracts is the stochastic process that
determines the evolution of health. Because we have multiple observations of individuals’
health status we are able to estimate a long-run health state transition process that captures
how this risk evolves over time. We use as well risk preference estimates from Handel,
Hendel, and Whinston (2015), identi…ed based on the insurance choices in these data, to
assess consumers’preferences for consumption smoothing.
    We …rst compute optimal contracts with one-sided insurer commitment using our data,
to examine the premiums and the extent of front-loading associated with these contracts.
For consumers with ‡at net income over time (“net income” is income minus expected
medical costs), a healthy consumer at age 25 pays a premium of $2,750 despite expected
costs of only $1,131 in that year. The extent of front-loading is inverted U-shaped: front-
loading is highest for individuals in medium health states. This occurs because the extent
of front-loading at any point in time depends on both the current health state and the
implications of that current state for future states (measured through our estimated health
status transition matrix). Good health draws can a¤ord the front-loading better, while bad
   3
    Guaranteed premium path contracts contractually specify the path of future premiums at which the
consumer can continue coverage if she has not previously lapsed. These are distinguished by their premium
guarantees from what are called “guaranteed renewable” contracts. The latter merely state that the con-
sumer has a right to renew at a rate at the insurer’s discretion, but that must be the same as what the
insurer o¤ers to all other consumers in the same policy. This discretion potentially allows the insurer to
induce lapsation by raising premiums or degrading quality (e¤ectively cancelling the policy) and to then
re-enroll consumers in new policies at rates based on their health states. In practice, in the pre-ACA world,
an insurer’s ability to do this varied across states due to di¤erences in state regulatory stringency.


                                                     3
draws bene…t more from the future promises front-loading buys. The extent of front-loading
is substantial. Over the …rst ten years of these long-term contracts, the average consumer
contributes $21,209 extra through front-loading, in order to fund long-term insurance against
health shocks leading to reclassi…cation risk.
    We also examine the structure of these contracts as a function of consumers’expected in-
come paths. In addition to the case of ‡at net income, we use the income paths of managers
at the …rm to represent steeply increasing net income, the income paths of non-managers
to re‡ect rising but ‡atter income paths, and we also consider the case of a “downscaled
manager”whose lifetime income path is proportionately scaled down from that of a manager
to generate the same present discounted value as that of a non-manager. Downscaled man-
agers, for example, with steeper income growth, have equilibrium contracts with noticeably
lower front-loading than for the case of ‡at net income: a downscaled manager in perfect
health at age 25 front-loads only $547 in that year, over $1,000 lower than the $1,619 that
a consumer with ‡at net income front-loads at that same age and health state. This fea-
ture holds in general: conditional on age and health state, managers front-load much less
early in the contract, primarily because their marginal value of incremental income is much
higher in those periods than later in life, when their incomes are much higher. Thus, their
income growth over time limits their desire to insure future health risks with current income.
Nonetheless, managers’contracts still exhibit substantial consumption guarantees that pro-
tect against the risks of their health status worsening over time. The primary di¤erence
relative to ‡atter income paths is that the consumption guarantees of managers are lower
and provide less insurance, due to the lower degree of front-loading.
    We then consider the welfare e¤ects of these long-term contracts. We investigate …rst
the welfare loss from a market with only year-to-year spot contracts (and no community
rating). Spot contracts result in a welfare loss between 14% and 40% relative to the …rst
best, depending on the income pro…le, with larger losses for consumers with steeper income
paths. Part of these losses come from the inability of spot contracts to smooth consumption
over time. Since our interest is insurance, not consumption smoothing, we also use as
a benchmark contracts that o¤er full insurance with premiums at each age equal to the
average medical expenses of that age group. These contracts o¤er full insurance (generating
a deterministic consumption path), without allowing consumption smoothing over time.
Relative to this alternative benchmark, we …nd that spot contracts imply a 10% to 14%
welfare loss, representing the loss from being unable to insure reclassi…cation risk. Still, this
is a very large loss in lifetime expected uility.
    We then assess the performance of optimal dynamic contracts with one-sided commit-
ment. We …nd that, for consumers with ‡at net income, these dynamic contracts achieve
close to the …rst best, closing 87.7% of the welfare gap between spot contracts and the …rst


                                               4
best. However, for steeper income pro…les, optimal dynamic contracts bridge much less of
this gap. For example, for downscaled managers, optimal dynamic contracts with one-sided
commitment bridge only 10.8% of this welfare gap. They perform somewhat better relative
to the case of full insurance with no consumption smoothing, closing 38% of the welfare loss
su¤ered by a downscaled manager due to the reclassi…cation risk arising from spot contracts.
    We compare as well optimal dynamic contracts with one-sided commitment to ACA-like
market regulation with spot contracts and community rating, where price discrimination is
prohibited and consumers are mandated to purchase one of several levels of coverage. In
ACA-like markets, community-rating fully insures reclassi…cation risk, but creates adverse
selection [studied in Handel, Hendel, and Whinston (2015)] leading to a welfare loss be-
tween 2% and 6% relative to the …rst best, depending on the income path considered. This
welfare loss occurs because, due to adverse selection, consumers’within-period event insur-
ance unravels to the minimum allowable coverage of 60% actuarial value in equilibrium.4
We …nd that whether the ACA-like market is preferred from a welfare perspective depends
on the income paths we consider. For rising income paths (non-managers, managers, and
downscaled managers) the ACA-like environment does better than dynamic contracts, but
for consumers with ‡at net income paths, dynamic contracts are preferred. Intuitively, the
ACA-like environment is better for individuals who …nd front-loading costly.
    We also explore several robustness checks and extensions. First, we explore the role that
risk aversion plays in our analysis, and speci…cally focus on the case in which risk aversion is
one-…fth the magnitude as what we estimated in our empirical context. Reduced risk aversion
limits the extent of surplus that is lost via either spot contracts or dynamic contracts, but,
ultimately, the intuition of how dynamic contracting gains relate to income paths remains
the same. However, with this lower level of risk aversion, dynamic contracts are preferred to
the ACA-like market by consumers with all four income paths we consider, albeit the welfare
losses from risk bearing are in all cases much smaller than in our base case (although not
insubstantial). Second, we consider the e¤ects of switching costs, as estimated in Handel
(2013). By improving consumers’ commitment to their current insurer, these costs can
improve the insurance of reclassi…cation risk. We …nd that a switching cost in the range of
$5,000 increases the welfare optimal dynamic contracts deliver to the range of the ACA-like
market. Third, we verify that our …ndings also hold using health state transitions computed
for employees of a larger …rm (so that data for some transition cells are less sparse). Fourth,
we examine the degree to which optimal precautionary savings would improve welfare under
spot contracting. While consumer welfare improves, the basic insights from our analysis are
unchanged. Fifth, we examine the welfare optimal dynamic contracts deliver to consumers
   4
   Risk adjustment, which we do not model here, could reduce this loss [see, for example, the discussion in
Handel, Hendel, and Whinston (2015)].


                                                    5
who arrive at age 25 in di¤erent health states. We …nd that consumers who are in poor
initial health are signi…cantly disadvantaged relative to how they do in alternative market
designs, a fact that suggests the desirability of providing some form of insurance for this
risk if contracting does not occur until age 25. Insuring this pre-age 25 health risk, so
that all consumers have the same lifetime welfare as the healthiest 25-year old, would cost
the government roughly $2,000 per consumer. Alternatively, a revenue-neutral government
tax/subsidy scheme that insures this pre-age 25 risk results in welfare similar to that in the
ACA-like exchange.
    We are not the …rst to consider the use of long-term contracts as a means of addressing
reclassi…cation risk in insurance markets. Long-term contracts have been explored in life
insurance markets by Hendel and Lizzeri (2003) who document that long-term life-insurance
contracts involve front-loaded premiums, as the theory of optimal contracts with one-sided
commitment predicts. Finkelstein, McGarry and Su… (2005) study positive implications of
dynamic contracting in the context of long-term care markets, and show evidence of adverse
retention, namely that healthier consumers lapse from contracts over time, leading to high
average costs from those consumers that remain.5
    In the context of health insurance, Pauly, Kunreuther, and Hirth (1995) and Cochrane
(1995) provide theoretical discussions of schemes to address reclassi…cation risk. Pauly,
Kunreuther, and Hirth (1995) focus on “guaranteed renewable” contracts that ensure that
an insured can renew future coverage at the same rates that the healthiest possible type
would pay, while Cochrane (1995) proposes the use of “premium insurance” as a means
of insuring against long-term negative shocks to health.6 We discuss both of these ideas,
and their relation to our optimal contracts, in Section 7. Closest to our approach here is
Herring and Pauly (2006), who conduct an empirical calibration of the Pauly, Kunreuther
and Hirth (1995) model, using data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS).
After deriving their guaranteed renewable contract they compare its time path of premiums
to the average premiums paid by age in the MEPS data. Compared to our analysis, they
place a much simpler structure on the evolution of health and possible health states, and do
not derive optimal contracts that take account of consumption-smoothing concerns, nor do
they conduct a welfare analysis as we do.
    One-sided dynamic health insurance contracts are o¤ered in several countries, including
Germany and Chile. Browne and Ho¤mann (2013) study the German private health insur-
ance (PHI) market and demonstrate that (i) front-loading of premiums generates lock-in of
consumers, (ii) more front-loading is associated with lower lapsation, and (iii) consumers
   5
     Abramitzky (2010) applies a similar model to understand the evolution and existence of the kibbutz as
an institution.
   6
     Pauly, Kunreuther, and Hirth (1995) refer to these policies as guaranteed renewable contracts, but (as
they note) e¤ectively treat them as guaranteed premium path contracts.


                                                    6
that lapse are healthier than those who do not. Atal (2016) studies the impact of lock-in to
an insurance plan on the matching between individuals and health care providers in Chile.7
    Compared to all of this previous work on long-term health insurance contracts, our work
is unique in using data to derive optimal contracts with one-sided commitment, and in assess-
ing the welfare impacts of these contracts. More generally, the paper provides an empirical
assessment of the gains to optimal long-term contracting in an economically signi…cant set-
ting.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents our model and its equilibrium
implications. Section 3 describes the data we use to quantify the positive and normative
implications of di¤erent market designs. Section 4 brie‡y discusses computation. Section
5 presents our main positive and normative results. Section 6 examines several extensions.
Section 7 addresses the relation of our work to that of Pauly, Kunreuther, and Hirth (1995)
[and, by extension, Herring and Pauly (2006)] and Cochrane (1995). Section 8 concludes,
including a discussion of potential barriers to adoption of dynamic health insurance contracts.


2       Model of Dynamic Insurance
We consider a dynamic insurance problem T periods long, with periods indexed t = 1; :::T .
In the empirical analysis, periods represent years, with t = 1 corresponding to a 25-year old,
and T = 40 corresponding to a 65-year old, when Medicare coverage would begin in the U.S.
     A consumer enters each period t characterized by her health state t 2 , with greater
  t indicating sicker individuals. We take     to be a …nite set. The consumer’s initial health
state is 1 , which occurs with probability f0 ( 1 ). For periods t < T , state t determines
both the distribution of period t medical expenses, mt ; and the transition probabilities to the
period t + 1 health state t+1 , according to the joint probability ft (mt ; t+1 j t ). We denote
by f t ( t+1 j t ) the marginal conditional probability of t+1 : As future health is not relevant
for the period T insurance problem, we need only specify the probability fT (mT j T ).8
    7
     Bundorf, Levin, and Mahoney (2012) investigate the implications of reclassi…cation risk in a large-
employer context in a short-run environment. See Hendel (2016) for a survey of the literature on reclassi…-
cation risk.
   8
     Incorporating health-dependent income is straightforward. We can allow for a link between di¤erent
health states and income by allowing for an additional expense associated with the state. Equilibrium
contracts would be determined in the same way as we describe below. However, the optimal policy would
then provide both health and income insurance, and could a¤ect labor supply incentives.




                                                    7
   An individual’s health state t is observed by both the individual and all insurance …rms,
namely, there is symmetric information and symmetric learning.9 We make the following
assumptions concerning the stochastic health process:

Assumption A1 E[mt j t ] is strictly increasing in                     t:

                          0                               0
Assumption A2 If          t   >   t,   then f t (   t+1 j t )   …rst-order stochastically dominates f t (   t+1 j t ):


    Assumption A1 says that the state t captures the consumer’s period t health: larger t
implies greater period t expected medical expenses. Assumption A2 says that being in worse
health in period t implies that the consumer’s health state in period t + 1 will be worse, in
the sense of …rst-order stochastic dominance.
    We assume that the insurance market is perfectly competitive, with risk-neutral …rms who
discount future cash ‡ows using the discount factor 2 (0; 1). A consumer’s risk preferences
are described by u( ), the consumer’s Bernoulli utility function, while the consumer’s long-
                  P
run utility is E[ t t u(ct )], where ct 2 R is the consumer’s period t consumption level.
Throughout, we assume that u0 ( ) > 0 and that u00 ( ) < 0, which motivates the consumer’s
desire for insurance. The consumer’s income in period t is yt , and evolves deterministically.10
Throughout we assume that consumers are unable to borrow to fund premium payments or
other expenses.
    In what follows, we will sometimes refer to a consumer’s income path y (y1 ; :::; yT ) and
risk preferences u( ) as the consumer’s “type”       (y; u). The optimal contract will depend
on this type.


2.1     Three Benchmarks
We will compare optimal dynamic contracts with one-sided commitment against three nat-
ural benchmarks.11 The …rst is the e¢ cient, …rst-best allocation. In this setting, this outcome
involves a constant consumption in all states and periods, equal to the present discounted
value of the consumer’s “net income” from periods t = 1 to T (where the “net income” in
   9
     Our assumption that all insurers have access to the same information assumes the ability of insurers
to underwrite e¤ectively potential new customers. If, instead, an individual’s current insurer had better
information than other …rms, prospective insurers would face an adverse selection problem when attempting
to attract lapsing consumers. For the consequences of this type of adverse selection, see, for example,
DeGaridel-Thoron (2005).
  10
     The model readily generalizes to stochastic income –possibly dependent on the consumer’s health state,
provided that E[yt mt j t ] is strictly decreasing in t . As noted in footnote 8, in this case the optimal
contract would insure both health and income risk.
  11
     We also compare the outcome of optimal dynamic contracts with one-sided commitment to an ACA-like
exchange market institution.




                                                                8
period t equals period t income, yt , less the ex ante expectation of period t medical expenses,
E[mt ]). That is, it involves the constant consumption level

                                            1                 X
                                                              T
                                                                      t 1
                                  C =                 T
                                                                            (yt     E[mt ]):              (1)
                                           1                  t=1


As is well known, if consumers and insurance …rms could both commit to a long-term contract
prior to the realization of 1 , the competitive equilibrium would yield this outcome.
    At the opposite extreme, long-term contracts may be impossible, leading to single-period
“spot” insurance contracts. In a competitive market, such contracts will fully insure the
consumer’s within-period medical expense risks at a premium equal to E[mt j t ], the con-
sumer’s expected medical expense given her period t health state t . This results in the
period t consumption level yt E[mt j t ]. Because the consumer’s period t health state t
is ex ante uncertain, this outcome faces the consumer with risk from an ex ante perspec-
tive. The consumer’s constant certainty equivalent of this uncertain consumption path is the
constant consumption level CESP OT such that
                                                                  "                                   #
                                             1                        X
                                                                      T
                                                                             t 1
                        u(CESP OT ) =                 T
                                                              E                    u(yt    E[mt j t ])    (2)
                                            1                         t=1


    Finally, in this dynamic setting both insurance and consumption smoothing over time are
needed to achieve the …rst best. Since we will focus on settings in which income is increasing
over time and borrowing is impossible, another natural benchmark is the outcome that would
result if the consumer was fully insured within each period (eliminating all ex ante risk) but
resources could not be transferred over time. This certain but time-varying consumption
path results in the same welfare as the constant consumption level CN BN S (“NBNS”= “No
Borrowing/No Savings”) such that

                                                  1                X
                                                                   T
                                                                            t 1
                            u(CN BN S ) =                 T
                                                                                  u(yt    E[mt ])):       (3)
                                                 1                 t=1


2.2       Optimal Dynamic Contracts with One-Sided Commitment
We now turn to the setting in which competitive insurers can o¤er long-term contracts
that they, but not consumers, are committed to. We assume that contracting begins
in period 1 (in our empirical setting, at age 25) after 1 has been realized.12 We can
view a long-term contract as specifying the consumer’s period t consumption level ct as
a function of the consumer’s publicly-observed health history up through period t, ht =
 12
      We consider the e¤ects of health risk before age 25 in Section 6.5.


                                                               9
[ 1 ; (m1 ; 2 ); :::(mt ; t+1 )].13 (The insurer’s pro…t in the period then equals the consumer’s
income yt less the sum of period t medical expenses and period t consumption.) The lack of
commitment by the consumer, however, means that the consumer is free in each period to
change to another insurer who is o¤ering the consumer better terms.
     As in Harris and Holmstrom (1982), without loss of generality we can restrict attention
when solving for the optimal contract to contracts in which the consumer never has an
incentive to “lapse”in this way: since the new contract the consumer signs following history
ht must give her new insurer a non-negative expected discounted continuation pro…t, the
consumer’s initial insurer could include the same contract continuation in the initial insurance
contract and weakly increase its expected discounted pro…t (lapsation would instead yield the
initial insurer a continuation pro…t of zero). As a result, we can look for an optimal contract
by imposing “lapsation constraints”that require that after no history ht is it possible to o¤er
the consumer an alternative continuation contract that (i) itself prevents future lapsation,
(ii) breaks even in expectation, and (iii) gives the consumer a higher continuation utility
than in the original contract.
     We take a recursive approach to solving this optimal contracting problem. At each date
t, we de…ne the state to be the pair ( t ; St ) where t is the consumer’s current health state
(which determines future expected medical expenses), and St is the absolute value of the
loss that the insurer is allowed to sustain going forward (i.e., St is the subsidy for future
insurance). This is a useful formulation for two reasons. First, after any history ht ,
continuation of the original contract generates some expected utility to the consumer and
some expected loss St to the insurer. A necessary condition for an optimal contract, given
the consumer’s current health state, is that it is not possible to increase the consumers’
continuation utility while keeping the insurer’s loss equal to St . So, the continuation of the
contract must itself solve an optimal contracting problem for an insurer who can sustain
the loss St starting in health state t . Second, the constraint that the contract prevents
lapsation can be viewed as saying that the consumer’s continuation utility starting in any
period t when in health state t cannot be less than in an optimal contract o¤ered by an
insurer who must break even, i.e., who has St = 0.
     Thus, we begin by considering the period T contracting problem that arises when an
insurer faces a consumer in health state T and can sustain a loss of ST :
                                           R
                 maxcT ( )                    u(cT (mT ))dFT (mT j   T)
                              R                                                                    (4)
                  s:t:            cT (mT )dFT (mT j T ) ST + yT       E[mT j   T ];   T

  13
    This formulation assumes, for convenience, that the consumer cannot engage in hidden savings. While
we will make this assumption initially, in the end we show that under the optimal contract the consumer
has no desire to save.



                                                  10
In problem (4), the insurer o¤ers cT ( ), which speci…es a consumption level cT for each
realization of period T medical expenses mT , subject to the constraint that the insurer’s
losses not exceed ST . In a long-term contract that breaks even overall, a positive subsidy
ST > 0 is enabled by previous front-loading of premiums –i.e., premiums that exceeded the
insurer’s expected medical expenses. For the …rm that initially contracted with the consumer
in period 1, ST may be positive, while for …rms seeking to induce the consumer to lapse and
sign with them, ST = 0. We denote the value of this problem by VT ( T ; ST ).
    For periods t < T , we then consider the problem –whose value we denote by Vt ( t ; St )
–that arises if a …rm faces a consumer in health state t and can sustain, going forward, a
(discounted expected) loss of St :
                             R
 maxct ( );St+1 ( )               [u(ct (mt ;    t+1 ))   + t Vt+1 (    t+1 ; St+1 (mt ;    t+1 ))]dFt (mt ;     t+1 j t )

                             R
                       (i)       [ct (mt ;   t+1 )   + St+1 (mt ;      t+1 )]dFt (mt ;     t+1 j t )   St + yt       E[mt j t ]
       s:t:

                      (ii)                      Vt+1 (    t+1 ; St+1 (mt ;   t+1 ))      Vt+1 (   t+1 ; 0)   for all (mt ;   t+1 )
                                                                                             (5)
In this problem, the …rm allocates resources to current consumption ct ( ) and to support-
ing future insurance through subsidies St+1 ( ), both of which are functions of the period t
medical expense realization mt and continuation state t+1 [as well as, implicitly, the state
( t ; St )]. The …rst constraint is the break-even constraint for the …rm going forward, given
the subsidy St that is available at the start of period t. The second constraint is the “lap-
sation constraint,”which says that the consumer’s continuation value for each realization of
  t+1 cannot fall below the value Vt+1 ( t+1 ; 0) that a rival insurer (who has no subsidy –i.e.,
who must break even) can provide. Since the value that can be provided to the consumer is
increasing in the subsidy, this constraint can equivalently be written as St+1 (mt ; t+1 ) 0 –
i.e., the optimal contract cannot involve strictly positive discounted continuation pro…ts (a
negative “subsidy”) for the insurer, since if it did a rival insurer could o¤er the consumer a
greater continuation utility while still earning a strictly positive expected discounted pro…t.
     Our main result, which can be viewed as a generalization of Harris and Holmstrom (1982),
and which we establish in the Appendix, is:14

Proposition 1 The equilibrium contract in a competitive market with one-sided commit-
ment for a consumer of type = (y; u) and who cannot borrow is characterized by a collection
of consumption guarantees fct ( t )g, where each ct ( t ) is the consumption guarantee o¤ered
  14
    Aside from the change of context from labor markets to health insurance, our model generalizes Harris
and Holmstrom (1982) by allowing for more general stochastic medical expense and health state transition
processes. We also o¤er a recursive proof of the result, show that the optimal contracts are self-selective
(Section 2.3), and introduce switching costs (Sections 2.4 and 6.2).


                                                             11
to the consumer in the …rst period of a break-even (i.e., zero subsidy) contract starting in
period t when the consumer is in health state t . The consumer who agrees to a contract
in period 1 when in health state 1 enjoys in each period t following health state history
( 1 ; :::; t ) the certain consumption max t c ( ). Consumers have no incentive to save
after agreeing to the contract.

       Proof. In Appendix A.

    Proposition 1 says that the equilibrium contract with one-sided commitment can be
viewed as o¤ering the consumer in period 1 an initial minimum guaranteed consumption
level c1 ( 1 ). This minimal guarantee is bumped up in later periods t > 1 to a new, higher
guarantee ct ( t ) > c1 ( 1 ) to match the outside market at the …rst instance at which the
consumer’s health state t is su¢ ciently good that an outside …rm could o¤er a better
contract (i.e., a higher consumption guarantee) to the consumer and break even. That new
guarantee is in turn bumped up in the periods that follow if, again, doing so is necessary to
match the outside market. The equilibrium contract provides full within-period insurance for
the consumer (i.e., consumption in each period is independent of mt ), and partial insurance
against reclassi…cation risk, as consumers who have experienced su¢ ciently bad health states
leading up through a given period t [such that c ( )              c1 ( 1 ) for all        t] all enjoy the
same level of consumption regardless of di¤erences in their health states. The extent of this
partial insurance is a function of the consumer’s initial health state 1 , income path y, and
risk preferences u( ), as well as the health state transition process. Since the consumer’s
consumption level is always weakly rising over time, the consumer never wishes to save.
    The optimal contract in Proposition 1 speci…es directly the consumer’s consumption
levels and prevents lapsation. Note, however, that the same outcome can alternatively be
achieved by means of a guaranteed premium path contract from which the consumer may
lapse. Speci…cally, the consumer is given the option to renew, if she has not yet lapsed, at
the guaranteed premium path p          (p1 ; :::; pT ) where pt = yt c1 ( 1 ) for t = 1; :::T , provided
that she has always renewed in the past.15 With this contract, some consumers, who have a
su¢ ciently good health state t , may choose not to renew in a given period t, instead signing
a contract with a new insurer that o¤ers premium path p = y                    ct ( t ) for       t, where
ct ( t ) > c1 ( 1 ). Such lapses have no e¤ect on the pro…t of the consumer’s initial insurer as
that …rm was indi¤erent about whether to match the outside o¤er.16;17
  15
      This form of contract is the counterpart to the “Annual Renewable Term”life insurance contracts studied
in Hendel and Lizzeri (2003).
   16
      We discuss in Section 8 the di¤erence between this guaranteed guranteed premium path contract and
that of Pauly, Kunreuther, and Hirth (1995).
   17
      The recursive formulation also makes clear that this equilibrium outcome can be achieved instead with
single-period contracts. A consumer in period 1 with health state 1 could purchase a contract that covers


                                                     12
2.3     Unobserved Types and Self-Selection
The analysis above assumed that a consumer’s lifetime income path y = (y1 ; :::; yT ) and risk
preferences u( ), summarized in the consumer’s “type” = (y; u), is known by both the
consumer and all insurers. In practice, this is unlikely to be the case. In this subsection we
show that insurers’failure to possess this information does not pose an obstacle to the use
of optimal dynamic contracts. Speci…cally, we show that if o¤ered the collection of optimal
contracts for all types derived above, presented as the guaranteed premium path contracts
described above, consumers will self-select, choosing the optimal contract for their type.18
    Speci…cally, suppose that there is a set of types in the market. As above, a guaranteed
premium path contract is a p = (p1 ; :::; pT ) that allows the consumer to continue coverage
in period t paying premium pt provided that she has not previously lapsed. The optimal
guaranteed premium path contract for a known type starting in period t when the con-
sumer’s health state is t is denoted by the path pt ( t ) fy ct ( t )gT=t , a path that keeps
consumption constant [equal to ct ( t )] as income changes from year to year.
    Our result is:

Proposition 2 Suppose that, in each period t = 1; :::T , the menu of optimal guaranteed
premium path contracts fpt ( t )g 2 ; t 2 is o¤ered, where pt ( t )  fyt ct ( t )gTt=1 . Then
in each period the menu is self-selective: that is, if a consumer of type agrees to a new
contract she chooses that type’s optimal contract pt ( t ).

    Proof. In Appendix B.
    Since insurers cannot o¤er any type of consumer a greater value than in the optimal
contract and still break even, Proposition 2 implies that it is an equilibrium for this menu
of contracts to be o¤ered, which results in the same allocation as if consumer types were
perfectly observable.
all period 1 medical expenses, and that in addition pays the consumer at the start of period 2 the amount
S2 (m1 ; 2 ) from the solution to problem (5) for t = 1. The premium in period 1 would equal y1 c1 ( 1 ), while
the period 2 premium would equal y2 E[m2 j 2 ] max 2 c ( ) + S2 (m1 ; 2 ). This is exactly the amount
that is needed to buy a long-term policy in period 2 that o¤ers the consumer a consumption guarantee equal
to max 2 cy ( ). Upon reaching period 2, however, the consumer could instead again buy a one-period
policy of this type, and could continue in this manner until period T . [This approach to replicating a
long-term contract with a series of short-term contracts is reminiscent of Fudenberg et al. (1990), although
our setting is not captured in their model because of the presence of lapsation constraints and the consumer’s
inability to borrow.]
   As noted in Cochrane (1995), such short-term contracts avoid the consumer being locked into an insurer,
perhaps resulting in better insurer performance as well as better matching of insurers and consumers when
health care networks are bundled with insurance provision. However, such contracts require that courts can
verify the consumer’s health state , while guaranteed premium path contracts do not.
   18
      Note that contracts that instead present the optimal contracts as guaranteed consumption levels (as in
Proposition 1), would clearly not induce self-selection as consumers with low lifetime incomes would choose
contracts intended for consumers with high lifetime incomes.


                                                      13
2.4     Switching Costs
Recent evidence suggests that consumers may exhibit substantial inertia in their health
insurance choices [see, e.g., Handel (2013)]. In Section 6.2 we extend our analysis to consider
the e¤ect of switching costs, modeled as creating a consumption loss of > 0 if the consumer
lapses and switches insurers. We show in Appendix A that the key change this introduces is
that the lapsation constraint in the period t problem (5) becomes St+1 (mt ; t+1 )       ; that
is, the insurer can now earn positive discounted expected continuation pro…ts up to without
causing the consumer to lapse. Nonetheless, the basic structure of an optimal contract
is unchanged when switching costs are present, again involving consumption guarantees.
Switching costs simply allow those guarantees to be greater because healthy consumers
are less likely to need to receive a premium reduction (consumption increase) to prevent
lapsation, enabling a greater shift of resources from healthy to unhealthy states.


3      Data and Parameter Estimates
We investigate positive and normative outcomes for each type of contracting relationship. To
predict equilibrium contracts and welfare under each regime we need four basic ingredients:
(i) expected medical costs conditional on an individual’s health state, (ii) the transitions
across health states as individuals age,(iii) preferences towards risk, and (iv) income paths.19
    We use detailed administrative data on the health insurance choices and medical utiliza-
tion of employees (and their dependents) at a large U.S.-based …rm over the period 2004
to 2009. These proprietary panel data include information on employee plan choices, and
detailed, claim-level employee (and dependent) medical expenditure and utilization informa-
tion. Overall, the data include 11,253 employees and 9,710 dependents, implying a total of
20,963 covered lives. For more information and descriptives statistics see Handel, Hendel
and Whinston (2015).
    The sample used in our analysis includes individuals between the ages of 25 and 65 who
are present over a given two-year period in our data (two years are needed to estimate health
state transitions for those individuals). The sample displays ages close to uniformly spread
between 25 and 65, is 45% male, and has incomes dispersed over the full range we can
measure from Tier 1 (less than $41,000) to Tier 5 (greater than $176,000).
  19
    One of the market con…gurations we consider, the ACA, does not entail full event insurance. Computing
welfare without full event insurance requires as an input the distribution of health expenses conditional onan
individual’s health state, rather than just its mean. See Handel, Hendel, and Whinston (2015).




                                                     14
3.1     Health States
The most essential part of the data is the available information on diagnostics (ICD-9 codes)
of each individual in the sample. The diagnostic codes as well as other demographics are
fed into the ACG software developed at Johns Hopkins Medical School to create individual-
level measures of predicted expected medical expenses for the upcoming year relative to
the mean of the population.20 The output is an index that represents the health status of
each individual in the population. Since the ACG is used by insurers in their underwriting
processes, our empirics are based on similar information about risks that market participants
(insurers) have.21
    We denote the ACG index by and we refer to it as individual i’s “health state”at time
t. As the ACG score measures expected medical expenses, Assumption 1 in the previous
section holds by construction, though we verify that the higher predicted expenditures do
imply higher actual expenditures and vice-versa.
    Table 1 presents the decomposition of health expenses between the predictable compo-
nent , and the deviation around this expectation. The former re‡ects heterogeneity and the
potential source of reclassi…cation risk, while the latter captures the gains from spot insur-
ance (conditional on ). For each age cohort, the …rst two columns show the mean expense
and the overall standard deviation around this mean. The last two columns then decom-
pose this standard deviation into the standard deviation of E[mj ] and the average standard
deviation of medical expenses around E[mj ]. The table illustrates that both within-period
insurance for expenditure risk and longer-run insurance for health state transitions are im-
portant aspects of consumer risk protection in this market. The large standard deviation
in E[mj ] conditional on age suggests that there could be signi…cant reclassi…cation risk in
spot contracting environments, as well as meaningful adverse selection if community rating is
introduced (as under the A¤ordable Care Act), something that is shown in Handel, Hendel,
and Whinston (2015).


  20
     We use the Johns Hopkins ACG (Adjusted Clinical Groups) Case-Mix System. It is one of the most
widely used and respected risk adjustment and predictive modeling packages in the health care sector,
speci…cally designed to use diagnostic claims data to predict future medical expenditures.
  21
     This is one of the main advantages of our empirical strategy. Most of the literature on health insurance
estimates the distribution of risks from observed insurance choices and realized total medical expenditures.
Instead our measure of risk is based on diagnosis codes and professional diagnostics (the ACG index). The
distribution of risk is data, as opposed to being inferred from choice and expense realizations.




                                                     15
                        Sample Total Health Expenditure Statistics

        Ages           Mean          S. D.     S. D. of E[mj ] S. D. around E[mj ]
        All          6,099         13,859           6,798              9,228
       25-30          3,112         9,069           4,918              5,017
       30-35          3,766        10,186           5,473              5,806
       35-40          4,219        10,753           5,304              6,751
       40-45          5,076        12,008           5,942              7,789
       45-50          6,370        14,095           6,874              9,670
       50-55          7,394        15,315           7,116             11,092
       55-60          9,175        17,165           7,414             13,393
       60-65         10,236        18,057           7,619             14,366

Table 1: Sample statistics for total health expenditures for (i) the entire sample used in our
equilibrium analysis and (ii) 5-year age buckets within that sample. “Mean”column reports
the average medical cost for the relevant group; “S.D.”reports its standard deviation; “S.D.
of E[mj ]” and “S.D. around E[mj ]” columns decompose the overall standard deviation
into the parts related to the observable health state and the average of the residual variation.

3.2     Health State Transitions
The second key input into our empirical analysis are the health state transitions over time.
Once we have it for every individual in the sample, we estimate the probabilistic health
state transition process as follows. First, we divide the into seven mutually exclusive and
exhaustive bins that each contain one-seventh of the …nal sample. Table 2 presents the pro-
portion of individuals in each age group in each of these seven health state categories, with
bin 1 being the healthiest, and bin 7 being the sickest.        We then compute a separate
transition matrix for each …ve-year age group (e.g., transitions within cohort 25-30) using
the actual transitions of consumers within each age range. We limit the partition of the
health space to seven bins, and the age groups to …ve-year bins, to guarantee meaningful
support to estimate each probability in these transition matrices. The advantage of comput-
ing transitions of ACG scores as opposed to medical expense transitions is that the ACG is
based on persistent diagnostics. A broken arm probably does not a¤ect signi…cantly future
medical expense realizations while asthma does. In other words, the ACG eliminates tem-
porary expenses from the forecast of future expenses.22 We use the eight 7-by-7 transition
matrices for the …ve-year age bins from 25-65 as the foundation for modeling health state
persistence and transitions over time.23
  22
     Admittedly, by de…ning transitions over ACGs we may miss potential information on what condition led
to the current ACG index that could entail di¤erent persistence.
  23
     To study the long run predictive power of these one-year ACG transitions we compared the proportion
of individuals in each state at di¤erent ages in the sample, to the proportions predicted by the transition


                                                    16
                                            Health State by Age

 Age                1 (Healthy)            2          3          4           5           6        7 (Sick)
25-30                   0.49             0.19        0.14       0.07       0.04        0.03         0.04
30-35                   0.41             0.18        0.13       0.08       0.06        0.06         0.07
35-40                   0.27             0.30        0.13       0.06       0.09        0.07         0.09
40-45                   0.19             0.28        0.16       0.09       0.12        0.08         0.10
45-50                   0.01             0.15        0.32       0.15       0.13        0.12         0.12
50–55                   0.00             0.10        0.25       0.19       0.15        0.16         0.15
55-60                   0.00             0.01        0.01       0.25       0.24        0.28         0.22
60-65                   0.00             0.00        0.00       0.18       0.24        0.26         0.31

Table 2: Health state by age, where consumers are divided into 7 bins of their predicted
medical spending (determined by their Johns Hopkins ACG predictive score) for the year
ahead.

                               Health State Transitions: 30-35 Year Olds
                                                                t+1
     t                   1             2           3             4           5             6           7
 t   =1                 0.72         0.13         0.05         0.05         0.02         0.01         0.03
 t   =2                 0.35         0.25         0.12         0.11         0.04         0.03         0.11
 t   =3                 0.15         0.23         0.19         0.15         0.10         0.08         0.10
 t   =4                 0.20         0.08         0.12         0.24         0.18         0.12         0.08
 t   =5                 0.10         0.10         0.05         0.20         0.20         0.20         0.15
 t   =6                 0.16         0.11         0.14         0.11         0.08         0.22         0.19
 t   =7                 0.11         0.11         0.07         0.04         0.11         0.20         0.37

         Table 3: Health state transitions from one year to the next, for 30-35 year olds.

    Tables 3 and 4 present these transition matrices for ages 30-35 and 40-45 respectively.
Entries along the diagonal of each matrix re‡ect health state persistence, while o¤-diagonal
elements re‡ect health state changes. For example, 72% of consumers aged 30-35 who are
in the healthiest state bin in one year ( it = 1) are estimated to stay in that category for
the following year. Only 11% of these consumers begin the next year in one of the four
sickest bins ( it 2 f4; 5; 6; 7g). On the other hand, 57% of consumers who begin the …rst
year in the sickest health state bin ( it = 7) begin the next year in one of the two sickest bins
( it 2 f6; 7g). Though the distributions of health are di¤erent for 40-45 year olds, health
states show similar persistence.
matrices for an individual who starts healthy at age 24. To assess the …t between predicted and actual
proportions, we ran a regression of actual on predicted proprortions. The coe¢ cient on predicted proportions
is 0.95 and the R-squared 0.77. Splitting the sample for the ages 25 to 44, and 45 to 64, the R-squared are
0.89 and 0.63. While the predictive power of the latter is lower, it involves predictions on average 30 years
away, but is still quite a good …t.


                                                     17
                               Health State Transitions: 40-45 Year Olds
                                                                t+1
     t                   1             2           3             4           5             6           7
 t   =1                 0.57         0.27         0.08         0.01         0.01         0.04         0.02
 t   =2                 0.21         0.37         0.14         0.14         0.05         0.05         0.04
 t   =3                 0.08         0.16         0.29         0.18         0.10         0.13         0.07
 t   =4                 0.09         0.14         0.19         0.17         0.20         0.12         0.09
 t   =5                 0.05         0.10         0.24         0.23         0.10         0.12         0.16
 t   =6                 0.04         0.14         0.09         0.20         0.18         0.09         0.27
 t   =7                 0.00         0.03         0.03         0.17         0.20         0.20         0.37

         Table 4: Health status transitions from one year to the next, for 40-45 year olds.

 Age 30 Present value of expected           expenses
 health           at various ages
  state   30     31-35 36-40                 31-65
    1   1,131 16,888 20,066                 135,132
    2   2,290 22,184 20,482                 140,884
    3   3,780 25,155 20,761                 144,159
    4   3,975 25,752 20,810                 144,809
    5   5,850 29,228 20,960                 148,450
    6   10,655 28,854 20,853                147,950
    7   18,554 33,366 20,988                152,618

Table 5: The table shows the present value of expected health expenses for di¤erent periods
(age 30, ages 31-35, 36-40, and 31-65), for an individual who at age 30 was in the respective
health state shown in each row of the …rst column.

    The persistence embodied in these health state transitions is illustrated in Tables 5 and
6. Table 5 shows the net present value of expected medical expenses starting at age 30
for consumers in di¤erent health states at age 30. Table 6 shows the same for consumers
starting at age 40. The tables show that while there is signi…cant persistence, much of it is
dissipated in 10 years, and to a large extent after 5 years.24;25

  24
      The fact that expected costs depend very little on the health state 10 years prior is consistent with
actuarial mortality tables. There are two kinds of tables: “ultimate” tables are based on attained age
only, while “select and ultimate” tables report the death rate not only by attained age, but by years since
underwriting (namely, conditional on being in good health at that time). The tables converge as the years
since underwriting increase; 10 years after underwriting the rates are quite similar.
   25
      In Appendix C we examine how the level of health state persistence a¤ects welfare under optimal dynamic
contracts relative to our benchmarks. One point to note is that complete persistence would eliminate the
bene…t of dynamic contracts as there would be no reclassi…cation risk to insure once a consumer’s age 25
health state is realized.




                                                     18
 Age 40 Present value of expected           expenses
 health           at various ages
  state   40     41-45 46-50                  41-65
    1   1,131 19,587 24,317                  119,397
    2   2,290 23,827 24,753                  124,126
    3   3,780 28,023 25,096                  128,705
    4   3,975 28,993 25,127                  129,710
    5   5,850 30,851 25,236                  131,690
    6   10,655 33,376 25,316                 134,304
    7   18,554 38,403 25,552                 139,532

Table 6: The table shows the present value of expected health expenses for di¤erent periods
(age 40, ages 41-45, 46-50, and 41-65), for an individual who at age 40 was in the respective
health state shown in each row of the …rst column.

3.3     Risk Preferences
The third ingredient is a consumer’s risk aversion, i.e., the degree to which consumption
smoothing over di¤erent states of the world is valued by consumers. To this end, we use the
risk preferences estimated from our data in Handel, Hendel, and Whinston (2015). There
we estimate a panel discrete choice model where risk aversion is identi…ed by the choices
that households make conditional on their household-speci…c health expenditure risk for the
upcoming year. Consumers have constant absolute risk aversion (CARA) preferences:

                                                           1       c
                                              u(c) =           e                                           (6)

where c = y p o is consumption (which equals income less premium payments p and
out-of-pocket medical expenses o) and is the risk aversion parameter.26
    Handel, Hendel, and Whinston (2015) estimate the distribution of which …ts the ob-
served choices, given the choice sets available each year of the sample. The mean estimated
risk-aversion level is 0:000428 and the standard deviation in this mean from observed hetero-
geneity is 0:00001. The estimates fall within the range reported in the literature. See Handel,
Hendel, and Whinston (2015) for further discussion of these risk preference estimates.
    In the next sections we use our median risk aversion estimate, = 0:0004. We also
consider the robustness of our conclusions with respect to the degree of risk aversion in
Section 6.1.
  26
    In the model, we assume that consumers have zero price elasticity of demand for health care services,
which is why full insurance is e¢ cient in our setup. See Handel, Hendel, and Whinston (2015) for a discussion;
a correlation test, in the spirit of Chiappori and Salanie (2000), does not reject this assumption.




                                                      19
Figure 1: Income paths for managers, non-managers, proportionally “downscaled”managers,
and ‡at net income.

3.4     Income Paths
The shape of the optimal contract depends on a consumer’s income path. Firms o¤er di¤erent
contracts to consumers with di¤erent income paths to maximize their lifetime expected
utilities conditional on breaking even and the lapsation constraint. In our analysis, we
consider the income paths of managers at the …rm which are steepest, those of non-managers
which are ‡atter, and a baseline of a completely ‡at net income path.27 The latter eliminates
intertemporal consumption smoothing motives (for an individual who would pay a certain
premium in each period equal to her ex ante expected medical costs), as individuals with
‡at net income do not want to use the contract as a mechanism to borrow or save, unlike
consumers with increasing or decreasing income pro…les over time. The manager income path
is the steepest and highest dashed curve depicted in Figure 1, while non-managers’income
path is represented by the ‡atter curve comprised of dashes and dots. The bold dashed
curve is a proportionally scaled-down managers’income path that makes the present value of
lifetime income equal to that of a non-manager (which facilitates certain comparative statics
we present). The solid curve is a ‡at net income path. As can be seen in the …gure, both
managers and non-managers have income that grows more quickly than expected medical
expenses, leading to steeper paths than the ‡at net income curve.
  27
    The manager and non-manager income paths we use here are estimated in Handel, Hendel, and Whinston
(2015).




                                                 20
4       Computation of Optimal Dynamic Contracts
Given estimated values of transitions f ( ) and preferences u( ), income pro…le y, and a value
for , we derive the contracts described in Proposition 1 recursively. We …rst derive, for
each possible T , the last period consumption levels cyT ( T ) = yT E[mT j T ] that would be
o¤ered to a consumer in state T by competitive …rms. We then look at each possible state
  T 1 in period T      1: We …nd cyT 1 ( T 1 ) by doing a binary search over possible values for
the consumption guarantee cT 1 , looking for the largest cT 1 that generates non-negative
pro…ts for the insurer, taking account of the fact that the consumer will lapse in period
T (or, if retained, yield the insurer continuation pro…ts of zero) in those states in which
cyT ( T ) > cT 1 . We then continue backward in this fashion, with the transition matrix
being used to generate probabilities that the consumer is in each possible state at each
future date (which also generates the probability that the consumer will have lapsed by that
date).
     More formally, for each period t, we denote by Cty the (T t + 1) 7 matrix of …rst-
period consumption guarantees whose ( ; s) element for > t and s 2 f1; :::; 7g is cy ( = s),
a consumption guarantee that breaks even for a contract starting in period with health
state     = s, given the future guarantees described in Proposition 1 (which are, themselves,
                 y
contained in Ct+1  ). We start at t = T where, as noted above, cyT ( T = s) = yT E[mT j T =
s]. This gives us CTy . We then proceed iteratively backwards, deriving Cty given Ct+1  y
                                                                                            and
                                                y                             y
the transition probabilities. Speci…cally, Ct adds an additional row to Ct+1 ; each element
(t; s) of this row is the consumption guarantee cyt ( t = s). We derive cyt ( t = s) by doing a
grid search to …nd the (unique) value c such that
                                 (                                                                          )
                                      X
                                      T          X
                                                 7
                                                                                                 y
                                             t
fyt     E(mt j   t   = s)   cg+                        [y    E(m j   = z)   c] P (zj   t   = s; Ct+1 ; c)       = 0;
                                      =t+1       z=1
                                                                                              (7)
                           y
where P (zj t =              is the probability that, starting in health state t = s in period
                       s; Ct+1 ; c)
t; the health state transitions ( t+1 ; :::; ) from period t to period are such that         =z
      y                    0                 28
and ct0 ( t0 )  c for all t 2 ft + 1; :::; g.     The …rst term in curly brackets in (7) is the
expected pro…t in period t given the initial consumption guarantee c, while the second term
in curly brackets is the expected continuation pro…t and uses the fact that starting at the …rst
instance at which the consumer’s health state        is such that cy ( ) > c (i.e., the lapsation
constraint binds), the insurer’s continuation payo¤ is zero. We continue in this iterative
manner until we have derived C1y , whose …rst row gives the initial consumption guarantees
o¤ered in period-1 to consumers in each of the seven possible period 1 health states.
 28                                           y
      These probabilities are computed using Ct+1 and the transition matrices.



                                                            21
5     Results
Using the data and computational approach described above, we …nd the consumptions and
premiums in optimal dynamic contracts. In what follows we …rst examine the structure of
these contracts, and then turn to welfare analysis.


5.1    Front-loading and Reclassi…cation Risk
We describe …rst the extent of front-loading in the equilibrium contracts, and then consider
the amount of remaining reclassi…cation risk. We begin by considering the contract for a
consumer with ‡at net income (corresponding to the solid curve in Figure 1), an income
path that creates no borrowing or savings motive.
   In our context, a contract speci…es a premium and resulting consumption level for each
possible history of states at each age from 25 to 65. There are too many histories and
concurrent premiums to present: instead we focus on select attributes of the contract. First,
we look in detail at the early contract periods, which provide intuition for the form of the
equilibrium contract over longer time horizons. The …rst-period premiums, actuarial costs,
and front-loading are presented in Table 7. In all but the worst state, premiums are larger
than actuarial costs: consumers front-load premiums to transfer utility to future states with
negative health shocks. For example, for the healthiest consumer at the beginning of the
year, the premium is $2,750 despite average costs of only $1,131.
   The extent of front-loading rises as the consumer’s health state worsens to bin 5 out of 7,
and then declines to zero for the sickest bin of consumers (7 out of 7). The extent of front-
loading depends on both the current state and also on the implications of the current state for
future health. While the healthier type can a¤ord the most front-loading, she might bene…t
the least. This is why maximum front-loading occurs for consumers in the middle of the ex
ante health range, rather than for the healthiest consumers. The least healthy, on the other
hand, have very high costs (and, hence, high marginal utility of consumption) compared to
their expected future costs (recall Table 5); for them, front-loading isn’t worthwhile. It is
important to note that front-loading in this example is not driven by saving motives, since
net income is ‡at. Front-loading is done to enable inter-temporal insurance against poor
health state realizations.
   Tables 8 and 9 present second-period premiums and consumptions, respectively, re‡ecting
the 7 x 7 possible histories up through the beginning of that period (health state at the
beginning of period 1 crossed with health state at the beginning of period 2). Certain
patterns are indicative of the longer-run structure of the contract. First, second-period
premiums and consumptions display extensive pooling which takes place in states for which
the lapsation constraint is not binding. For example, if a consumer was in the healthiest

                                              22
                   First-Year Equilibrium Contract Terms: Flat Net Income
                                                           1
                            1        2            3         4         5          6        7
    Premium               2,750   4,155        6,008     6,130      8,885     11,890    18,554
First-Year Costs          1,131    2,291        3,780    3,975     5,850      10,655    18,554
 Front-Loading            1,619    1,864        2,228    2,155     3,035       1,235       0
 Consumption             52,550   51,145       49,292    49,170    46,415     43,410    36,746

Table 7: First-year contract terms in the equilibrium long-run contract for a ‡at net in-
come path, showing …rst-year premiums, expected costs, the extent of front-loading, and
consumption levels.

          Second-Year Equilibrium Premiums: Flat Net Income                        First-Year
                                           2                                       Premium
  1         1          2        3       4          5         6          7
1         2,943      3,300    3,300   3,300      3,300     3,300     3,300             2,750
2         2,943      4,302    4,705   4,705      4,705     4,705     4,705             4,155
3         2,943      4,302    6,090   6,206      6,558     6,558     6,558             6,008
4         2,943      4,302    6,090   6,206      6,680     6,680     6,680             6,130
5         2,943      4,302    6,090   6,206      8,955     9,434     9,434             8,885
6         2,943      4,302    6,090   6,206      8,955    11,919     12,440            11,890
7         2,943      4,302    6,090   6,206      8,955    11,919     18,554            18,554

Table 8: First- and second-year premiums in the equilibrium long-run contract for a ‡at net
income path, as a function of the period 1 and period 2 health states.

possible state in period 1, all other second-year states have the same consumption of $52,550,
an amount equal to her …rst-year consumption. The lapsation constraint does not bind for
this consumer when 2 > 1 because the …rst period front-loaded amount su¢ ces to make
outside o¤ers less attractive than the current consumption guarantee. Only when 2 = 1
does the lapsation constraint bind for this consumer, resulting in an increase in consumption
to $52,905 (and a corresponding reduction in her premium).
    The lapsation constraint binds for more and more second-year states the sicker the con-
sumer was at the start of the contract. For consumers initially in the sickest health bin
( 1 = 7), all second-year health states involve di¤erent consumption levels that also dif-
fer from the period 1 consumption level: long-run contracts cannot provide any insurance
against reclassi…cation risk in year 2 for this consumer as her …rst-year needs were so great
as to preclude any front loading. For this consumer, the long-run contract continuation in
year 2 simply matches the best contract she could get on the market given her second-year
health state.



                                               23
       Second-Year Equilibrium Consumptions: Flat Net Income                                First-Year
                                             2                                             Consumption
  1      1           2          3          4            5         6            7
 1     52,905     52,550      52,550     52,550      52,550     52,550      52,550             52,550
 2     52,905     51,545      51,145     51,145      51,145     51,145      51,145             51,145
 3     52,905     51,545      49,758     49,642      49,292     49,292      49,292             49,292
 4     52,905     51,545      49,758     49,642      49,170     49,170      49,170             49,170
 5     52,905     51,545      49,758     49,642      46,893     46,415      46,415             46,415
 6     52,905     51,545      49,758     49,642      46,893     43,929      43,410             43,410
 7     52,905     51,545      49,758     49,642      46,893     43,929      37,294             36,746

Table 9: First- and second-year consumptions in the equilibrium long-run contract for a ‡at
net income path, as a function of the period 1 and period 2 health states.

                       Equilibrium Front-loading: Flat Net Income
                                               Contract Year
                     1       2      3       4      5      6      7 8 9     10
Mean Front-Loading 1,702 1,682 1,758 1,834 1,919 2,280 2,461 2,536 2,568 2,469
Max. Front-Loading 3,035 3,105 3,174 3,324 3,236 3,324 3,623 3,781 3,859 3,438

Table 10: Mean and maximum front-loading for each of the …rst ten years of the equilibrium
long-run contract.

    It is di¢ cult to display premiums beyond the …rst couple of years, as there are 7t 1 histories
to consider in year t. For example, by year 10 there are over 40 million histories. Table 10
shows statistics associated with premiums for the …rst ten contract years including the mean
and maximum front-loading across possible histories. Speci…cally, the table shows for each
of the …rst ten years the mean front-loading (averaging across all possible histories, including
the possible age 25 health states, weighted by the probability of the histories).29 The second
row shows the maximum possible front-loading in each year, across these ten periods. Mean
front-loading increases over time from $1,702 in year 1 to $2,536 in year 9, and declines to
$2,469 in year 10. Maximum possible front-loading increases slightly over time through year
9, and also declines in year 10.
  29
    Throughout our analysis, we assume that the consumer arrives at age 25 with the health distribution
given by the transitions from the healthiest state for 25-30 year olds (i.e., we take the age-25 health dis-
tribution to be that generated by one transition from = 1 using the transition matrix in Table 3). The
distribution of health states for 25-30 year olds implied by this assumption closely matches the distribution
in Table 2, as discussed in footnote 22.




                                                     24
               First-Year Equilibrium Contract Term: Downscaled Managers
                                                          1
                           1          2         3         4          5         6         7
    Premium              1,678     3,165     5,256     5,449       8,245    11,593     18,554
First-Year Costs         1,131      2,291     3,780    3,975      5,850     10,655     18,554
 Front-Loading            547        874     1,476     1,474       2,395     938          0
 Consumption            32,022     30,535    28,244    28,051     25,255    21,907     14,946

Table 11: First-year contract terms in the equilibrium long-run contract for a downscaled
manager income path, showing …rst-year premiums, expected costs, the extent of front-
loading, and consumption levels.

5.2    E¤ects of Income Paths
The equilibrium contracts o¤ered depend crucially on a consumer’s rate of income growth
over her lifetime. When income is relatively low early in life, front-loading is quite costly
and undesirable in the absence of well-functioning capital markets.
    Table 11 presents …rst-period contract characteristics for “downscaled managers,”and is
the analog to Table 7 for ‡at net income. Recall that, as shown in Figure 1, a downscaled
manager income path proportionally scales down the income of a manager to match the
net present value of a non-manager’s lifetime income path. The table makes clear that
for downscaled managers, the extent of front-loading is much more limited than in the ‡at
net income case, which translates into less generous consumption guarantees later in life.
Essentially, the rapidly rising income makes paying extra early in life for long-term insurance
quite costly, as marginal utility is high early compared to what is expected later in life. For
example, a downscaled manager who is in the healthiest state at age 25 front-loads only
$547, compared to $1,619 for a consumer with ‡at net income.
    Tables 12 and 13 show second-year premiums and consumption levels for downscaled
managers as a function of di¤erent health histories. Though front-loading is much more
limited, the year 2 health states in which the lapsation constraint binds, conditional on
the initial year 1 health state, are quite similar to those of consumers with ‡at net income
pro…les.


5.3    Welfare
We now turn to the welfare analysis of these dynamic contracts. We measure and compare the
welfare they achieve to several alternatives. For each market setup and potential income path
considered, we compute a lifetime certainty equivalent. The certainly equivalent represents
the constant consumption for the forty years of life from age 25 to 65 that makes the consumer



                                              25
        Second-Year Equilibrium Premiums: Downscaled Managers                     First-Year
                                               2                                  Premium
  1          1          2          3         4        5         6         7
1          1,699      3,204      3,524     3,524    3,524     3,524     3,524       1,678
2          1,699      3,204      5,011     5,011    5,011     5,011     5,011       3,165
3          1,699      3,204      5,289     5,478    7,102     7,102     7,102       5,256
4          1,699      3,204      5,289     5,478    7,295     7,295     7,295       5,449
5          1,699      3,204      5,289     5,478    8,279    10,090    10,090        8,245
6          1,699      3,204      5,289     5,478    8,279    11,615    13,439       11,593
7          1,699      3,204      5,289     5,478    8,279    11,615    18,554       18,554

Table 12: First- and second-year premiums in the equilibrium long-run contract for a down-
scaled manager income path, as a function of the period 1 and period 2 health states.




      Second-Year Equilibrium Consumption: Downscaled Managers                   First-Year
                                           2                                    Consumption
  1      1            2         3          4          5       6         7
1      33,833      32,328     32,008     32,008    32,008   32,008    32,008      32,008
2      33,833      32,328     30,521     30,521    30,521   30,521    30,521      30,521
3      33,833      32,328     30,243     30,054    28,430   28,430    28,430      28,430
4      33,833      32,328     30,243     30,054    28,237   28,237    28,237      28,237
5      33,833      32,328     30,243     30,054    27,253   25,441    25,441      25,441
6      33,833      32,328     30,243     30,054    27,253   23,917    22,093      22,093
7      33,833      32,328     30,243     30,054    27,253   23,917    16,978      15,132

Table 13: First- and second-year consumptions in the equilibrium long-run contract for a
downscaled manager income path, as a function of the period 1 and period 2 health states.




                                                   26
as well o¤ as in a given market setup, ex ante.30 Speci…cally, we compare the certainty
equivalent of optimal dynamic contracts with one-sided commitment, denoted by CED , to
the three benchmarks we have described previously (see Section 2.1 for formal de…nitions):


(i) The …rst-best, fully-smoothed consumption C , which equates the marginal utility of
     consumption across periods and states. This is the welfare achievable were long-term
     contracts with two-sided commitment feasible.

(ii) The certainty equivalent from spot contracts that fully insure event risk in every period
      and state, but leave reclassi…cation risk across periods fully uninsured, denoted by
      CESP OT ;

(iii) The constant consumption equivalent of the No Saving/No Borrowing constrained …rst
      best, in which risk is fully insured in each period but neither borrowing nor saving is
      possible, denoted CN BN S .

    We also compare optimal dynamic contracts with one-sided commitment to an alternative
market design that has been used to cope with reclassi…cation risk, ACA-like exchanges.
These markets have year-to-year contracts, but are community rated: they thus fully insure
premium reclassi…cation risk, at the potential cost of creating adverse selection for within-
year coverage.
    We compute welfare under ACA-like regulation imposing (i) one-year contracts, (ii) com-
munity rating (no health-state based pricing allowed), (iii) age-based pricing, (iv) a fully
enforced mandate, requiring coverage purchase, and (v) insurers that o¤er coverage of spe-
ci…c actuarial values, with a minimum plan that covers 60% of spending for an average
population. As shown in Handel, Hendel, and Whinston (2015), this market eliminates re-
classi…cation risk, but induces adverse selection that reduces within-period event insurance.
The market unravels to minimum coverage (60%). Insurees end up responsible for 40% of
their costs on average. Because of the partial coverage, consumers face some future risk, not
from increased premiums, but rather from out-of-pocket expenses. We denote the certainty
equivalent of this outcome by CEACA . Notice that CN BN S is the same as this ACA outcome
except that it provides 100% coverage rather than unraveling to 60%; the di¤erence between
CN BN S and CEACA therefore re‡ects the cost of adverse selection under the ACA.
    To ease comparisons across di¤erent income paths, all pro…les we consider have the same
net present value of income, except for the manager’s pro…le when it is not downscaled. In
the …rst best, where consumers are fully insured and income is fully smoothed over time, all
  30
   By “ex ante” we mean prior to learning the age 25 health state. (See footnote 29 for a discussion of
how we determine that state.)


                                                  27
income paths (except managers without downscaling) have a certainty equivalent of $53,666
(re‡ecting the present value of income minus expected medical expenses).
    Column (2) shows welfare outcomes under spot contracts, with no protection for reclas-
si…cation risk. As column (6) shows, the welfare loss from spot contracting, relative to the
…rst best, is highest for relatively steep income pro…les (40.9% for downscaled managers).
With steep income pro…les, the …rst best both eliminates reclassi…cation risk, and smooths
consumption over time. However, the welfare loss from spot contracts is substantial (13.8%)
even in the case of ‡at net income, where no intertemporal consumption smoothing is oc-
curing in the …rst best.31
    Column (3) presents the certainty equivalent for dynamic contracts with one-sided com-
mitment, CED . As expected CED lies between C and CESP OT . Column (7) shows the
fraction of the welfare gap between the …rst best and spot contracts that these dynamic con-
tracts close, CE D CESP OT
               C CESP OT
                            . For ‡atter income pro…les, dynamic contracts almost fully insure
reclassi…cation risk and are quite close to …rst best: in the case of ‡at net income, 87.7%
of this gap is recovered by dynamic contracts. In contrast, since consumers with steeper
income pro…les dislike front-loading, dynamic contracts only recover a small portion of this
welfare loss for steeper income pro…les (10.8% for downscaled managers).
    Column (4) shows CN BN S , the constant consumption equivalent of the constrained …rst-
best outcome that does not allow for intertemporal consumption smoothing. For situations
with rising net income, this may be a more relevant benchmark of how well optimal dynamic
contracts with one-sided commitment do at eliminating reclassi…cation risk, since saving
and borrowing on their own can greatly improve utility for steep net income paths. Column
(8) therefore reports CCED CE     SP OT
                                        , which shows the proportion of the gap between spot
                         N BN S CESP OT
contracting and this No-borrowing/No-saving benchmark that is closed by optimal dynamic
contracts. The progress made by dynamic contracts relative to this constrained …rst best is
a good deal higher than when using C as a benchmark. Dynamic contracts get downscaled
managers 38.1% of the way to the constrained …rst best, instead of 10.8%, and those with
‡at net income get 89.5% of the way to the constrained …rst best. In sum, dynamic contracts
are very e¤ective at eliminating reclassi…cation risk when net income paths are fairly ‡at,
but with rising income paths they are only partially e¤ective.
    Comparing columns (3) and (5) in Table 14 reveals that the ACA environment is pre-
ferred to the dynamic contracting environment for non-managers, managers, and downscaled
managers, whose incomes rise over time. For these individuals, the desire to front-load when
young and income is low is limited, which reduces the bene…ts from dynamic contracts. In-
terestingly, individuals with ‡at net income pro…les prefer dynamic contracts to the ACA
 31
      In Section 6.4 we extend this analysis to allow precautionary savings in the spot contracting regime.




                                                      28
                  Certainty Equivalent ($1,000s)                              Gains from Long-term contracts
             (1)      (2)     (3)      (4)       (5)                         (6)          (7)           (8)
                                                                        C    CESP OT   CED CESP OT    CED CESP OT
 Income      C     CESP OT CED CN BN S CEACA                                 C          C CESP OT    CN BN S CESP OT
 Flat net   53:67    46:27   52:77 53:53        51:30                       13:8%        87:7%           89:5%
 Non-mngr   53:67    40:73   44:10 47:39        46:25                       24:1%        26:0%           50:6%
 Manager    84:00    50:32   51:77 56:08        55:09                       40:1%         4:3%           25:2%
 Downs Mngr 53:67    31:74   34:10 37:93        36:84                       40:9%        10:8%           38:1%


Table 14: Long-run welfare results showing the certainty equivalent consumption of di¤erent
insurance institutions under a discount factor of 0:975 for consumers with median estimated
constant absolute risk aversion equal to 0:0004.

environment, so the optimal market design depends on which of several types of income
paths individuals have.
    Finally, note that the gap between CEACA and CN BN S re‡ects the cost of adverse selection
in the exchanges relative to the constrained …rst-best. Both regimes involve community
rating, the …rst with consumers buying plans with 60% actuarial value (due to adverse
selection) and the second with consumers in full insurance. This cost of adverse selection
ranges from roughly $1,000 per year (downscaled managers) to roughly $2,200 per year for
‡at net income.


6       Extensions and Robustness
6.1       Risk Aversion
So far our analysis has used the median risk preferences estimated in Handel, Hendel, and
Whinston (2015). We now consider the robustness of the analysis with respect to the degree
of risk aversion. We are particularly interested in lower risk aversion. The reason is that we
are afraid our estimate of risk preferences, estimated from health insurance choice, might not
re‡ect consumers’risk tolerance for the larger stakes associated with reclassi…cation risk.32
The scale of losses from reclassi…cation risk is larger in our environment than in the setting
in which risk preferences were estimated.
    Table 15 presents the welfare comparisons for risk aversion of 0:00008, …ve times lower
than that in our main analysis. To put the coe¢ cients in perspective consider a lottery
that assigns the loss associated with each of the 7 health states, with each of them having
equal probability. (The expected health care costs are reported in Table 7.) Our 0.0004 risk
aversion coe¢ cient estimate implies a willingness to pay of $7; 222 to avoid the uncertainty
 32
      See Rabin (2000) for a discussion of issues with CARA and scaling of gambles.


                                                     29
                        Certainty Equivalent ($1,000s)                 Gains from Long-term contracts
                                                                CED CESP OT    CN BN S CESP OT      CED CESP OT
 Income          C       CESP OT CED CN BN S CEACA               C CESP OT         CN BN S         CN BN S CESP O
 Flat-net       53:67      52:47   53:62 53:67        52:85        95.8%            2.2%               95.8%
 Non-mngr       53:67      50:91   51:70 51:84        51:35        28.6%            1.8%               85.0%
 Manager        84:00      68:73   69:06 69:39        69:00        2.2%             1.0%               50.0%
 Downs mngr     53:67      46:41   46:94 47:20        46:80        7.3%             1.7%               67.1%


Table 15: Long-run welfare results showing the certainty equivalent consumption of di¤erent
insurance institutions for a discount factor of 0:975 and constant absolute risk aversion equal
to 0:00008.

associated with this risky prospect. Instead, the lower risk aversion coe¢ cient leads to a
willingness to pay of $1; 491.
    Lowering risk aversion substantially reduces the loss associated with reclassi…cation risk
(captured by the gap between CN BN S and CESP OT ). The loss is between 1.0% and 2.2%,
depending on the income path. For the higher 0.0004 risk aversion, the loss was between
13% and 41%. Still, a loss of 1-2% of lifetime certainty equivalent is not insubstantial.
    While the loss from reclassi…cation risk is lower, the gains from long-term contracting,
as captured by how much of the gap is recaptured by optimal contracts with one-sided
commitment, is larger. Optimal dynamic contracts come very close to eliminating the gap
for all income pro…les. It appears that most of the welfare loss is eliminated with tolerable
levels of front-loading, while the remaining reclassi…cation risk is not that harmful for the
less risk averse consumer.
    The lower risk aversion not only attenuates the cost of reclassi…cation risk, increasing
welfare under spot and dynamic contracts, but also lowers the losses from the partial coverage
of medical costs under the ACA. However, for lower risk aversion, dynamic contracts are
preferred to the ACA for all four income paths (although, as noted above, the losses due to
risk bearing are much smaller than before in both cases).


6.2    Switching Costs
Recent evidence from health insurance markets [Handel (2013), Ho et al. (2016)] points to
substantial inertia in insurance choice. Switching costs have the potential to improve how
dynamic contracts perform. Our basic model assumes that consumers lapse whenever they
get a better o¤er. As discussed in Section 2.4, switching costs relax the lapsation constraints,
which can enhance commitment and the welfare achievable with optimal dynamic contracts.




                                              30
 Switching Cost      Flat-net Non-manager Managers Downs mngr
 0                    52:76      44:10     51:77      34:10

 100                   52:79         44:16         51:85         34:17
 1; 000                52:95         44:68         52:54         34:95
 5; 000                53:39         46:45         55:07         36:92
 10; 000               53:58         47:85         57:45         38:82
 50; 000               53:66         51:67         65:37         44:72
 100; 000              53:67         53:52         70:75         48:76
 500; 000              53:67         53:67         84:00         53:67

 C                     53:67         53:67         84:00         53:67
 CN BN S               53:53         47:39         56:08         37:93


Table 16: Long-run welfare (in $1,000s) from optimal dynamic contracts (CED ) under dis-
count factor of 0:975 and risk aversion of 0.0004 for di¤erent levels of switching costs and
four income pro…les.

   Table 16 shows the welfare achieved by dynamic contracts for di¤erent levels of switching
costs and our four income pro…les. As expected, welfare is monotonic in the switching cost.

Relaxing the lapsation constraints enables the transfer of resources from good health states
to less fortunate ones. Qualitatively, as switching costs increase, from 0 to in…nity, welfare
in the optimal dynamic contract with one-sided commitment approaches the …rst-best (two-
sided commitment) level.
    Notice that while it takes an unreasonably large switching cost to achieve a welfare close
to …rst best, a switching cost of around $5,000 delivers welfare close to CEACA for consumers
with rising income paths, and a switching cost between $5,000 and $10,000 achieves welfare
comparable to CN BN S . The reason is that the commitment a¤orded by switching costs
helps in two ways. By lowering lapsation, commitment allows for a reduction in reclassi…ca-
tion risk. In addition, enhanced commitment enables the insurer to facilitate consumption
smoothing across periods. However, consumption smoothing through borrowing requires a
lot of commitment, especially when the income pro…le is steep. Thus, a substantial switching
cost is necessary to achieve the …rst best. Instead achieving the welfare level CN BN S requires
more modest inertia, as no consumption smoothing is involved.
    Table 17 shows …rst and second-year consumption levels for a ‡at net income path and
switching costs of $5,000 and $1,000. It is interesting to note that for all second-year
states without a binding lapsation constraint consumption is higher with a higher switching
cost, while consumption is lower for second-year states with a binding lapsation constraint.


                                              31
       First and Second-Year Consumptions: Switching Cost = 5,000                        First Year
                                             2                                           Consump
  1          1        2       3        4        5        6        7
 1        53,612 53,612 53,612 53,612 53,612 53,612 53,612                                 53,612
 2        52,910 52,765 52,765 52,765 52,765 52,765 52,765                                 52,765
 3        52,910 51,717 51,717 51,717 51,717 51,717 51,717                                 51,717
 4        52,910 51,551 51,243 51,243 51,243 51,243 51,243                                 51,243
 5        52,910 51,551 49,763 49,647 49,224 49,224 49,224                                 49,224
 6        52,910 51,551 49,763 49,647 46,898 46,881 46,881                                 46,881
 7        52,910 51,551 49,763 49,647 46,898 43,934 40,652                                 40,652
       First and Second-Year Consumptions: Switching Cost = 1,000
 1        53,088 53,088 53,088 53,088 53,088 53,088 53,088                                 53,088
 2        53,010 51,733 51,733 51,733 51,733 51,733 51,733                                 51,733
 3        53,010 51,651 50,001 50,001 50,001 50,001 50,001                                 50,001
 4        53,010 51,651 49,901 49,901 49,901 49,901 49,901                                 49,901
 5        53,010 51,651 49,863 49,747 47,162 47,162 47,162                                 47,162
 6        53,010 51,651 49,863 49,747 46,998 44,301 44,301                                 44,301
 7        53,010 51,651 49,863 49,747 46,998 44,034 37,759                                 37,759

Table 17: First and second-year consumptions for switching costs of $5,000 and $1,000 and
‡at net income.

Namely, conditional on a history, higher switching costs enable transferring resources from
the good to the bad states.



6.3     Transitions
One of the key ingredients in our simulation are the health state transitions. While our
transition matrices, such as Tables 3 and 4, largely satisfy the stochastic dominance property
(Assumption A2), there are a few violations of this property.33 The violations probably
re‡ect the sparsity of individuals in some cells. To study the robustness of our results to
the transition matrices, we present equilibrium contracts using the transitions from a larger
employer with over 50,000 insured lives.34
   Table 18 shows welfare for the new transitions. Qualitatively our results remain un-
changed. Quantitatively, overall welfare is a little lower due to a higher level of expected
medical costs (observe that C is lower than before, so the reason has to be a higher level of
expected costs, rather than related to uncertainty). To compare to our original results, we
  33
   The assumption is su¢ cient for our characterization result (Proposition 1), but not necessary.
  34
   We do not use these transition matrices in our main analysis out of a desire to have our transition
matrices and risk aversion estimates correspond to the same population.



                                                 32
                      Certainty Equivalent (1,000s)            Gains from Long-term contracts

                                                               C    CESP OT        CED CESP OT
 Income                C          CESP OT          CED             CESP OT          C CESP OT
 Flat net             51:22        44:60           49:98           14:8%               81:3%
 Non-mngr             51:22        38:14           41:01           34:3%               21:9%
 Manager              81:55        47:37           48:72           72:2%                4:0%
 Downs Mng            51:22        28:87           31:01           77:4%                9:6%

Table 18: Welfare for alternative transition matrices obtained for employees of a larger
employer.

can rescale the numbers in Table 18 so that C equals that in the analysis above; after this
adjustment, all of the welfare numbers with the alternative transitions are within 3% of our
base numbers, reported in Section 5.3.35



6.4     Precautionary Savings
So far we have not allowed for savings in our welfare calculations. From Proposition 1
we know that this is without loss of generality for the case of optimal contracts with one-
sided commitment. Consumers also would not want to engage in savings in the …rst best.
However, with spot contracting consumers may want to engage in precautionary savings to
lower the costs of reclassi…cation risk. Individuals can save in good states to weather periods
of bad health. To study the impact of precautionary savings we solve a …nite-horizon savings
problem, with the same underlying fundamentals as in our main analysis, namely, the same
income paths, risk preferences, and transition matrices. We …nd optimal savings starting at
age 25 given an income path and the actuarially fair health insurance premiums associated
with the di¤erent health states.36 Once we …nd optimal savings for each age and state, we
compute the certainty equivalent, which we denote by CESP OT wS (SP OT wS = “Spot with
Savings”).
  35
     Note that we cannot compute an ACA welfare for this population because we lack data for this population
that would allow us to determine full distributions of medical expense risk.
  36
     For each income pro…le, we solve a …nite-horizon dynamic programming problem, from ages 25 to 65.
Starting at age 64, for a grid of saving values entering that period, the individual …nds the optimal saving level
going into the last period that maximizes the sum of current utility from consumption and the discounted
value of the expected utility in the last period, where the expectation is taken for each state given the
transition matrices. Once we obtain the value function at age 64 for each possible health state and incoming
saving level, we proceed backwards all the way to age 25, where we obtain the discounted expected utility
starting in each possible health state. The ex-ante certainty equivalent is the certain consumption level that
makes the consumer indi¤erent to the expected utility of entering the dynamic problem before observing the
health realization at age 25.




                                                       33
            Certainty Equivalent (1,000s)                               % Gains
             (1)       (2)         (3)                 (4)              (5)                  (6)
                                                   CED CESP OT   CESP OT wS CESP OT    CED CESP OT wS
 Income     CED CESP OT wS CESP OT                   CESP OT       CED CESP OT        CEN SN B CESP OT wS
 Flat net   52:77     50:45       46:27              14:1%             64:3%                75:3%
 Non-mngr   44:10     42:38       40:73               8:3%             49:0%                34:3%
 Manager    51:77     50:82       50:32               2:9%             34:5%                18:1%
 Downs mngr 34:10     32:75       31:74               7:4%             42:8%                26:1%


Table 19: Long-run welfare allowing for precautionary savings under spot contracts. The
certainty equivalent of spot contracting with precautionary savings is denoted by CESP OT wS .

    Table 19 shows the welfare e¤ect of precautionary savings. As the spot contracting
with precautionary savings outcome is feasible in our dynamic problem with one-sided com-
mitment, CESP OT wS lies between CES and CED : Savings enable the consumer to transfer
resources to future periods, to be consumed in periods of high marginal utility from consump-
tion. Optimal dynamic contracts, however, do better, as they allow for state-speci…c savings.
By charging state-contingent premiums the optimal contract enables equating consumption
across all states in which the lapsation does not bind. As well, the optimal contract transfers
no resources to the most fortunate states.
    Column (5) shows that precautionary savings closes between 42% and 65% of the gap be-
tween welfare with optimal dynamic contracts and spot contracting without savings. Column
(6) gives the fraction of the welfare gap between the no-borrowing/no-savings constrained
…rst-best outcome and the spot contracting with precautionary savings outcome that is
closed by optimal dynamic contracts. As in our earlier analysis, dynamic contracts close a
signi…cant fraction of this gap with ‡at net income, but less when net incomes are increasing
with age.


6.5    Initial Health State
In our analysis we have assumed that a 25-year-old’s health state is observable and priced
when contracting starts. As a result, individuals who arrive at age 25 in di¤erent health
states may face very di¤erent outcomes.
    Table 20 presents welfare when contracting starts in various health states at age 25, for a
non-manager income path. Starting in a good initial state has a limited impact on …rst-best
welfare because of the relatively temporary nature of a poor initial health state. However,
it has a dramatic e¤ect on the welfare achieved under optimal dynamic contracts with one-
sided commitment because starting in a poor health state makes front-loading much less
attractive. As a result, there is a dramatic e¤ect of the age-25 health state of a consumer on

                                              34
                     Welfare and Initial Health ($1,000s): Non-managers
 Initial state
                  C           CED CESP OT         CESP OT wS     Subsidy Break-even subsidies
 Ex ante         53:67        44:10 40:73           42:19                       46:70
   1:
 1               53:76        47:20     41:79         43:70                            1:74
 2               53:56        46:05     40:82         42:71         4:20             1:79
 3               53:35        44:55     39:36         41:21         9:10             6:47
 4               53:29        44:34     39:23         41:05        10:27              7:57
 5               53:08        42:10     37:37         39:25        15:62             12:88
 6               52:86        39:47     37:26         37:87        21:07             18:27
 7               52:50        33:16     33:04         33:10        30:43             27:69
 E[ ]                                                              1:93                 –

Table 20: Non-manager welfare from alternative contracting institutions for alternative initial
states 1 , and the subsidies required to give all 25-year old non-manager consumers the same
lifetime welfare with dynamic contracting as if they were in the healthiest state.

her lifetime welfare under this regime. The situation with spot contracts (with or without
precautionary savings) is intermediate.
    These welfare results raise the question of how much ex ante welfare would be increased
with optimal dynamic contracts if consumers were insured for the risk they bear that arises
from uncertain age-25 health, perhaps through some form of government insurance. The
next-to-last column of Table 20 shows the subsidy that is required in each age-25 health
state to give a consumer facing the dynamic contracting environment the same welfare as if
they were in the healthiest age-25 state.37 The expected value of these subsidies, using the
probabilities of the various possible health states at age 25, is given in the last row of the
table: the government would incur a cost of $1,930 per consumer to achieve this. The last
column instead reports the expected revenue-neutral age-25 taxes and subsidies that would
insure this risk, and (at the top of the column) the resulting certainty equivalent of $46,704.
With this balanced-budget government scheme, the welfare from dynamic contracts slightly
exceeds that in the (non-risk-adjusted) ACA-like market for these consumers (reported in
Table 14).
  37
    For each state we …nd the subsidy that, when added to the …rst year of the consumer’s income path,
leads to a certainty equivalent of $47,200 with an optimal dynamic contract.




                                                 35
7       Comparison to Pauly, Kunreuther, and Hirth (1995)
        and Cochrane (1995)

Pauly, Kunreuther, and Hirth (1995) (PKH) propose guaranteed renewable contracts as a
solution to prevent reclassi…cation risk. In contrast to the long-term contracts described
in Proposition 1, PKH aim to design a policy that provides full insurance in each period
and guarantees that the consumer can renew in the future at the same premium as would
be o¤ered to the healthiest consumer type at that age. The idea is that a consumer with
such a policy never wishes to lapse and faces no uncertainty in their consumption (i.e, no
reclassi…cation risk). In the context of our model, these policies provide a consumer who
starts period 1 in the healthiest possible state ( 1 = 1) with the guaranteed consumption
path fyt pt gTt=1 , where the period t premium pt is (we denote by t = 1 the healthiest
possible state in period t):38
                                     X
                                           t
          pt = E[mt j   t   = 1] +             fE[m j     t   = 1]     E[m j      t+1   = 1]g for t = 1; :::; T    (8)
                                     >t


To understand this formula, consider a case in which T = 2. In period 2 (the last period),
the consumer pays a premium equal to p2 = E[m2 j 2 = 1], the expected medical expenses of
the healthiest possible period 2 consumer. In period 1, the consumer pays a premium of

           p1 = E[m1 j        1   = 1] + fE[m2 j      1   = 1]       E[m2 j   2   = 1]g
                = E[m1 j      1   = 1] + Pr(     2   > 1j     1   = 1)fE[m2 j     2   > 1]    E[m2 j   2   = 1]g

The …rst term is the consumer’s expected period 1 medical costs (since he starts with 1 = 1),
while the second term is the prepayment of the expected period 2 discount being o¤ered to
the consumer (which he enjoys when it turns out that 2 > 1). In a problem in which
T = 3, period 2 and 3 premiums would be as just described, while in the …rst period the
consumer would prepay the value of the expected period 2 premium discount: Pr( 2 > 1j 1 =
    P         1                                  P         1
1)f =2;3        E[m j 2 > 1] E[m j 2 = 1]g =        =2;3     fE[m j 1 = 1] E[m j 2 = 1]g.
    The fact that the PKH policies di¤er from those described in Proposition 1 points to
two limitations of the PKH approach. First, unlike the contracts described in Proposition
1, the PKH contracts do not optimally balance the bene…ts of reducing reclassi…cation risk
against the costs of front-loading; indeed, as formula (8) makes clear, the PKH contract is
una¤ected by a consumer’s income path and risk preferences. The PKH contracts go to
the extreme of completely preventing reclassi…cation risk, resulting in a fully deterministic
 38
      We provide the derivation in Appendix D.


                                                            36
consumption path but excessively low initial consumption.39 Second, because PKH contracts
do not optimize in this way, they are actually not lapsation-proof in periods t 2 [2; T 1] if
insurers o¤er optimal dynamic contracts: the healthiest types would actually be drawn away
by a …rm o¤ering the contracts described in Proposition 1.40
    Cochrane (1995) proposes a di¤erent scheme to protect consumers from reclassi…cation
risk: premium insurance purchased in each period t that pays the consumer the change in
the present discounted value of his future medical expenses at the start of the next period,
equal to                    X
                                   (t+1)
                                         fE[m j t+1 ] E[m j t ]g
                                    >t

As Cochrane notes, however, this policy has the problem that the consumer would have to
pay the insurer when the evolution of his expected future health expenses is better than
expected, which may be impossible to enforce.
   One possible solution to this problem would be to have the consumer pre-pay the max-
imum possible ex post payment up front as part of her premium.41 In each period t the
consumer would pay a premium of
                                          X
                                                  t
                          E[mt j t ] +                fE[m j t ]      E[m j    t+1    = 1]g                       (9)
                                          >t


and in each period t + 1 (for t < T ) the insurer would pay the consumer the non-negative
amount
                 X                                                   X
                         (t+1)                                                (t+1)
Payment =                        fE[m j   t+1 ]   E[m j t ]g +                        fE[m j t ]   E[m j   t+1   = 1]g
                  >t                                                  >t
                 X
                         (t+1)
            =                    fE[m j   t+1 ]   E[m j       t+1   = 1]g     0;                                  (10)
                  >t


equal to the change in expected medical expenses plus the repayment (with interest) of the
second term in (9). Subtracting the period t payment [(10) modi…ed to be for period t]
from the period t premium (9), we see that the net premium payment in each period t for a
consumer who begins with 1 = 1 is exactly the PKH premium (8).
  39
     PKH’s Proposition 2 asserts that their contract is Pareto optimal, but their argument assumes that
“capital markets are perfect,”when the motivation for considering these contracts to begin with was precisely
the presence of capital market imperfections that prevent the payment of all lifetime premiums up front [see
Pauly, Kunreuther, and Hirth (1995, p. 146)].
  40
     This lapsation problem in the PKH contract arises only if T 3.
  41
     Cochrane (1995) proposes a di¤erent approach: an account that has to be used to receive and make
these premium insurance payments. Unfortunately, Cochrane’s assertion that such an account would never
run into a negative balance for a consumer who starts out healthy is incorrect. For example, a consumer
who starts healthy ( 1 = 1) and remains healthy ( t = 1 for all t > 1) would need to make payments in
every period.


                                                         37
7.1     Empirical Comparison of PKH and Optimal Dynamic Con-
        tracts
Using formula (8), we calculate that the initial PKH premium paid by a healthy 25-year old
is about 27% higher than the initial premium paid by a healthy 25-year old individual with
‡at net income in the optimal dynamic contract.42;43 For a consumer with a ‡at net income
path, the excessively low initial consumption required to eliminate all reclassi…cation risk
translates into a lower welfare: CEP KH = 49; 509, which is 3.6% lower than the certainty
equivalent that this consumer would have with an optimal dynamic contract. The welfare
loss from the PKH contract relative to an optimal contract increases with rising income paths:
for example, for a healthy 25-year old downscaled manager we …nd that CEP KH = 31; 159,
resulting in a loss of 16.6% compared to an optimal dynamic contract, while for a non-
manager CEP KH = 42; 758 which represents a 16.0% welfare loss.


8      Conclusion
In this paper we have studied the potential for long-term contracting in health insurance
markets to insure against reclassi…cation risk when insurers, but not consumers, can commit
to the contract and consumers are unable to borrow to pre-pay premiums. We character-
ized optimal contracts, and quanti…ed their positive and normative implications relative to
alternative market designs using detailed individual-level data on health risks, health state
transitions, insurance choices, and income pro…les for the employees of a large …rm.
    Optimal dynamic contracts exhibit front-loading at early ages, thereby enabling con-
sumption guarantees that reduce reclassi…cation risk. These guarantees can also be provided
by o¤ering an equivalent guaranteed premium path whose year-to-year increases match the
consumer’s income growth. Moreover, when framed as guaranteed premium path contracts,
these optimal contracts –which di¤er according to a consumer’s income path and risk pref-
erences –are self-selective, in the sense that consumers with di¤ering types will choose the
contract that is designed for them.
    Empirically, we …nd that optimal dynamic contracts for our population of consumers
exhibit substantial front loading: at age 25 a healthy consumer with a ‡at net income path,
for example, pays a premium of $2,750 compared to expected medical costs of only $1,131.
  42
      In this section we use the transition matrices described in Section 6.3 for the employer with a larger
population of covered individuals. The reason is that the PKH contract is very sensitive to the transition
matrices later in life.
   43
      At age 25 the value of the second term in equation (8), representing the premium pre-payment that
is required in the PKH contract, is $4,604. This amount divided by (= 0:975) is also the end-of-period
amount that the consumer would need to pay out in the event that she remained healthy (with 26 = 1) to
achieve the …rst best in the reclassi…cation-risk insurance scheme proposed by Cochrane (1995).


                                                    38
However, a healthy “downscaled manager,”whose income rises steeply over time would front
load much less, paying a premium of $1,678. We …nd that the welfare implications of optimal
dynamic contracts also depend crucially on the steepness of a consumer’s income path:
Optimal dynamic contracts with one-sided commitment almost achieve the …rst-best for
consumers with ‡at net income paths, but o¤er less improvement over spot market contracts
(with or without precautionary savings) for consumers with rising income pro…les, for whom
front-loading to facilitate reclassi…cation risk insurance is quite costly. This intuition carries
over to the welfare comparison between dynamic contracts and ACA-like markets: consumers
with ‡atter income pro…les prefer dynamic contracts but those with steeper income pro…les
prefer ACA-like markets.
    We also considered several extensions of our main analysis. We …nd that lower consumer
risk aversion, which reduces the costs of reclassi…cation risk, makes optimal dynamic con-
tracts nearly achieve the …rst best for all income paths. While lower risk aversion also
improves the performance of other contracting institutions, with low risk aversion dynamic
contracts o¤er higher welfare than an ACA-like market for all income paths. (Of course, the
di¤erences in welfare are smaller when risk aversion is lower.) Higher switching costs also
improve the performance of dynamic contracts, which can achieve a level of welfare com-
parable to the ACA with switching costs on the order of $5,000. We also show that those
consumers who are in poor health at age 25 do particularly poorly with dynamic contracts,
as their high medical needs at that age preclude front loading. Insuring consumers against
the risks of their age 25 health realization would cost the government approximately $2,000
per consumer. Alternatively, a revenue-neutral government tax/subsidy scheme can insure
this pre-age-25 risk, resulting in welfare similar to that in an ACA-like exchange.
    In sum, dynamic contracts o¤er a way to reduce reclassi…cation risk without requiring
community rating as in the ACA. However, with rising incomes we …nd in our base speci…-
cation that the ACA approach (even without e¤ective risk adjustment) o¤ers greater lifetime
welfare. This conclusion can be reversed, though, if consumers’ risk aversion is lower (in
which case risk-bearing has much smaller, though not insubstantial, welfare consequences),
consumers face signi…cant switching costs, or the government insures pre-age-25 (i.e., pre-
contracting) risk.
    A natural question, then, is whether there are other factors that might in practice limit the
use of dynamic contracts, but that we have abstracted from. We conclude with a discussion
of this issue.
    Our model has abstracted from a number of factors that could potentially reduce the
bene…ts of dynamic contracts. One concern is that …rms may have di¢ culty forecasting
future medical cost levels, an issue that does not arise in markets such as life insurance



                                               39
in which long-term contracts are prevalent. Moreover, this risk is not fully diversi…able.44
Nonetheless, this need to forecast can be alleviated (in part) by indexing future guaranteed
premiums to medical cost in‡ation indices, which also would allow for a sharing of the risk
between …rms and consumers.
    Another potential problem is that consumer lock-in might lead to quality degradation
by insurers. However, it would seem that insurers’ quality incentives would actually be
enhanced in some dimensions, as they would have increased incentives to promote long-term
health. Lock-in could also reduce a consumer’s ability to re-match with …rms if …rm-speci…c
preferences change (Atal (2015)).45
    One might also be concerned that front-loaded contracts would be unappealing to “young
invincibles,” a group that has been di¢ cult to attract into the ACA market. However, for
these consumers (i.e., 25 year old consumers with 25 = 1) the optimal contract’s $2,750
premium for the case of ‡at net income is less than the average medical cost for 25-30 year
olds (equal to $3,112), which would be the premium in an age-based community rating
environment with full insurance. For healthy 25-year-old downscaled managers the optimal
contract premium is even less: $1,678.
    Perhaps the most serious current limitation on the bene…ts of dynamic contracts is that
consumers have a tax-based incentive to use employer-based insurance when it is available
to them, which can limit the duration of consumers’involvement in the individual market.
For example, in the pre-ACA world, while some consumers purchased individual insurance
over long periods of time, many others used it as a short-term solution between employment
spells, leading median duration in the individual market in one study to be less than 2
years [Marquis et al (2006); see also Herring, Song, and Pauly (2008)]. Short durations can
greatly reduce the bene…ts of a long-term contract.46 In addition, those older consumers
newly arriving to the individual market with pre-existing conditions (perhaps because of a
job loss) would still face reclassi…cation risk, much as in our discussion of unhealthy 25-year-
old consumers in Section 6.5, perhaps necessitating some sort of government insurance (such
as high-risk pool subsidies).
    Another way to address this question is to look at the extent to which dynamic contracts
are used in practice. In the U.S., before the ACA mandated annual policies, few explicitly
  44
     The need to forecast could also introduce “winner’s curse” type concerns, as …rms who attract a lot of
business would tend to be those whose forecasts of future medical cost in‡ation are unreasonably low.
  45
     This problem would be greatly reduced if health insurance products were purely …nancial.
  46
     Introducing an exogenous probability of break up into our model is equivalent to lowering the discount
rate, provided that separation payments upon break up cannot be made. With a discount factor of 0.5
(which generates an expected duration of 2), optimal dynamic contracts close only 36.8% of the gap between
spot contracts and the no-borrowing/no-savings benchmark for a consumer with ‡at net income.




                                                    40
dynamic contracts seem to have been o¤ered.47 Nonetheless, it does appear that there were
important dynamic aspects to the contracts o¤ered to consumers. While good evidence on
the workings of the pre-ACA individual market is limited, it appears that in most states
insurers faced guaranteed renewability regulations that prevented them from re-pricing a
policy to continuing customers on an individual basis [Patel and Pauly (2002)].48 There is also
evidence that these constraints, where present, did in fact signi…cantly limit reclassi…cation
risk consumers faced once enrolled in a policy [Marquis and Buntin (2006), Herring and Pauly
(2006), Herring, Song, and Pauly (2008)].49;50 At the very least, this suggests that insurers
can deal with considering dynamic concerns in their pricing of policies. However, why
insurers did not o¤er optimal dynamic contracts to improve upon the regulated guaranteed
renewable policies is an open question; whether these regulated contracts were close to
optimal, whether instead insurance regulations made it di¢ cult to do so, or whether other
impediments existed (such as the short average duration of consumers in the individual
market) is not clear.
    Of course, the high number of uninsured consumers in the pre-ACA world is well-
documented. It is not clear that optimal dynamic contracts will signi…cantly help with
this problem, especially given that some form of dynamic contracting seems to have been
part of the pre-ACA environment. In part, this high rate of uninsurance may have been due
to problems of adverse selection [Hendren (2013)] and the availability of free care through
various means [Mahoney (2015)]. As well, the poor may have a low demand for high-cost
medical expenditures given their limited wealth, and hence also a low demand for insur-
ance that covers such care. As a result, signi…cant expansion of comprehensive insurance,
whether via dynamic contracts or annual contracts, may require large government subsidies.
What our analysis shows is that signi…cant insurance of reclassi…cation risk may be e¤ec-
tively provided via long-term contracts that are risk-rated, rather than through short-term
community-rated policies, provided that consumers enroll when young and healthy.
  47
    One attempt to do so is described in http://www.nytimes.com/2008/12/03/business/03insure.html (ac-
cessed Feburary 23, 2017). The possible adoption of the ACA may have reduced demand for this policy.

  48
     Insurers were generally free to set initial premiums based on health status (Kaiser Family Foundation
(2012)), and could also raise a policy’s premiums on a non-individual basis, although potentially subject to
state-level regulatory constraints. The pool of customers in a policy generally worsened over time due to
attrition of the healthiest consumers (much as in our theory) and insurers would raise rates over time to the
continuing pool of customers (so-called “durational rating”). This ability to raise rates did allow insurers to
avoid medical cost in‡ation risk, as a policy’s premiums could be increased in response to cost increases.
  49
     However, consumers with pre-existing conditions needing to insure for the …rst time in the individual
market (perhaps because of a job loss) faced risk-rating in most states.
  50
     Similar regulations are present in Germany and Chile, as noted in Browne and Ho¤man (2013) and Atal
(2016), respectively. Germany requires premiums to be constant over time, although they are indexed, much
as we discussed above. In Chile …rms face restrictions on how they initially risk rate and also a band limiting
the range of policy-level price increases, although average policy-level price increases are unregulated.



                                                      41
References
 [1] Abramitzky, R.(2008) “The Limits of Equality: Evidence from the Israeli Kibbutz,”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 123: 1111-59.

 [2] Akerlof, G. (1970) “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
     Mechanism,”Quarterly Journal of Economics 84: 488-500.

 [3] Atal, J. P. (2016), “Lock-In in Dynamic Health Insurance Contracts: Evidence from
     Chile,”working paper.

 [4] Brown, J., M. Duggan, I. Kuzioemko, and W. Woolsten, “How Does Risk Selection
     Respond to Risk Adjustment? Evidence from the Medicare Advantage Program,”Amer-
     ican Economic Review 104: 3335-64.

 [5] Browne, M. and A. Ho¤mann. (2013) "One-Sided Commitment in Dynamic Insurance
     Contracts: Evidence from Private Health Insurance in Germany" Journal of Risk and
     Uncertainty 46: 81-112.

 [6] Bundorf, K., J. Levin, and N. Mahoney (2012), “Pricing and Welfare in Health Plan
     Choice,”American Economic Review 102: 3214-48.

 [7] Cardon, J. and I. Hendel (2001), “Asymmetric Information in Health Insurance: Ev-
     idence from the National Medical Expenditure Survey,” RAND Journal of Economics
     32: 408-27.

 [8] Carlin, C. and R. Town (2009). "Adverse Selection, Welfare and Optimal Pricing of
     Employer Sponsored Health Plans,”working paper.

 [9] Chiappori, P. and B. Salanie (2000), “Testing for Asymmetric Information in Insurance
     Markets,”Journal of Political Economy 108: 56-78.

[10] Cochrane, J. (1995), “Time-Consistent Health Insurance,”Journal of Political Economy
     103: 445-73.

[11] DeGaridel-Thoron, T. (2005), “Welfare-Improving Asymmetric Information in Dynamic
     Insurance Markets,”Journal of Political Economy 113: 121-50.

[12] Finkelstein, A, K. McGarry and A. Su…. (2005) “Dynamic Ine¢ ciencies in Insurance
     Markets: Evidence from Long-Term Care Insurance,”The American
    Economic Review 95: 224-8.



                                           42
[13] Fudenberg, D., B. Holmstrom, and P. Milgrom (1990), “Short-term Contracts and Long-
     term Agency Relationships,”Journal of Economic Theory 51: 1-31.

[14] Hendren, N. (2013), “Private Information and Insurance Rejections,”Econometrica 81:
     1713-62.

[15] Herring, B. and M.V. Pauly (2006), “Incentive-Compatible Guaranteed Renewable
     Health Insurance Premiums,”Journal of Health Economics 25: 395-417.

[16] Ho, K., J. Hogan, and F. Scott Morton (2016), “The Impact of Consumer Inattention
     on Insurer Pricing in the Medicare Part D Program,”NBER working paper no. 21028.

[17] Glazer, J., T. McGuire, and J. Shi (2014), “Risk Adjustment of Health Payment Plans
     to Correct Ine¢ cient Plan Choice From Adverse Selection” NBER working paper no.
     19998.

[18] Handel, B. (2013), “Adverse Selection and Switching Costs in Health Insurance Markets:
     When Nudging Hurts,”American Economic Review 103: 2643-82.

[19] Handel, B., I. Hendel and M. Whinston (2015), “Equilibria in Health Exchanges: Ad-
     verse Selection vs. Reclassi…cation Risk,”Econometrica 83: 1261-1313.

[20] Harris, M. and B. Holmstrom (1982), “A Theory of Wage Dynamics,” Review of Eco-
     nomic Studies, 40: 315-33.

[21] Hendel, I. (2016), “Dynamic Selection and Reclassi…cation Risk: Theory and Empirics,”
     working paper.

[22] Hendel, I. and A. Lizzeri (2003), “The Role of Commitment in Dynamic Contracts:
     Evidence from Life Insurance,”Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 299-327.

[23] Herring, B. and M. Pauly (2006), “Incentive-Compatible Guaranteed Renewable Health
     Insurance Premiums,”Journal of Health Economics 25: 395-417.

[24] Herring, B., X. Song, and M. Pauly (2008), “Changes in Coverage in the Individual and
     Group Health Insurance Markets and the E¤ect of Health Status,”U.S. Department of
     Health and Human Services Report, O¢ ce of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and
     Evaluation.

[25] Hofmann, A. and M. Browne (2013), “One-Sided Commitment in Dynamic Insurance
     Contracts: Evidence from Private Health Insurance in Germany,” Journal of Risk and
     Uncertainty 46: 81-112.


                                            43
[26] Koch, T. (2011), “One Pool to Insure Them All? Age, Risk, and the Price(s) of Medical
     Insurance,”working paper.

[27] Marquis, M.S. and M.B. Buntin (2006), “How much risk pooling is there in the individ-
     ual insurance market?,”Health Services Research 41: 1782-1800.

[28] Marquis, M.S., M.B. Buntin, J.J. Escarce, K. Kapur, T.A. Louis, and J.M. Yegian
     (2006), “Consumer Decision Making in the Individual Health Insurance Market,”Health
     A¤airs 25: w226-34.

[29] Mahoney, N. (2015), “Bankrupcy as Implicit Health Insurance,” American Economic
     Review 105: 710-46.

[30] Pauly, M., H. Kunreuther and R. Hirth (1995), “Guaranteed Renewability in Insurance,”
     Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 10: 143-56.

[31] Pauly, M., A. Percy, and B. Herring (1999), “Individual vs. Job-Based Health Insurance:
     Weighing the Pros and Cons,”Health A¤airs 18: 28-44.

[32] Rabin, M. (2000), “Risk Aversion and Expected-Utility Theory: A Calibration Theo-
     rem,”Econometrica 68: 1281-92.

[33] Rothschild, M. and J. E. Stiglitz (1976), “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Mar-
     kets: An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information,” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 90: 629-49.


9    Appendix A: Characterization of Equilibrium Con-
     tracts with One-Sided Commitment
In this appendix, we characterize equilibrium contracts with one-sided commitment, allowing
for a switching cost       0 that represents the consumer’s consumption loss should she
switch. Proposition 1 follows as the special case in which = 0. Speci…cally, we establish
the following result:

Proposition 3 The equilibrium contract in a competitive market with one-sided commit-
ment for a consumer of type = (y; u) who cannot borrow and has a switching cost           0 is
characterized by a collection of consumption guarantees fct ( t )g, where each ct ( t ) is the
consumption guarantee o¤ered to the consumer in the …rst period of a break-even (i.e., zero
subsidy) contract starting in period t when the consumer is in health state t . The consumer
who agrees to a contract in period 1 when in health state 1 enjoys in each period t following

                                             44
health state history ( 1 ; :::; t ) the certain consumption max                    t   c (        ). Consumers have no
incentive to save after agreeing to the contract.

    We begin by specifying the contract design problem recursively, and then provide a series
of characterization results that collectively establish Proposition 3.


9.1    The period T problem
Suppose that the period T state is ( T ; ST ; T ), where ST is the discounted expected loss that
can be sustained from that period on (i.e., the available subsidy), and T is the switching
cost the consumer incurs in period T (which equals 0 if he is not switching and equals if
he is). Consider the following problem, whose value is V T ( T ; ST ; T ):
                                              R
                 maxcT ( )                      u(cT (mT )           T )dFT (mT j T )
                                   R                                                                                (11)
                  s:t:                 cT (mT )dFT (mT j T )         ST + yT       E[mT j         T ];    T


   The FOC for this problem is

                                       u0 (cT (mT )     T)   =   T    for all mT

So we have
                                        cT (mT ) = ST + yT           E[mT j   T]

and
                         V T(      T ; ST ;   T)   = u(ST + yT         E[mT j   T]           T)



   Observe, that we can rewrite problem (11) as
                                                   R
             maxCT ( )                          u(CT (mT ))dFT (mT j T )
                             R
               s:t:              (CT (mT ) + T )dFT (mT j T ) ST + yT                    E[mT j          T ];   T


and in turn as
                                                   R
           maxCT ( )                           u(CT (mT ))dFT (mT j T )
                             R                                                                                      (12)
             s:t:                CT (mT )dFT (mT j T ) (ST     T ) + yT                  E[mT j          T ];   T


which shows that V T ( T ; ST ; T ) = V T ( T ; ST      T ; 0). That is, having the consumer
incur a consumption loss of T due to switching is equivalent to having the loss that can be
sustained by the …rm be ST      T . Intuitively, we can think of the …rm as …rst compensating
the consumer for the switching cost, and then devising the optimal consumption level given
a subsidy of ST    T.


                                                        45
    It will be convenient to de…ne the value function VT ( T ; ST       T)    V T ( T ; ST T ; 0),
which is the value of problem (12). Observe that this value function is strictly concave in
ST since @ 2 VT ( T ; ST )=@ST2 = u00 (ST + yT E[mT j T ]), and by Assumption A1 we also have
strict increasing di¤erences in ( T ; ST ) since @VT ( T ; ST )=@ST = u0 (ST + yT E[mT j T ]) is
strictly increasing in T .


9.2      The period t problem
Suppose the period t state is ( t ; St ; t ). (As above, t equals 0 if the consumer is not
switching and equals if he is.) Consider the following problem, whose value is V t ( t ; St ; t ):
                            R
 maxct ( );St+1 ( )             [u(ct (mt ;      t+1 )         t)   + V t+1 (     t+1 ; St+1 (mt ;        t+1 ); 0)]dFt (mt ;            t+1 j t )

                         R
                             [ct (mt ;       t+1 )   + St+1 (mt ;          t+1 )]dFt (mt ;        t+1 j t )      St + yt         E[mt j t ];          t
       s:t:

                      V t+1 (        t+1 ; St+1 (mt ;    t+1 ); 0)          V t+1 (    t+1 ; 0;     ) for all (mt ;      t+1 );      t (mt ;     t+1 )
                                                                                                                                            (13)


Remark 1 The second constraint is the lapsation constraint.

Remark 2 Note that ct (mt ; t+1 ) and St+1 (mt ; t+1 ) also depend on ( t ; St ; t ), the state
entering period t. We do not include these arguments to simplify notation. Below, for
example, we report some results on how changes in the state ( t ; St ; t ) a¤ect ct (mt ; t+1 )
and St+1 (mt ; t+1 ).

    Following similar logic as for the period T problem, we can rewrite problem (13) as
                                      R
 maxCt ( );St+1 ( )                       [u(Ct (mt ;    t+1 ))       + V t+1 (       t+1 ; St+1 (mt ;        t+1 ); 0)]dFt (mt ;        t+1 j t )

                        R
                            [Ct (mt ;        t+1 )   + St+1 (mt ;          t+1 )]dFt (mt ;        t+1 j t )      (St       t)   + yt        E[mt j t ];           t
        s:t:

                         V t+1 (          t+1 ; St+1 (mt ;     t+1 ); 0)       V t+1 (     t+1 ; 0;    ) for all (mt ;          t+1 );      t (mt ;       t+1 )
                                                                                                                                            (14)
Thus, we have:

Lemma 1 V t ( t ; St ;          t)   = V t ( t ; St          t ; 0)   for all ( t ; St ;     t)


     As in the period T problem, it is convenient to de…ne the value function Vt ( t ; St                                                   t)
V t ( t ; St  t ; 0)




                                                                      46
Corollary 1 The lapsation constraint can be written as St (mt ;                                    t+1 )            .

    Proof. From Lemma 1, the inequality V t+1 ( t+1 ; St+1 ; 0) V t+1 ( t+1 ; 0; ) is equivalent
to the inequality V t+1 ( t+1 ; St+1 ; 0) V t+1 ( t+1 ; ; 0), which holds if and only if St    .


    As a result, we can rewrite problem (14) as the following problem, whose value is
Vt ( t ; St t ):

                                        R
 maxct ( );St+1 ( )                          [u(ct (mt ;   t+1 ))   + Vt+1 (       t+1 ; St+1 (mt ;        t+1 )))]dFt (mt ;           t+1 j t )

                             R
                                 [ct (mt ;    t+1 )   + St+1 (mt ;         t+1 )]dFt (mt ;       t+1 j t )   = St           t   + yt      E[mt j t ];        t
       s:t:

                        ft (mt ;     t+1 j t )    St+1 (mt ;    t+1 )            ft (mt ;      t+1 j t )       for all (mt ;           t+1 );      t (mt ;   t+1 )
                                                                                                                                         (15)

Remark 3 We write the second constraint with ft (mt ; t+1 j t ) (which is strictly positive)
to simplify statement of the FOC (17) below. We also write the budget constraint as an
equality, as it will clearly bind at the solution.


9.3      Equilibrium Contract Characterization

Since without loss of generality the equilibrium contract prevents lapsation, it solves (12)
and (15) with t = 0 for all t. We now characterize its solution. We do so through an
inductive argument. We have already seen that VT ( T ; ST ) is strictly concave in ST and
has strictly increasing di¤erences in ( T ; ST ). In considering the period t problem, we now
assume that Vt+1 ( t+1 ; ST +1 ) is strictly concave in St+1 and has strictly increasing di¤erences
in ( t+1 ; St+1 ). The characterization results below will imply that the same properties hold
for the value function Vt ( t ; St ).
    The FOC for problem (15) are:

                              u0 (ct (mt ;       t+1 ))    =        t   for all (mt ;    t+1 )                                           (16)
                @Vt+1 ( t+1 ; St+1 (mt ;         t+1 ))
                                                           =        t        t (mt ;   t+1 )   for all (mt ;            t+1 )            (17)
                           @St+1




                                                               47
Condition (16) implies that ct is independent of (mt ;                         t+1 ).     We can therefore rewrite problem
(15) for t = 0, whose value is Vt ( t ; St ), as:
                                                         R
 maxct ;St+1 ( )                           u(ct ) +           Vt+1 (     t+1 ; St+1 (mt ;       t+1 ))dFt (mt ;     t+1 j t )

                                            R
                                 ct +             St+1 (mt ;     t+1 )]dFt (mt ;          t+1 j t )   = St + yt     E[mt j t ];       t
      s:t:

                   ft (mt ;   t+1 j t )     St+1 (mt ;        t+1 )            ft (mt ;     t+1 j t )       for all (mt ;   t+1 );        t (mt ;   t+1 )
                                                                                                                                     (18)

    The FOC for this problem are (17) and

                                           u0 (ct ) =     t    for all (mt ;       t+1 )                                             (19)

    We now establish a number of lemmas characterizing the solution of this problem.


Lemma 2 Vt ( t ; St ) is strictly concave in St .

      Proof. Let [ct ; St+1 ( )] be the solution of problem (18) for ( t ; St ) and [c0t ; St+10
                                                                                                 ( )] 6=
                                           0
[ct ; St+1 ( )] be the solution for ( t ; St ). Consider the problem for ( t ; St ) where St = St +(1
  )St0 for 2 (0; 1). In this problem [ct ; St+1 ( )] is feasible, where ct = ct +(1 )c0t and St+1 =
                     0
  St+1 + (1       )St+1 : Moreover, because u( ) is strictly concave and Vt+1 ( t+1 ; St+1 ) is strictly
concave in St+1 , [ct ; St+1 ( )] achieves a value strictly larger than Vt ( t ; St )+(1 )Vt ( t ; St0 ),
which implies that Vt ( t ; St ) > Vt ( t ; St ) + (1        )Vt ( t ; St0 ).


Lemma 3 St+1 ( ) is independent of mt .

    Proof. Suppose St+1 (mt ;             t+1 )   > St+1 (m0t ;        t+1 )   for some mt and m0t 6= mt . Then
                                            0
                    @Vt+1 (    t+1 ; St+1 (mt ;        t+1 ))          @Vt+1 (     t+1 ; St+1 (mt ;        t+1 ))
                                                                 >
                                   @St+1                                                @St+1

Moreover, since St+1 (mt ; t+1 ) > St+1 (m0t ;                 t+1 )            , we have            0
                                                                                                 t (mt ;    t+1 )     t (mt ;   t+1 )     =
0. But this contradicts (17).




                                                                 48
   So, letting f t ( t+1 j t ) be the marginal conditional distribution of                                        t+1   given     t,     we can
rewrite the period t problem (for t = 0) as
                                                      R
    maxct ;St+1 ( )                    u(ct ) +           Vt+1 (    t+1 ; St+1 ( t+1 ))f t ( t+1 j t )d t+1

                                         R
                               ct +          St+1 (    t+1 )f t ( t+1 j t )d t+1        = St + yt             E[mt j t ];     t            (20)
         s:t:

                            f t(   t+1 j t )    St+1 (    t+1 )           f t(   t+1 j t )       for all        t+1 ;    t ( t+1 )


Its FOC are (19) and

                             @Vt+1 (    t+1 ; St+1 ( t+1 ))
                                                                   =      t       t ( t+1 )    for all         t+1                         (21)
                                            @St+1

Lemma 4 St+1 ( ) is nondecreasing in                         t+1 :

                                                             0                                0
   Proof. Suppose St+1 (                t+1 )   > St+1 (     t+1 )   where        t+1   <     t+1 .   Then
                      0            0                                           0
         @Vt+1 (      t+1 ; St+1 ( t+1 ))            @Vt+1 (      t+1 ; St+1 ( t+1 ))         @Vt+1 (         t+1 ; St+1 ( t+1 ))
                                                >                                        >                                           ;
                          @St+1                                    @St+1                                       @St+1

where the …rst inequality follows because Vt+1 ( t+1 ; St+1 ) has strict increasing di¤erences in
( t+1 ; St+1 ) and the second because Vt+1 ( t+1 ; St+1 ) is strictly concave in St+1 . Moreover,
since St+1 ( t+1 ) > St+1 ( 0t+1 )  , we have t ( 0t+1 )        t ( t+1 ) = 0. But this contradicts
(21).

     The next three results show how the consumption and the subsidy varies with the state
( t ; St ) (only the last of the three is necessary for the proof of Proposition 3).

Lemma 5 ct is strictly increasing in St , and                             t   is strictly decreasing in St .

   Proof. By the Envelope Theorem, @Vt ( t ; St )=@St =                                          t.     Since Vt ( t ; St ) is strictly

concave in St ,       t   is strictly decreasing in St . By (19), this implies that ct is strictly increasing
in St .

Lemma 6 For all               t,   St+1 (    t+1 )   is nondecreasing in St at all                    t+1 .


   Proof. Consider St > St0 . Denote the solutions [ct ; St+1 ( )] and [c0t ; St+1
                                                                               0
                                                                                   ( )] respectively.
                                                 0                                       0
Consider state t+1 . The result is immediate if St+1 ( t+1 ) =     so suppose that St+1     ( t+1 ) >



                                                                     49
   . Then 0t ( t+1 ) = 0. Since         t   <     0
                                                  t   by Lemma 5 and                 t ( t+1 )
                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                     t ( t+1 ),   (21) implies
that we must have
                                          0
                         @Vt+1 (   t+1 ; St+1 ( t+1 ))           @Vt+1 (       t+1 ; St+1 ( t+1 ))
                                                         >
                                     @St+1                                      @St+1
                                                    0
which, in turn, implies that St+1 (      t+1 )   > St+1 (        t+1 )   by the strict concavity of Vt+1 (            t+1 ; St+1 )
in St+1 .

Lemma 7 ct is strictly increasing in              t,   and       t   is strictly decreasing in          t.


   Proof. Suppose that 0t > t but 0t                                                                 0
                                                      t . Denote the solutions for ( t ; St ) and ( t ; St )
by [ct ; St+1 ( )] and [c0t ; St+1
                               0
                                   ( )] respectively. Then, by (21) and Lemma 2, for all t+1 such
                                           0                                 0
that St+1 ( t+1 ) >         , we have St+1   ( t+1 )    St+1 ( t+1 ). Thus, St+1 ( t+1 )    St+1 ( t+1 ) at
all t+1 . Assumptions A1 and A2, plus Lemma 4, then imply that
                                                             Z
                           St + yt     E[mt j t ]                    St+1 (   t+1 )f t ( t+1 j t )d t+1
                                                             Z
                      > S t + yt       E[mt j 0t ]                   St+1 (                    0
                                                                              t+1 )f t ( t+1 j t )d t+1
                                                             Z
                                                  0                   0                        0
                           St + yt     E[mt j     t]                 St+1 (   t+1 )f t ( t+1 j t )d t+1



so the budget constraint implies that c0t < ct . But this violates (19) when                                      0
                                                                                                                  t        t   –a
contradiction.

Lemma 8 Vt ( t ; St ) has strictly increasing di¤erences in ( t ; St ).

   Proof. Since, by the Envelope Theorem, @Vt ( t ; St )=@St = t , the result follows from
Lemma 7.
   Lemmas 2 and 8 establish that the induction hypothesis is valid. We now argue that the
above lemmas establish Proposition 3.
   Note from (21) for the period t problem that the states in which the lapsation constraint
does not bind (so that St+1 >       ) have equal marginal utilities of St+1 , equal to t . This
implies (using the Envelope Theorem for the period t+1 problems) that they have equal
 t+1 , which in turn implies that they have equal ct+1 . Moreover, t = t+1 in those states,
so ct = ct+1 . The states in which lapsation constraint does bind in the period t problem
have marginal utilities of St+1 that are strictly less than t . Hence, again from the Envelope
Theorem, in these states we have t+1 < t , which implies that ct+1 > ct . Thus, the contract
can be thought of as starting with a guaranteed consumption, which gets bumped up to
a new higher guaranteed consumption whenever the lapsation constraint binds. The new

                                                         50
higher guaranteed consumption level is exactly the …rst-period consumption in the optimal
contract that would start at that date and health state if the consumer were to start with a
new …rm, incurring the switching cost (since St+1 =         at that continuation).51
    Finally, observe as well that t is weakly falling (and ct is weakly increasing) along any
realized path. As a result, the consumer never has any desire to save.


10      Appendix B: Self Selection
We …rst establish the following Lemma:


Lemma 9 Let p = (p ; :::; pT ) and pb = (bp ; :::; pbT ) be guaranteed premium paths (that start
in period ) such that pb p. Suppose that (i) the insurer earns a non-negative expected
continuation payo¤ when guaranteed premium path p is chosen in period by a type con-
sumer in health state     (given the consumer’s optimal lapsation behavior), and (ii) under
premium path p, in every period t > and health state t in which a type consumer op-
timally does not lapse, the insurer’s expected continuation payo¤ is non-positive. Then the
insurer’s expected continuation payo¤ is non-negative when premium path pb is chosen by a
type consumer in health state .

     Proof. Let U (t; t ) and Ub (t; t ) denote the type consumer’s continuation payo¤ at state
(t; t ) given optimal lapsation behavior under p and pb respectively. Let (t) and b (t) denote
the set of health states at which the consumer optimally lapses in period t, under p and pb
respectively; N L (t) and b N L (t) are the complementary sets at which the consumer does
not lapse. Finally, let (t; t ) and b (t; t ) denote the insurer’s expected continuation payo¤
at state (t; t ) given the consumer’s optimal lapsation behavior under p and pb respectively.
Assumption (i) therefore says that ( ; ) 0, while assumption (ii) says that (t; t ) 0
if t > and t 2 N L (t) [of course, (t; t ) = 0 for all t 2 (t)].
     Note, …rst, that U (t; t ) U  b (t; t ): starting in period t, the consumer who faces p could
adopt the same lapsation behavior as when facing pb and receive a weakly higher continuation
payo¤ since under p she would be facing lower prices. Her optimal lapsation behavior yields
a still higher payo¤. Next, the fact that U (t; t ) U      b (t; t ) implies that (t) b (t): in any
health state in which the consumer lapses in period t when facing p, she also lapses when
facing pb. Finally, consider the expected payo¤ of the insurer starting at state ( ; ) under
p. This is the probability weighted average of the payo¤s achieved along the various possible
sequences of health states ( ; :::; T ). For each sequence the insurer earns premiums and
  51
    Equivalently, it is the guaranteed consumption level that would be o¤ered to a consumer who incurs no
switching costs but faces …rms who must earn an expected discounted pro…t equal to .


                                                   51
incurs costs until the consumer lapses. Since (t) b (t), each such sequence hits lapsation
weakly earlier under pb than under p. Since, under path p, (t; t )           0 if t >     and
  t 2   N L (t), the earlier termination behavior under
                                                        b (but earning the same premiums p
prior to lapsation) would weakly raise the expected payo¤ earned by the insurer for the
sequence by changing a non-positive expected continuation payo¤ into a continuation payo¤
of zero. Moreover, the fact that the premiums earned until lapsation are higher under pb than
under p, while the expected costs are the same, means that a change from premium path p
to path pb, holding lapsation behavior …xed at b , would further raise the insurer’s expected
payo¤ earned from this health state sequence. As a result, ( ; ) b ( ; ).

   We next establish the following Lemma:

Lemma 10 Suppose that in each period t           the menu of contracts o¤ered to a consumer
who is in health state t and wishes to sign a new contract is the set of optimal contracts
for that consumer, fpt ( t )g 2 ; t 2 , and that moreover, in each period t > this menu is
self-selective. Then an insurer earns a non-negative continuation expected NPV if in period
  type 0 consumer in health state        chooses the guaranteed premium path p ( ) that is
intended for a type consumer in health state .

   Proof. The proof is by induction. Consider the following induction hypothesis:

Induction Hypothesis: Under contract p ( ), if starting in period t > the consumer
    has not yet lapsed, lapsation behavior of type 0 starting in period t is either (A) the
    same as for type (meaning, it is the same after any history of health states between
    periods and t and sequence of decisions not to lapse), or (B) di¤erent and raises
    the expected continuation payo¤ of the insurer starting in period t compared to the
    continuation payo¤ the insurer receives when facing a type consumer.

    Observe that the Induction Hypothesis holds if t = T , since then lapsation behavior is
the same for type 0 as for type –both types lapse if and only if E[mT j T ] < pT , where pT
is the last period price in guaranteed premium path p ( ) (p ; :::; pT ).
    Now suppose that the Induction Hypothesis holds for periods t; :::; T , and consider period
t 1(        + 1) after some previous history of health states and a sequence of decisions in
which the insured has not yet lapsed. Suppose …rst that, under p ( ), period t 1 lapsation
behavior is di¤erent for type 0 than for type in a health state t 1 in which type would
not lapse. Then since the lapsation constraint in problem (20) requires that St 1 ( t 1 ) 0
in the solution to the type problem in period t 1, lapsation by type 0 in state t 1
would remove a continuation that had a weakly negative continuation expected payo¤ for
the insurer when facing type and replace it with a zero payo¤ when facing type 0 .

                                              52
    Suppose, instead, that state t 1 is one in which type would lapse in period t 1,
choosing a contract with premium path pb, while type 0 does not lapse. We will show
that this changes what would have been a zero payo¤ continuation for the insurer into a
continuation with a non-negative expected payo¤ when facing type 0 . By the self-selection
assumption, we know that the contract pb type chooses is pt 1 ( t 1 ), the optimal guaranteed
premium path contract for that consumer, so the insurer o¤ering that contract breaks even.
Note now that since that contract induces the type consumer to lapse there is a           >0
such that pbk = pk        for all periods k  t 1 (this is true because the two guaranteed
premium paths di¤er only in o¤ering di¤erent initial premiums and then the premium change
each period equals the change in the type ’s income). Hence, by Lemma 9, if the type
consumer were instead not to lapse from path p ( ) (p ; :::; pT ) in this state, the insurer’s
expected continuation payo¤ would be non-negative. But the Induction Hypothesis then
implies that it is also non-negative when the type 0 consumer does not lapse in this state:
the insurer’s payo¤s in period t 1 from the two types are the same as both the premium
paid and the expected medical costs are the same for the two types. The transitions to the
period t state t are also the same. But, by the Induction Hypothesis, the insurer’s expected
continuation payo¤ under contract p ( ) is weakly higher starting in period t when facing
the type 0 consumer than when facing a type consumer. So the Induction Hypothesis
holds in period t 1, and hence –applying induction –in period 2.
    Finally, consider period . The argument is similar to that above: If a type 0 consumer
in health state    chooses the premium path p ( ) intended for a type consumer in health
state , the insurer’s …rst period costs are the same as if a type consumer in health state
   had chosen that contract, and the transitions to health states in the next period are the
same as well. If the lapsation behavior starting in period + 1 were the same, the insurer
would break even. But, we have just concluded that if the lapsation behavior is di¤erent,
the insurer’s expected continuation payo¤ must be weakly higher. Thus, the insurer must
have a non-negative expected payo¤ when a type 0 consumer in health state             chooses
contract p ( ) in period .
    Apply induction

   We now prove Proposition 2:

    Proof. of Proposition 2: We suppose that, in each period t = 1; :::T , the menu
of optimal guaranteed premium path contracts fpt ( t )g 2 ; t 2 is o¤ered, where pt ( t )
fyt ct ( t )gTt=1 . The proof is by induction. Consider the following induction hypothesis.

Induction Hypothesis: In each period t >      the menu is self-selective: that is, if a
    consumer of type agrees to a new contract she chooses that type’s optimal contract
    pt ( t ).

                                             53
     The hypothesis is clearly true for = T , as given any previous history the menu fpT ( T )g
is a singleton with pT = E[mT j T ], and hence necessarily self-selective. Now suppose it is
true for some ; we argue that it is then also true for       1. From Lemma 10 we know that
if a type consumer chooses in period         1 when in health state     1 the contract intended
for her then the insurer breaks even, but if she chooses instead the contract intended for type
  0
    the insurer earns a non-negative pro…t. But the policy intended for the type consumer
maximizes the type consumer’s discounted expected utility subject to the constraint that
the insurer at least break-even. The policy intended for type 0 was therefore feasible for
type , which implies that it cannot be preferred by type .
     Apply induction.


Remark 4 The proof goes through unchanged if we also allow consumers to have unob-
servable risk aversion coe¢ cients. It does not go through, however, if consumers have
unobservable switching costs. This makes sense: As discussed in Sections 2.4 and 6.2,
high switching costs can, for example, allow the consumer to borrow, but a low-switching cost
consumer would then …nd it worthwhile to misrepresent his type, borrow and then lapse.


11        Appendix C: E¤ects of Health State Persistence
In this Appendix we explore the e¤ects of health state persistence on the welfare achieved
under various contracting institutions. To illustrate the e¤ects of greater persistence, we
derive the optimal contracts and corresponding welfare using transition matrices representing
the weighted average of the identity matrix (with weight 2 f0; 1]) and uniform transition
probabilities (namely, from any state there is 1/7 probability to transition to any state). The
identity matrix represents full persistence, which is captured by = 1. Instead for low
the states become less persistent, and in the extreme case of = 0 the state is independent
of past health. Note also that, with this transition process, ex ante (prior to the realization
of 1 ) expected medical expenses are independent of . We assume here ‡at income (since
expected health care costs are independent of age, this also represents ‡at net income).
    Table 21 reports the welfare achieved in the …rst best (C ), with spot contracting
(CESP OT ), with optimal dynamic contracts with one-sided commitment (CD ), and with
spot contracts with precautionary savings possible (CESP OT wS ).52 (Since we have ‡at net
income, CN BN S = C here.) The last two columns show the percentage welfare gain from
optimal dynamic contracts versus spot contracting and versus spot contracting with precau-
tionary savings. Observe that greater persistence has no e¤ect on welfare for either the
 52
      Precautionary savings was discussed in Section 6.4.


                                                     54
                                                 CED        CED
           C       CSP OT   CED     CSP OT wS   CESP OT   CESP OT wS
 0         47.05   39.83    45.59   44.45       1.14      1.03
 0.3000    47.05   39.83    45.17   43.45       1.13      1.04
 0.5000    47.05   39.83    44.72   42.68       1.12      1.05
 0.7000    47.05   39.83    43.94   41.78       1.10      1.05
 0.9000    47.05   39.83    42.12   40.64       1.06      1.04
 0.9999    47.05   39.83    39.84   39.83       1.00      1.00

Table 21: Welfare for alternative transition matrices capturing health state persistence. With
probability the state is unchanged, and with probability 1        the state is a random draw,
with equal probabilities, of the seven possible states.

…rst best or spot contracting regimes. The …rst best is una¤ected by persistence because
expected medical expenses are independent of . Welfare with spot contracting is also inde-
pendent of because the ex ante distribution of premiums in any period is independent of
  and preferences are additive across time periods. Once precautionary savings is allowed,
however, welfare is greater the lower is , as precautionary savings can smooth out short-run
shocks to medical expenses, but accomplishes less when those shocks are persistent; as shocks
become perfectly persistent, precautionary savings provides no bene…t at all. Finally, the
welfare achievable by optimal dynamic contracts with one-sided commitment is declining
in the level of persistence. Indeed, in the limit as approaches 1 welfare with dynamic
contracts approaches the level with spot contracting (with or without precautionary sav-
ings) as, in that limiting case, there is no reclassi…cation risk to insure once the consumer’s
age-25 health state is realized. The gains of optimal contracts over spot contracts declines
montonically in , while it is inverse U-shaped when there is precautionary savings.


12        Appendix D: PKH premiums
Consider one-period contracts signed in each period t in return for the premium pt ( t ) paid
at signing that does the following:

     fully insures period t health expenses

     if t < T , pays in addition the amount pt+1 ( t+1 ) pt+1 (1) [where pt+1 (1) is the period
     t + 1 premium for the healtiest period t + 1 health state, t+1 = 1, at the start of the
     next period t + 1].

   These contracts pay an amount that gurantees that the insured’s outlays for the next
period contract (net of the insurance payout from the previous period) always equal the
amount that the healtiest type would pay.

                                                55
   The premiums for these contracts will in equilibrium be:

                                               pT (     T)   = E[mT j         T]


and for t < T ,
                          pt ( t ) = E[mt j t ] + Efpt+1 (                t+1 )       pt+1 (1)j t g

   The next result derives an expression for the premium paid in period t, corresponding to
expression (8) in the text.
                                                             P            t
Lemma 11 For all t, pt ( t ) = E[mt j t ] +                      >t           fE[m (          )j t ]       E[m (        )j   t+1   = 1]g

   Proof. Clearly true in period T . Suppose it is true for all periods > t. To see it is
true in period t , we substitute and use the Law of Iterated Expectations:

pt ( t ) = E[mt j t ] + fE[pt+1 (          t+1 )j t ]     pt+1 (1)g
                                                          X
                                                                       (t+1)
        = E[mt j t ] + EfE[mt+1 j             t+1 ]   +                        fE[m (              )j   t+1 ]    E[m (        )j   t+2   = 1]j t g
                                                          >t+1
                                              X
                                                             (t+1)
                  fE[mt+1 j   t+1   = 1] +                           fE[m (          )j    t+1     = 1]         E[m (    )j   t+2   = 1]g
                                               >t+1
                                                  X
                                                                 (t+1)
        = E[mt j t ] + fE[mt+1 j t ] +                                   E[m (            )j t ]
                                                      >t+1
                                              X
                                                             (t+1)
                  fE[mt+1 j   t+1   = 1] +                           fE[m (          )j    t+1     = 1]g
                                               >t+1
                          X
                                     t
        = E[mt j t ] +                   fE[m (        )j t ]    E[m (          )j    t+1    = 1]g
                              >t




                                                                56
