                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 THE EFFECTS OF U.S. MONETARY POLICY ON EMERGING MARKET ECONOMIES'
               SOVEREIGN AND CORPORATE BOND MARKETS

                                       John D. Burger
                                     Francis E. Warnock
                                  Veronica Cacdac Warnock

                                     Working Paper 23628
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23628


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2017




This paper, funded by the Central Bank of Chile, was prepared for the Central Bank of Chile’s
Twentieth Annual Conference. The authors thank Anderson Silva of the World Bank, for
GEMLOC investability data; Branimir Grui of the BIS, for data on the size of local currency and
USD-denominated bond markets; McKinsey Global Institute, for data on the size of global
financial assets; and John Rogers, Chiara Scotti and Jonathan Wright, for their unconventional
monetary policy shocks data. We also thank John Ammer, Eric Swanson, Carlos Viana de
Carvalho (the discussant) and participants at the Twentieth Annual Conference of the Central
Bank of Chile for their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by John D. Burger, Francis E. Warnock, and Veronica Cacdac Warnock. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of U.S. Monetary Policy on Emerging Market Economies' Sovereign and Corporate
Bond Markets
John D. Burger, Francis E. Warnock, and Veronica Cacdac Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 23628
July 2017
JEL No. F21,F3,G15

                                           ABSTRACT

We analyze the effect of the US Federal Reserve’s monetary policy on EME sovereign and
corporate bond markets by focusing on two dimensions: the evolution of the structure (size and
currency composition) of the bond markets and their allocations within the bond portfolios of US
investors. Global factors, particularly the level of long-term US Treasury yields, matter. Across
all specifications, when US long-term interest rates were low (i) EMEs issued more sovereign and
private-sector local currency bonds and more private-sector foreign currency bonds and (ii) US
investment in EME sovereign bonds (both local currency and USD-denominated) increased. In
contrast, after controlling for the level of US long-term interest rates, measures that attempt to
isolate the effects of US unconventional monetary policy are often statistically insignificant in our
analysis. Local factors matter too: The local currency government bond markets in countries with
stronger regulatory quality/creditor rights are larger and attract relatively more US investment.
Finally, consistent with Burger et al. (2017), we find that the well-known home bias phenomenon
is at least in part a home currency bias: US investors exhibit no home bias against some
countries’ USD-denominated bonds, whereas for local currency bonds the familiar home bias is
very present.

John D. Burger                                    Veronica Cacdac Warnock
Loyola University Maryland                        Darden Business School
4501 N. Charles Street                            University of Virginia
Baltimore MD 21210-2699                           Box 6550
jburger@loyola.edu                                Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
                                                  vwarnock@virginia.edu
Francis E. Warnock
Darden Business School
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
and NBER
warnockf@darden.virginia.edu
       The global environment for emerging market economy (EME) bond markets has changed

dramatically over the past few decades. Local currency bond markets (LCBMs) have developed,

especially in EMEs with low inflation, stronger institutions and well defined creditor rights (see Burger

and Warnock 2003, 2006; Eichengreen and Luengnaruemitchai 2006, Claessens, Klingebiel and

Schmukler, 2007). Some EMEs have been able to borrow globally in their local currency, which enhances

financial stability by ameliorating the currency mismatches that were at the core of past crises (Goldstein

and Turner, 2004). However, large inflows of foreign investment can be problematic, as most extreme

capital flow episodes are driven by debt flows (Forbes and Warnock, 2013), credit booms lead to crises

(Mendoza and Terrones, 2008; Gourinchas and Obstfeld, 2012; Schularick and Taylor, 2012) and large

foreign investment flows into LCBMs can complicate the tasks of EME policymakers by appreciating real

exchange rates, fanning asset price bubbles and intensifying lending booms. Indeed, unconventional

monetary policy (UMP) by many advanced economies (AEs) may have propelled a global search-for-

yield strategy and contributed to a period of large and volatile inflows to EMEs. Many EME policymakers

who were worried about excessive upward pressure on local currencies and indiscriminate flows enabling

increasingly risky borrowing are now concerned about the possibility of an external shock (such as US

monetary policy tightening) prompting a stampede for the exits.

       This paper is the latest in a series of ours on EME bond markets. Our early work was primarily

concerned with whether EME bond markets could ever develop and whether foreign investors would hold

EME local currency bonds as opposed to only holding EMEs’ foreign currency denominated bonds.

Burger and Warnock (2006, 2007) found that, counter to the “original sin” literature, policies and laws

indeed matter, as EMEs with stable inflation rates and strong creditor rights have more developed local

bond markets, rely less on foreign currency-denominated bonds and can attract US investors. Our

subsequent work focused in part on whether the global financial crisis put an end to EMEs’ bond market



                                                    1
development and foreigners’ interest in EME local currency bonds. Burger, Warnock and Warnock

(2012), focusing on the period from 2001 to the end of 2008—when the crisis had already begun—find

that policies and laws that helped improve macroeconomic stability and creditor rights enabled EME local

currency bond markets to grow substantially and also provided US investors with attractive returns. US

investors responded by sharply increasing their holdings of EME local currency bonds, especially in EMEs

with investor-friendly institutions and policies. Burger, Sengupta, Warnock and Warnock (2015) extend

that analysis in a panel dataset from 2006 through 2011, focusing on US investors’ reallocations within

their international bond portfolios. They note that the steady increase in US investors’ allocations towards

EME local currency bonds, which was unabated by the global financial crisis and even accelerated after

the crisis, was due in part to global ‘push’ factors, such as low US long-term interest rates and subdued

risk aversion or expected volatility. But also evident was investor differentiation among EMEs, with the

largest reallocations going to those EMEs with strong macroeconomic fundamentals, such as less volatile

inflation and more positive current account balances. Finally, Burger, Warnock and Warnock (2017),

using a panel dataset from 2006 to 2015, find a home currency bias: Not only do factors associated with

greater (or less) cross-border investment in bonds differ by currency denomination, but also the ever-

present home bias actually disappears in some cases when bonds are denominated in the investor’s

currency.

       In this paper, we analyze bond markets using a panel dataset similar to that in Burger, Warnock

and Warnock (2017), spanning the period 2007 to 2015. Currency denomination, as in all of our bond

market papers, is an important aspect of our analysis, but unlike in our earlier work, the focus here is

squarely on sectoral aspects of EME bond markets. In particular, we assess the development of EME

sovereign and corporate bond markets, both local currency and foreign currency and attempt to understand

what drives US investors’ portfolios in those markets.



                                                     2
        We find that the structure of EME bond markets has generally continued to improve over the 2007

to 2015 period, as many EMEs have lessened their reliance on foreign currency bonds. That trend has

reversed slightly in recent years, in particular because of increased private-sector issuance of foreign

currency denominated bonds. Nevertheless, the share of EME bonds denominated in the local currency is

markedly higher than a decade ago and time-fixed effects in our regressions indicate that, after controlling

for local variables, over the 2007-2015 period there has been a trend toward larger sovereign local

currency bond markets and larger private foreign currency bond markets. It is this latter trend that creates

the recent decline in the share of private bonds denominated in local currency.1 Regarding the determinants

of bond market development, we find that local factors matter: countries with better macroeconomic

stability (i.e., lower inflation volatility) have larger sovereign local currency bond markets and a greater

share of private local currency denominated bonds; stronger regulatory quality/creditor rights are

associated with larger sovereign local currency bond markets and a greater share of local currency

denominated bonds (both sovereign and private issued); and countries with more positive current account

balances have larger bond markets (both local currency and foreign currency denominated, and especially

private-sector issued bonds) and a greater share of bonds denominated in local currency. Interestingly,

larger economies in our sample have smaller foreign currency bond markets and a larger share of local

currency bonds. US conditions and policies also influence EME bond markets: (a) local currency (both

sovereign and private) and private foreign currency bond markets increased in size when US yields,

especially the non-large scale asset purchase portion (non-LSAP), were lower, and (b) EME bond markets

grew most during periods of lower CBOE Volatility Index (VIX). Controlling for the level of US long-

term interest rates, we fail to find robust evidence for an additional impact of UMP on EME bond market


1
  For this study, a local currency bond is denominated in the currency of the country of residence of the issuer, in keeping
with residence-based international accounts. A recent focus on the ultimate nationality of the issuer —for example, when a
Chinese firm issues a yuan-denominated bond through an off-shore subsidiary (see, for example, McCauley et al., 2013)— is
relevant, but beyond the scope of our study.

                                                             3
development, as across three UMP proxies there is limited and mixed evidence linking US unconventional

monetary policy and bond market development.

       We also examine the evolution of US investors’ EME bond portfolios, employing data on

country-level holdings (by currency and sector of issuer) built from high-quality security-level data. While

holdings of private-sector local currency bonds remain quite small (the data appear to indicate that EME

corporates must issue in US dollars to attract a meaningful amount of US investment), holdings of

sovereign issued local currency bonds and private-issued USD-denominated bonds have increased

significantly over the past decade. For sovereign local currency bonds, we find that US investment is

greater in EMEs with more positive fiscal balances, higher yields, greater regulatory quality and creditor

rights and stronger trade ties with the US. Some global factors also matter. For example, lower US long-

term interest rates and a lower VIX are associated with increased investment in EME sovereign local

currency bonds. However, results for UMP proxies were mixed, including some (but not much) evidence

that the LSAP-induced fall in US rates was associated with increased investment in EME sovereign local

currency bonds. Overall results for these bonds are consistent with the classic result of low US rates being

associated with a surge in investment in EMEs. From our analyses of US cross-border investment in USD-

denominated bonds, we find investment was greater in EMEs with stronger regulatory quality and creditor

rights, lower inflation volatility and lower yields. We also find evidence that lower US interest rates are

associated with increased investment in USD-denominated sovereign bonds, but global push factors do

not appear important in determining investment in EME private-sector bonds.

       In addition to being related to our series of papers on EME bond markets, as discussed above, this

paper is related to academic literature in four respects. First, on bond market development, it adds to

Burger and Warnock (2006), Claessens et al. (2007) and many others (to be discussed in Section 3).

Second, it contributes to the literature on relationships between international portfolios and global and



                                                     4
local factors. For example, Calvo et al. (1993) noted the importance of global factors such as US interest

rates in explaining capital inflows, and Chuhan et al. (1998) made the important contribution of separating

different types of flows and found that global factors were important in explaining capital inflows, but

country-specific developments were at least as important. Many subsequent papers confirmed points made

by those two papers. A recent example, Fratzscher (2012), using weekly fund flows data, found that global

factors were the main drivers of capital flows in the midst of the recent crisis, but that country-specific

determinants were dominant in the years immediately following the crisis. Third, our paper is also directly

related to work on international investment in bonds—including Lane (2006) and Fidora et al. (2007)—

and on US investors’ local currency bond portfolios—Burger and Warnock (2007); Burger, Warnock and

Warnock (2012). Fourth, a closely related but separate literature looks at cross-border banking flows—

see, for example, Blank and Buch (2007) and Hale and Obstfeld (2016).

       Our assessment of EME bond markets—their size, structure and international investment—starts

in the next section with a discussion of considerations about existing data on bonds outstanding and bond

holdings. Section 2 describes the three ways UMP proxies enter our regression analysis. In Section 3, we

describe and assess the evolution of EME markets. In Section 4, we assess US investors’ EME bond

portfolios. Section 5 concludes.


1. Bonds Outstanding and Bond Holdings Data

1.1 Working Dataset

       Our assessment of the development of EME bond markets demands a careful appraisal of available

datasets. We consider the following four points: First, the currency denomination of bonds should be

identified for both bonds outstanding and cross-border bond holdings—the location of the issuer is not an

accurate proxy for the currency denomination of bonds—so that we can examine the development of local

currency denominated bonds against foreign currency denominated ones, as well as investors’ allocations

                                                    5
within the two (local and foreign currency). Second, we are interested in revealing any differences in

trends between sovereign issued bonds and private-sector issued bonds, and so we require data

disaggregated by sector (public v. private). Third, we choose a class of investors, namely, those residing

in the US, for which consistent and complete data are available. Fourth, we obviously need data through

time.

        Given the above requirements, our working dataset for this paper consists of annual data from

2007 to 2015 on 15 EMEs, assembled from two main sources: portfolio data from US Treasury

comprehensive benchmark surveys and bond market data from the recently redesigned debt securities

datasets of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). Local currency denominated debt is clearly

identified in the Treasury data and, in the BIS data, it is the sum of the long-term debt component of

“domestic debt” and the local currency/local issuer portion of “international bonds”. Overall, our dataset

allows us to separately analyze bonds by sector of the issuer (sovereign or private) and by currency

denomination (local currency and foreign currency, including a separate entry for USD-denominated

bonds). We consider this dataset appropriate for our study; but, it also poses significant challenges, which

we outline below.



1.2 The Amount of Bonds Outstanding

        Before 2012, data that identified the currency denomination and issuer of bonds were available

from BIS for more than 40 countries, including over 20 EMEs. The relevant data on debt securities and

international bonds statistics formed the BIS Quarterly Review “Table 16A: Domestic debt securities, by

sector and residence of issuer” and “Table 14B: International bonds and notes - all issuers, by residence

of issuer”. Domestic debt was defined by the BIS as local currency bonds issued by locals in the local

market (i.e., not placed directly abroad), while international bonds were bonds issued either in a different



                                                     6
currency or in a different market. It was possible to back out data on bonds (debt securities with original

maturity over one year)2 placed either domestically or internationally, as well as to identify the issuer’s

residence, the currency denomination of the bonds and the type of issuer (sovereign or private). Burger,

Sengupta, Warnock and Warnock (2015), using this BIS dataset, were able to include 21 EMEs and 23

AEs. However, this dataset was discontinued and is thus available only through 2011, and is possibly

inconsistent with the new dataset based on new methodology that the BIS established in 2012 (see Gruić

and Wooldridge, 2012).

         In the new BIS dataset (with 2012 definitions) that we use in this paper, “international bonds” are

largely the same as in the discontinued pre-2012 dataset described above. The challenge with this new

dataset is that central banks of some countries have opted to report data that sum together domestic and

international debt. We argue that, even for an aggregated analysis, combining domestic and international

debt hampers analysis. For analyses that explicitly require splits on currency and maturity—a split that

used to be readily available because the international portion was built up from security-level data and the

domestic portion was assumed (by definition) to be denominated in the local currency—aggregated debt

data presents a severe limitation.



1.3 Bond Holdings

         International bond portfolio data must identify the currency denomination of the underlying bonds,

because the location of the issuer does not indicate the currency denomination of the bonds. One dataset

that identifies currency denomination is available for a particular set of investors: US resident investors.



2
  The split between bonds/notes and short-term paper can be important. Consider, for example, Brazil. A large proportion of
Brazilian debt securities are short-term; see Leal and Carvalhal da Silva (2008) for a detailed analysis. In the old BIS
database, Brazilian debt securities were broken out by maturity (and currency denomination), and it showed that, as of end-
2011, about $1 trillion of its $1.5 trillion in domestic debt securities were short-term instruments (e.g., money market). Using
the old dataset, one can omit Brazilian short-term instruments and focus on Brazilian domestic long-term debt securities
(which totaled $0.5 trillion at end-2011).

                                                               7
Data on US holdings of foreign bonds have been obtained from periodic, comprehensive security-level

benchmark surveys conducted by the US Treasury Department, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York

and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The security-level holdings data are not

available to researchers outside the Federal Reserve Board, but the country-level aggregates (with

currency and sector breakdown) that are built from the security-level data are available for over 100

countries and provide a clean annual dataset beginning in 2007.3 These holdings data also constitute the

official US data on international positions; for example, the figure for international bonds in the

International Investment Position report issued by the Bureau of Economic Analysis is formed by

aggregating the survey’s security-level information.

         The data based on the granular security-by-security data are aggregated according to the currency

denomination of a bond, the country residence of its issuer and the sector (sovereign or private) of the

issuer. Starting with year-end 2007 data, the data are posted on the Treasury website, in a report with a

table labeled as “US holdings of foreign long-term debt securities, by country and sector of issuer,

denominated in US dollars and in local currency.”4

         Although in our analysis we are forced, by limited data availability, to focus on US investors’

cross-border bond holdings (and not investors across a number of countries), it is sufficiently rich because

US investors are a large group for which we have high-quality, publicly available data. And to reiterate,

US investors’ bond holdings are captured at the security level, so the exact nature of the bond is known to




3
  Note that, while for foreign currency bonds we limit our portfolio analysis to USD-denominated bonds, U.S. investors’
holdings of third-currency bonds (i.e., neither in USD, nor in the issuer’s currency) are extremely small, amounting to only
2.3% of their foreign bond portfolio in 2011.
4
  For more detail, see, for example, U.S. Department of the Treasury et al. (2008), or the Griever, Lee and Warnock (2001)
primer. For the exact table we use, see, for example, Table 29 from U.S. Department of the Treasury et al. (2008) or Table
A11 from U.S. Department of the Treasury et al. (2016). Note that we alter the underlying Treasury data in two ways. One,
we leave true zeros as zeros, but we replace asterisks, which indicate that U.S. holdings are greater than zero but less than
$500,000, with $250,000. Two, there are instances when, for a particular split of the data, reported U.S. holdings are greater
than the amount outstanding; in these cases, we set holdings equal to the amount outstanding.

                                                               8
the data clearinghouse (i.e., Treasury, NY Fed and the Federal Reserve Board) and, therefore, this enables

the production of publicly available reports on bonds by various classifications (currency, sector, etc.)



2. Unconventional Monetary Policy in the Empirical Model

        Several proxies for unconventional monetary policy (UMP) are available, although for our

purposes no one method seems to be superior over the rest.5 We therefore use three approaches for UMP.

        First, following Ahmed and Zlate (2014), we decompose the 10-year Treasury yield into two

components: one that may be due to LSAPs (usi10_LSAP) and the yield estimated in the absence of LSAPs

(usi10_nonLSAP). Specifically, in a first-stage regression, we regress Treasury yields on one-quarter

ahead Fed net asset purchases (since the QE programs were announced ahead of implementation) over the

period from 2002:Q4 to 2016:Q2, and then we compute the LSAP component of yields as beta*LSAP.6

The remaining yield is the non-LSAP component. For the period prior to the first QE program, we set the

LSAP component to zero. The results suggest that, on average, $100 billion in LSAPs in a quarter would

decrease yields by 37.5 basis points (bps), in line with the Ahmed and Zlate (2014) estimate of 31 bps and

roughly consistent with other estimates in the literature. For example, the D’Amico and King (2013) event

study estimated a persistent downward shift in yields averaging 30 bps, and the VAR estimates of

Bhattarai, Chatterjee and Park (2015) suggest $100 billion in LSAPs would have a 25 basis point effect


5
  In the literature, a number of UMP proxies have been employed; see Ahmed and Zlate (2014) for a discussion focused on
LSAPs. For example, an indicator variable has been used to mark initial announcements and implementation periods of the
first three rounds of LSAPs; see Gagnon et al. (2010), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011) and Bauer (2012). See
also D’Amico and King (2013), Wright (2012), Hamilton and Wu (2012), Bauer and Rudebusch (2014), Rogers et al. (2014)
and the Fawley and Neely (2013) narrative account of the LSAPs of four major central banks. Another technique is to use a
VAR-based approach to assess the effects of quantitative easing (QE); see Wright (2012), Baumeister and Benati (2013),
Gambacorta et al. (2014) and Bhattarai, Chatterjee and Park (2015). Swanson (2016) uses techniques from Gurkaynak, Sack
and Swanson (2005) to estimate separate forward guidance and LSAP effects. Other work on the international effects of U.S.
QE policy include Glick and Leduc (2012, 2013), Chen et al. (2012) and Bauer and Neely (2014); Eichengreen and Gupta
(2015), Aizenman et al. (2016) and Bowman et al. (2015); Tillmann (2014) estimates of the QE effects on the aggregate data
of EMEs; and the Ahmed and Zlate (2014), Ahmed et al. (2016), Dahlhaus and Vasishtha (2014) and Lim et al. (2014)
analyses of the QE effects on capital flows to EMEs.
6
  LSAP is the change in the size of Federal Reserve securities holdings (from the Federal Reserve Statistical Release H.4.1)
scaled by GDP.

                                                             9
on impact. Figure 1 shows the actual 10-year Treasury yield (thick line), our estimate of what the 10-year

yield would have been without LSAPs (thin line) and LSAP scaled by GDP (bars, right-hand scale). Table

1 shows the two series from the decomposition that enter our annual regressions: an estimate of what the

US 10-year yield would have been without LSAPs (usi10_nonLSAP) and the effect of LSAPs on the US

10-year yield (usi10_LSAP). The LSAP effect averages 31 bps per year from 2009 through 2014 with

peaks in 2010 and 2013.

       The second approach augments the first by adding a direct measure of the amount of LSAPs scaled

by GDP (lsap_flow_gdp) in regressions that also include the 10-year interest rate.

       The third approach uses well-identified UMP shocks to the 10-year interest rate, as calculated by

Rogers, Scotti and Wright (2016), henceforth RSW, which updates Rogers et al. (2014). Specifically,

RSW use high-frequency financial market data around Federal Reserve announcements (FOMC

statements as well as governors’ speeches) to help identify monetary policy shocks in a VAR setting. We

use the RSW shock to the 10-year rate—the change in 10-year Treasury rates within a 2-hour window of

announcements—and, at the same time, also include the level of the 10-year Treasury interest rate (which

itself captures some of the impact of unconventional monetary policy).

       We are agnostic on the many ways to proxy UMP; we therefore utilize the three approaches

described above and attempt to discern effects that are robust to the choice of a proxy.



3. Bond Markets in Emerging Market Economies

3.1 Structure of EME Sovereign and Corporate Bond Markets

       We start by presenting salient features of EME sovereign and corporate bond markets, specifically,

their size and structure. For consistency, in descriptive tables or figures that present aggregates, we include




                                                      10
only the 13 EMEs for which we have complete data for 2009 and 2015: Chile, Colombia, Mexico and

Peru; Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines and Thailand; and Israel, Russia, South Africa and Turkey.

       Table 2 presents information on 13 EME bond markets and shows that, over the period 2009-2015,

local currency bond markets grew from $2289 billion to $3281 billion, just over half of which were issued

by sovereign entities. The size of local currency bonds, measured as a percent of the country’s GDP,

increased modestly from 42% to 46%, and their weight in the global bond market increased from 2.7% to

3.5%. Foreign currency denominated bonds—most of which are issued by the private sector—also

increased, from $436 billion in 2009 to $851 billion in 2015, increasing from 8.0% to 11.8% of national

GDP and nearly doubling their weight in the global bond market (from 0.5% to 0.9%). Of the foreign

currency denominated bonds, most are USD-denominated ($714 billion out of $851 billion in 2015).

Overall, most EME bonds are denominated in the local currency; in 2015, 87% of sovereign bonds and

72% of private-sector bonds were denominated in the local currency.

       The evolution of EME sovereign and corporate bonds markets is plotted in Figures 2a-2e. We see

the stark predominance of local currency bonds over USD-denominated bonds and a milder predominance

of sovereign over private bonds (Figure 2a). Though smaller in size, USD-denominated private-sector

bonds have rapidly grown, more than doubling between 2009 and 2015. Bonds outstanding by country,

plotted in Figures 2b-2e, help uncover any regional trends, while showing differences across countries

within a region. As a share of GDP (Figure 2b), local currency sovereign bond markets increased smartly

since 2007 in many Asian and Latin American EMEs, but less so in other countries. In contrast, trends in

the development of many private-sector local currency bond markets are less discernible (Figure 2c).

Further, local currency share—the share of local currency bonds in all bonds—is generally high for

sovereign bonds (Figure 2d), but lower and even declining for private-sector bonds (Figure 2e). This last




                                                   11
point—the decline in local currency share of private bonds—is due to the doubling of private-sector

foreign currency bonds evident in Figure 2a.



3.2 The Determinants of the Size and Structure of EME Bond Markets

       Why do some EMEs have larger local currency bond markets than others? In Burger, Warnock

and Warnock (2012), we assessed the size of local currency bond markets in 2008 and found that EMEs

with lower inflation volatility and stronger legal rights have more developed local bond markets. In Burger

and Warnock (2006), the findings were similar; economies can (and have) put in place institutions and

policies that foster the development of debt markets. Economies with better inflation performance (an

outcome of creditor-friendly policies) have more developed local bond markets, both private and

sovereign and rely less on foreign currency denominated bonds. Creditor-friendly laws matter. Stronger

rule of law is associated with deeper local bond markets and countries with stronger creditor rights are

able to issue a larger share of bonds in their local currencies.

       With an annual panel dataset spanning 2007 to 2015, we refresh our analysis on the size and

currency composition of bond markets. Similar to Burger and Warnock (2006) and Claessens et al. (2007),

we employ three measures of bond market development, each defined by sector (sovereign and private)

as follows: the ratio of the size of the local currency bond markets to GDP, the ratio of the size of the

foreign currency bond markets to GDP and the share of the country’s outstanding bonds denominated in

the local currency (local currency share).

       Explanatory variables include regulatory quality, creditor rights, fiscal and current account

balances, country size, GDP growth rate, the extent of trade with the US, a bond-specific measure of

capital account openness and inflation volatility. Specifically:




                                                      12
       regcr is a measure of regulatory quality and creditor rights, calculated as a weighted average of

        the Regulatory Quality Index from the World Bank’s World Governance Indicators and the Legal

        Rights Index from the ‘Getting Credit’ section of the World Bank’s Doing Business report. We

        construct a composite measure with twice the weight on regulatory quality, according to the

        GEMLOC Investability Indicator Methodology (Markit 2013).7 We recast the indicators to have

        values from 0 to 1—instead of from 0 to 100—to easily interpret the regression coefficients.

       caopen is a Markit (2013) de jure measure of the openness of a country’s local currency bond

        market to foreign investment, with higher scores indicating that a bond market is more open to

        cross-border investment. From the update of Markit (2013), we use the November observation of

        “Capital Control, Convertibility and Access” for each country and year and merge with the Burger

        et al. (2015) estimates for 2006 and 2007. We assume top scores (i.e., completely open) for South

        Korea (which enters the Markit dataset in 2011 with score of 100) and Israel and Singapore (which

        are not in the Markit sample). We recast caopen to range from 0 to 1.

       ca_gdp and fbal (current account balance and fiscal balance, both scaled by GDP) are from IMF’s

        IFS as reported in Haver Analytics.

       infvol, inflation volatility, is computed on a rolling basis using three years of quarterly data (from

        the IMF’s International Financial Statistics (IFS) data as reported in Haver Analytics).

       growth is calculated as the three-year average growth rate in real GDP per capita (from IMF’s IFS

        data as reported in Haver Analytics).

       nomgdp is the log of nominal GDP in USD.




7
  The regulatory quality index measures a government’s ability to formulate and implement sound policies and regulations
that promote private sector development, while the creditor rights index measures the degree to which collateral and
bankruptcy laws protect the rights of borrowers and lenders.

                                                            13
           trade_gdp is bilateral imports and exports between the US and the foreign country, scaled by the

            respective countries’ nominal GDP (source: IMF).

           For global variables, we include the VIX, as well as several proxies for unconventional monetary

            policy and US 10-year Treasury yields (as described in Section 2 and presented in Table 1).

            In our regressions, we use an annual panel dataset that spans the period 2007 to 2015 and includes

15 EMEs. In all, we have 123 observations, as due to data limitations some EMEs enter the panel later

than 2007.8 We report our results in Table 3 for sovereign bonds and for private-sector bonds using three

measures: local currency scaled by GDP, foreign currency scaled by GDP and share of local currency in

total. Constants are included but not reported. Estimates are calculated using panel-feasible generalized

least squares (FGLS), which allows for heteroscedastic error structures and different autocorrelation

coefficients for each country. Wald tests (not reported) show that the explanatory variables are always

jointly significant.

            First, in Table 3a we include time-fixed effects (but not global factors) to capture the impact of

global forces on EME bond markets during each year in the sample; coefficients for 2008 to 2015 are

reported and should be interpreted relative to 2007. The strongest results (in a statistical sense and also

robust across specifications) are as follows:

           Countries with stronger regulatory/creditor rights have larger local currency sovereign bond

            markets and a greater share of bonds denominated in local currency (both sovereign and private).

           Countries with stronger current account balances have larger local currency bond markets (and

            higher local currency share).




8
 Ten countries have data for all 9 years. In addition, Chile enters in 2008; Mexico and Pakistan, in 2009; Hungary, in 2010;
and India, in 2011. We lose 3 observations in the final column of Table 3, because Pakistan had no reported private-sector
bonds.

                                                             14
      Trade with the US matters for private-sector bonds, but negatively impacts sovereign bonds. While

       we cannot see the underlying firm-level data, it could be that corporates that trade a lot with the

       US also issue more bonds (some of which are USD-denominated).

      Capital account openness matters only for foreign currency private bonds. Macroeconomic

       stability (infvol) impacts only local currency sovereign bonds.

      The impact of country size varies across the specifications: Larger countries in our sample have

       smaller foreign currency bond markets and a larger share of local currency bonds.

      The time effects are often positive and significant for sovereign local currency bonds and foreign

       currency private bonds and often negative for the local currency share of private bonds. In other

       words, after controlling for other variables, over the 2007 to 2015 period there has been a trend

       toward larger sovereign local currency bond markets and larger private foreign currency bond

       markets (the latter trend leading to a decline in the share of all private bonds denominated in local

       currency).

       In Tables 3b-3d, we include global push variables and omit the time-fixed effects. The impact of

country-specific macroeconomic conditions and policies is broadly similar to the analysis in Table 3a. In

addition, we see that US yields and global risk conditions matter. EME local currency (both sovereign and

private) and foreign currency private bond markets increased in size when the non-LSAP component of

the 10-year Treasury was lower (Table 3b). We also find evidence that EME bond markets grew most

during periods of lower VIX. Further, there is no robust evidence showing an independent impact of

UMP—that is, above and beyond what is embedded in long-term Treasury yields—on the size and

currency composition of EME bond markets. Across the three UMP proxies, there is limited and

inconsistent evidence linking Fed policy and bond market development (beyond the ever-present US long-




                                                    15
term interest rate effect). That said, we do find some evidence suggesting that UMPs that lower US long

rates are associated with increased EMEs’ private-sector issuance in US dollars.



4. US Investors’ International Bond Portfolios

4.1 Analyzing US Investors’ Portfolios: Measure

         The dependent variable in this analysis is the Ahmed, Curcuru, Warnock and Zlate (2016) measure

of portfolio weights—the normalized relative weight.9 Relative weight is simply a country’s weight in US

investors’ portfolio relative to its weight in a benchmark portfolio. Specifically, country i’s relative

portfolio weight in US portfolios is the ratio of its weight in US investors’ portfolio to its weight in the

global market. Relative weight can be defined as:


                       i      H US   H   US
                                           i
Re lWgt iUS    i ,US                i
                                                                                                                      (1)
               i .m MCapi             MCap
                                      i
                                                 i




where H iUS is defined as US investors’ holdings of country i’s bonds and                       H
                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                      US
                                                                                                      i    represents the global


portfolio of bonds held by US investors, while MCapi is the market capitalization of country i’s bond

market and       MCap
                 i
                           i   is the market capitalization of the global bond market. If the portfolio weight


assigned to a particular bond market equals its weight in the global bond market, the relative weight for

that market is one. In reality, US investors’ relative portfolio weights are often far less than one—this is



9
  Relative weight is consistent with an international Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)-based model of international
portfolio allocation as presented in Cooper and Kaplanis (1986). That model, described in some detail in Holland et al.
(2016), includes country-specific proportional investment costs representing both explicit and implicit costs of investing
abroad and is designed to optimize an investor’s allocation of wealth among risky securities in n countries in order to
maximize expected returns net of costs. If there are no costs to investing, the allocation collapses to the global market
capitalization allocation; that is, the investor allocates his wealth across countries according to market capitalizations. If costs
are non-zero and non-uniform, allocations deviate from market weights. The higher the costs in a particular foreign market,
the more severely underweighted that country will be in the investor’s portfolios. The international CAPM, therefore,
provides a theoretical underpinning for our focus on relative weight.

                                                                16
one dimension of the well-known home bias in asset holdings—because over 90 percent of US investors’

bond holdings are issued by US entities. That said, for some asset classes—such as bonds denominated in

the investor’s currency—relative weights can and sometimes do exceed one (Burger, Warnock and

Warnock 2017).

       Relative price changes will cause movements in Relative Weight even if investors do not alter

their positions. This relative price effect can be removed through the simple normalization of dividing the

relative weight from equation (1) by the relative weight for the home market:

                 i ,US   US ,US
norm Re lWgt                                                                                     (2)
                 i ,m    US ,m

       This normalized relative weight is shown in Ahmed et al. (2016) to isolate portfolio reallocations

that are independent of relative price changes and are consistent with the Bekaert and Wang (2009)

adjustment of scaling by the source country’s home bias. In our panel regressions, we use normalized

relative weight, a measure of portfolio allocations that omits passive portfolio changes due to relative price

changes.



4.2 Evolution of EME Bond Holdings

       The EME local currency bond portfolio of US investors grew dramatically from $20 billion in

2009 to $72 billion in 2015 (lower panel of Table 4). EME local currency bonds were 2.7% of the global

bond market in 2009 and grew to 3.5% in 2015. US holdings increased even faster: US investors held

0.87% of outstanding EME local currency bonds in 2009 and this increased to 2.2% by 2015. Because the

weight of EME local currency bonds in US portfolios has increased relative to their weight in the global

bond market, the relative weight measure for EME local currency bonds in US investors’ portfolios more

than doubled over this period, from 0.029 in 2009 to 0.070 in 2015.



                                                     17
        Holdings of USD-denominated bonds issued by EMEs are substantially larger at $73 billion in

2009, which increased to $152 billion by 2015 and US investors hold a slightly higher percentage of

outstanding EME USD-denominated bonds (20.5% in 2009, 21.3% in 2015). Indeed, the weights of EME

USD-denominated bonds in US bond portfolios (0.29% in 2009, 0.51% in 2015) are not too dissimilar

from their weight in the global bond market (0.4% in 2009, 0.8% in 2015), so US investors’ relative weight

on EME USD-denominated bonds are much closer to one (0.68 in 2009, 0.67 in 2015).

        US holdings of EME bonds, levels by currency and sector, are presented in Figure 3, which can

be compared with the amount of bonds outstanding from Figure 2a. Quite apparent is the fact that the ratio

of local-to-USD bonds is much smaller in US portfolios than in bonds outstanding. Most EME bonds are

denominated in the local currency, but most US holdings (especially of private-sector bonds) are in USD.

In fact, whereas US investors hold roughly equal amounts of local currency and USD-denominated

sovereign bonds, US holdings of private-sector EME local currency bonds are so low, that it appears that

EME corporates must issue in USD to reach US investors.

        Regional aggregates (Figure 4) add insight into the stylized fact presented in Burger, Warnock and

Warnock (2017) that home bias is, to some extent, a home currency bias. In each graph in Figure 4, there

are two thick lines; the higher of the two is the relative weight for USD-denominated bonds, whereas the

lower thick line is for local currency bonds. As in Burger et al. (2017), relative weights for USD-

denominated bonds are always much greater than for local currency bonds. Also shown are the sectoral

splits. That EME corporates must issue in USD to reach US investors is evident from the private-sector

USD relative weights being near zero. Relative weights for sovereign local currency bonds are also quite

low, but nowhere near zero. And relative weight for USD bonds, whether sovereign or corporate, is quite

high.




                                                    18
4.3. Empirical Analysis of US Investors’ Foreign Bond Portfolios

        Over the past decade, US investors have significantly increased their cross-border holdings of

EME bonds. We use a common framework to analyze the evolution in US investors’ country-specific

relative portfolio weights—that is, their portfolio weights relative to a global benchmark—for bonds split

by currency and sector. Our annual panel dataset of US investor relative portfolio weights includes 15

destination countries over the 2007 to 2015 period.10 For explanatory variables, in addition to the country-

specific factors from Table 3, we include another “pull” factor, yield, to proxy for expected return.11 The

other macroeconomic indicators are shown in Table 3 and here represent factors that likely impact the

attractiveness of an economy as a destination for cross-border bond investment. Inflation volatility

(calculated as a rolling, trailing 12-quarter standard deviation) is included as a proxy for the uncertainty

of ex-ante real returns—increased inflation volatility will also lead to more volatile nominal bond yields,

thus increasing reinvestment risk. We include the current account to GDP ratio as a proxy for financial

imbalances. A country running a current account deficit must attract capital flows; if those inflows do not

materialize, adverse financial market outcomes (such as currency depreciation and/or a spike in bond

rates) are likely to occur. We also include the 3-year average growth rate in real GDP per capita as an

indicator of the vigor of the destination economy. Our primary institutional variable (our measure of

regulatory quality and creditor rights) and our de jure measure of the openness of a country’s local

currency bond market to foreign investment are described in Section 3. For global “push” factors, we

include the VIX volatility index (which measures variation in expected volatility and risk appetite, and

which we divide by 100 for readability of regression coefficients) and the three measures of US long rates

and US unconventional monetary policy discussed in Section 2.


10
   The number of destination countries is limited not by the holdings data, but by data on the size and composition of bond
markets and by explanatory variables.
11
   Yield, expressed in basis points, is the annual average of monthly bond yields (yield-to-maturity from the J.P Morgan GBI
indexes). JPMorgan provided yield data through 2013; we gathered 2014 and 2015 data from the Bloomberg.

                                                             19
         We present results for US cross-border investment in local currency bonds in Table 5 and in

USD-denominated bonds in Table 6. In each case, we split by sector with sovereign bonds in Panel a and

private-sector bonds in Panel b. In both tables, we include either time-fixed effects (column 4) to show

the impact of global forces on bond allocations over time without having to specify the precise nature of

the global variables, or specific global “push” factors (columns 1-3). For the time effects, coefficients for

2008 to 2015 are reported and should be interpreted relative to 2007.

4.3.1 Panel Results for Local Currency Portfolio Allocations

         The results for investment in local currency bonds (Table 5) show a stark contrast between

sovereign and private-sector bonds. Much fewer explanatory variables are significant for private-sector

bonds (Panel b), but this is not surprising given the minimal investment by US investors in local currency

bonds issued by the private sector in EMEs. For sovereign bonds (Panel a), US investment is greater in

countries with more positive fiscal balances, higher yields, greater regulatory quality and creditor rights

and stronger trade linkages with the US. The time-fixed effects indicate that, after controlling for country-

specific factors, US investors increased their allocations to EME local currency sovereign bonds during

the 2010 to 2015 period. When including specific global factors (columns 1-3), results suggest that lower

US interest rates and lower VIX are associated with increased investment in local currency sovereign

bonds. We get mixed results when we bring in unconventional monetary policy, but we do find that the

LSAP-induced fall in US rates was associated with increased investment in EME local currency sovereign

bonds.

         In summary, the results for EME sovereign local currency bonds in Table 5 are consistent with the

classic result of low US rates being associated with a surge in EME investment, therefore providing a

plausible channel through which US conditions could have contributed to the appreciation of EME

currencies (and also providing support to currency war claims).



                                                     20
4.3.2 Panel Results on USD-denominated Portfolio Allocations

       We analyze US cross-border investment in USD-denominated bonds and report our results in

Table 6 for sovereign bonds (Panel a) and private-sector bonds (Panel b), including country-level “pull”

factors and either time-fixed effects (column 4) or global “push” factors (columns 1-3). The time-fixed

effects for USD-denominated sovereign bonds are positive and significant for many years between 2009

and 2014. For private-sector USD-denominated bonds the time-fixed effects are all negative and usually

statistically insignificant. Investment in USD-denominated sovereign EME bonds was greater in countries

with stronger regulatory quality/creditor rights, lower inflation volatility and lower yields. For USD-

denominated bonds issued by the private sector in EMEs, investment is greater in smaller economies and

in those with greater trade linkages with the US For global factors, there is a sharp contrast in the impact

on US investment in USD-denominated sovereign v. private-sector bonds. Low US interest rates and

lower VIX are associated with increased relative weights on USD-denominated sovereign bonds, but we

fail to find a significant impact of these global push factors on relative weights for the growing stock of

USD-denominated private-sector bonds.



5. Conclusion

       Our assessment of EME sovereign and corporate bond markets suggests that local factors matter.

For example, countries with stronger regulatory quality/creditor rights have larger sovereign issued local

currency bond markets and also attracted relatively more US investment into their sovereign bonds. But a

longstanding global factor—the level of US long-term interest rates—is also important in much of our

analysis: We find strong evidence that, when US long rates were low, (1) EMEs issued more sovereign

and private-sector local currency bonds and more private-sector foreign currency bonds, and (2) US

investment in EME sovereign bonds (both local currency and USD-denominated) increased.



                                                    21
       We use three methods to isolate the effects of unconventional monetary policy of the US, but we

find UMP was rarely important. The low-frequency (annual) data we use is potentially hiding important

effects; for example, shocks in June could be undone by December. Still, the contrast between the

importance of US long-term rates and UMP is striking.

       The interesting stylized fact from Burger et al. (2017) that the home bias is, at least in part, a home

currency bias—US investors exhibit no home bias against some countries’ USD bonds—is also evident

here. Our sectoral analysis provides additional insight. Relative investment weights, whether for sovereign

or corporate bonds, are always substantially higher for USD-denominated bonds than local currency

bonds. And while the home bias against sovereign local currency bonds is substantial, it pales in

comparison to that against corporate local currency bonds. Indeed, to a first approximation, EME

corporates can only reach US investors if they issue USD-denominated bonds.




                                                     22
                                                      REFERENCES

Ahmed, S. and A. Zlate. 2014. “Capital Flows to Emerging Market Economies: A Brave New World?” Journal of
    International Money and Finance 48: 221–48.
Ahmed, S., S. Curcuru, F. Warnock and A. Zlate. 2016. “Decomposing International Portfolio Flows.” Mimeographed.
Aizenman, J., M. Binici and M.M. Hutchison. 2016. “The Transmission of Federal Reserve Tapering News to Emerging
    Financial Markets.” International Journal of Central Banking 317–56.
Bauer, M.D. 2012. “Fed Asset Buying and Private Borrowing Rates.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2012–16, May 21.
Bauer, M.D. and G.D. Rudebusch. 2014. “The Signaling Channel for Federal Reserve Bond Purchases.” International
    Journal of Central Banking 10(3): 233–89.
Bauer, M.D. and C.J. Neely. 2014. “International Channels of the Fed’s Unconventional Monetary Policy.” Journal of
    International Money and Finance 44: 24–46.
Baumeister, C. and L. Benati. 2013. “Unconventional Monetary Policy and the Great Recession: Estimating the
    Macroeconomic Effects of a Spread Compression at the Zero Lower Bound.” International Journal of Central Banking
    9: 165–212.
Bekaert, G. and X. Wang. 2009, “Home Bias Revisited.” Unpublished working paper.
Bhattarai, S., A. Chatterjee and W.Y. Park. 2015. “Effects of US Quantitative Easing on Emerging Market Economies.”
    Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper No. 255.
Blank, S. and C. Buch. 2007. “The Euro and Cross-Border Banking: Evidence from Bilateral Data.” Comparative Economic
    Studies 49: 389–410.
Bowman, D., J.M. Londono and H. Sapriza. 2015. “US Unconventional Monetary Policy and Transmission to Emerging
    Market Economies.” Journal of International Money and Finance 55: 27–59.
Burger, J. and F. Warnock. 2003. “Diversification, Original Sin and International Bond Portfolios.” International Finance
    Discussion Paper No.755, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
_________. 2006. “Local Currency Bond Markets.” IMF Staff Papers 53: 133–46.
_________. 2007. “Foreign Participation in Local-Currency Bond Markets.” Review of Financial Economics 16(3): 291-304.
Burger, J., F. Warnock and V.C. Warnock. 2012. “Emerging Local Currency Bond Markets.” Financial Analysts Journal
    68(4): 73–93.
_________. 2017. “Currency Matters: Analyzing International Bond Portfolios.” NBER Working Paper 23175.
Burger, J., R. Sengupta, F. Warnock and V. C. Warnock. 2015. “US Investment in Global Bonds: As the Fed Pushes, Some
    EMEs Pull.” Economic Policy 30 (84): 729–66.
Calvo, G.A., L. Leiderman and C.M. Reinhart. (1993). “Capital Inflows and Real Exchange Rate Appreciation in Latin
    America: The Role of External Factors.” IMF Staff Papers 40(1): 108–51.
Chen, H., V. Curdia and A. Ferrero. 2012. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programmes.”
    Economic Journal 122: 289–315.
Chuhan, P., S. Claessens and N. Mamingi. 1998. “Equity and Bond Flows to Latin America and Asia: The Role of Global
    and Country Factors.” Journal of Development Economics 55(2): 439–63.
Claessens, S., D. Klingebiel and S. Schmukler. 2007. “Government Bonds in Domestic and Foreign Currency: The Role of
    Institutional and Macroeconomic Factors.” Review of International Economics 15(2): 370–413.
Cooper, I. and E. Kaplanis. 1986. Costs to Crossborder Investment and International Equity Market Equilibrium.” In Recent
    Developments in Corporate Finance, edited by J. Edwards, J. Franks, C. Mayer and S. Schaefer. Cambridge University
    Press.
Dahlhaus, T. and G. Vasishtha. 2014. “The Impact of US Monetary Policy Normalization on Capital Flows to Emerging-
    Market Economies.” Bank of Canada Working Paper No. 2014–53.
D’Amico, S. and T.B. King. 2013. “Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance
    of Local Supply.” Journal of Financial Economics 108: 425–48.
Eichengreen, B. and P. Luengnaruemitchai. 2006. “Why Doesn’t Asia Have Bigger Bond Markets?” In BIS Papers No. 30:
    Asian Bond Markets: Issues and Prospects. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements.


                                                           23
Eichengreeen, B. and P. Gupta. 2015. “Tapering Talk: The Impact of Expectations of Reduced Federal Reserve Purchases on
    Emerging Markets.” Emerging Markets Review 25: 1–15.
Fawley, Brett W. and Christopher J. Neely. 2013. “Four Stories of Quantitative Easing.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
    Review, Jan/Feb, 51–88.
Fidora, M., M. Fratzscher and C. Thimann. 2007. “Home Bias in Global Bond and Equity Markets: The Role of Real
    Exchange Rate Volatility.” Journal of International Money and Finance 26: 631–55.
Fratzscher, M. 2012. “Capital Flows, Push versus Pull Factors and the Global Financial Crisis.” Journal of International
    Economics 88(2): 341–56.
Forbes, K. and F. Warnock. 2013. “Debt- and Equity-Led Capital Flow Episodes.” in Capital Mobility and Monetary Policy,
    edited by M. Fuentes and C.M. Reinhart. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile. Also available as NBER Working Paper No.
    18329.
Gagnon, J., M. Raskin, J. Remache and B. Sack. 2010. “Large-scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They
    Work?” Staff Reports No. 441, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Gambacorta, L., B. Hoffman and G. Peersman. 2014. “The Effectiveness of Unconventional Monetary Policy at the Zero
    Lower Bound: A Cross-Country Analysis.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 46: 615–42.
Glick, R. and S. Leduc. 2012. “Central Bank Announcements of Asset Purchases and the Impact on Global Financial and
    Commodity Markets.” Journal of International Money and Finance 31: 2078–101.
_________. 2013. “The Effects of Unconventional and Conventional US Monetary Policy on the Dollar.” San Francisco Fed
    Working Paper No. 2013–11.
Goldstein, M. and P. Turner. 2004. Controlling Currency Mismatches in Emerging Economies. Washington, DC: Institute for
    International Economics.
Gourinchas, P.‐O. and M. Obstfeld. 2012. “Stories of the Twentieth Century for the Twenty‐First.” American Economic
    Journal: Macroeconomics 4(1): 226–65.
Griever, W., G. Lee and F. Warnock. 2001. “The US System for Measuring Cross-Border Investment in Securities: A Primer
    with a Discussion of Recent Developments.” Federal Reserve Bulletin 87(10): 633–50.
Gruić, B. and P. Wooldridge. 2012. “Enhancements to the BIS Debt Securities Statistics.” BIS Quarterly Review (December):
    63–76.
Gurkaynak, R., B. Sack and E. Swanson. 2005. “Do Actions Speak Louder than Words? The Response of Asset Prices to
    Monetary Policy Actions and Statements.” International Journal of Central Banking 1: 55–93.
Hale, G. and M. Obstfeld. 2016. “The Euro and the Geography of International Debt Flows.” Journal of European Economic
    Association 14(1): 115–44.
Hamilton, J.D. and C. Wu. 2012. “The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound
    Environment.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 44: 3–46.
Holland, S., S. Sarkissian, M. Schill and F. Warnock. 2016. “Global Equity Investment.” Mimeographed.
Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen. 2011. “The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Interest Rates: Channels and
    Implications for Policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall.
Lane, P. 2006. “Global Bond Portfolios and EMU.” International Journal of Central Banking 2(2): 1–23.
Leal, R.P.C. and A.L. Carvalhal da Silva. 2008. “Development of the Brazilian Bond Market.” In Bond Markets in Latin
    America: On the Verge of a Big Bang? , edited by E. Borensztein, K. Cowan, B. Eichengreen and U. Panizza. MIT Press.
Lim, J.J., S. Mohapatra and M. Stoker. 2014. “Tinker, Taper, QE, Bye? The Effect of Quantitative Easing on Financial Flows
    to Developing Countries.” Background paper for Global Economic Prospects 2014, Washington, DC: World Bank.
Markit Indices Limited. 2013. “GEMLOC Investability Indicator Methodology.” February 2013,
    https://www.markit.com/assets/en/docs/products/data/indices/bond-
    indices/GEMLOC%20Investability%20Indicator%20Methodology.pdf
McCauley, R., C. Upper and A. Villar. 2013. “Emerging Market Debt Securities Issuance in Offshore Centers.” BIS
    Quarterly Review (September, Box 2).
Mendoza, E. and M. Terrones. 2008. “An Anatomy of Credit Booms: Evidence from Macro Aggregates and Micro Data.”
    NBER Working Paper No. 14049.


                                                           24
Rogers, J.H., C. Scotti and J. Wright. 2014. “Evaluating Asset-Market Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy: A Multi-
    Country Review.” Economic Policy 749–99.
_________. 2016. “Unconventional Monetary Policy and International Risk Premia.” International Finance Discussion
    Papers No. 1172.
Schularick, M. and A. M. Taylor. 2012. “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles and Financial Crises,
    1870‐2008.” American Economic Review 102: 1029–61.
Swanson, E. 2016. “Measuring the Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance and Asset Purchases on Financial Markets.”
    Mimeographed, University of California, Irvine.
Tillmann, P. 2014. “Unconventional Monetary Policy Shocks and the Spillovers to Emerging Markets.” Working Paper.
US Department of the Treasury, Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
    2008. Report on Foreign Portfolio Investment in the United States as of December 31. 2007.
________ 2016. US Portfolio Holdings of Foreign Securities as of December 31, 2015.
Wright, J. 2012. “What Does Monetary Policy Do to Long-Term Interest Rates at the Zero Lower Bound?” Economic
    Journal 122: F447–F466.




                                                           25
                                           Figure 1. 10-year Treasury Yields and LSAPs



6                                                                                                                     0.030


5                                                                                                                     0.025


4                                                                                                                     0.020


3                                                                                                                     0.015


2                      LSAP/GDP (rhs)                                                                                 0.010
                       10yrTreasury Actual
1                      10yrTreas nonLSAP                                                                              0.005


0                                                                                                                     0.000


-1                                                                                                                    -0.005
     20031


               20041


                           20051


                                   20061


                                            20071


                                                      20081


                                                              20091


                                                                      20101


                                                                              20111


                                                                                      20121


                                                                                              20131


                                                                                                      20141


             Table 1. US 10-year Treasury Yields, Decomposition and Unconventional Monetary Policy            20151


                                           10-year Treasury Yield

                                   Actual            Non-LSAP       LSAP       UMP     LSAP/GDP
                                   usi10            usi10_nonlsap usi10_lsap us_ump10 lsap_flow_gdp
                  2007              4.63                 4.63        0.00       0.000     0.000
                  2008              3.67                 3.67        0.00      -0.351     0.000
                  2009              3.26                 3.57        -0.31     -0.322     0.094
                  2010              3.21                 3.75        -0.54     -0.026     0.021
                  2011              2.79                 3.10        -0.32     -0.062     0.029
                  2012              1.80                 1.93        -0.13      0.108     0.003
                  2013              2.35                 2.80        -0.45     -0.019     0.066
                  2014              2.54                 2.67        -0.13      0.207     0.027
                  2015              2.14                 2.14        0.00      -0.411     0.000



                                                                       26
                              Table 2. EME Bond Markets

                                                                            2009        2015
 Size of EME Local Currency Bond Markets
  $ billions                                                                2289        3281
  % sovereign                                                                52.7        54.1
  % of GDP                                                                   41.9        45.7
  % of global bond market                                                     2.7         3.5
 Size of EME USD-denominated Bond Markets
  $ billions                                                                 357         714
  % sovereign                                                                44.1        31.0
  % of GDP                                                                    6.5         9.9
  % of global bond market                                                     0.4         0.8
 Ratio of Local Currency to Total Bonds (%)                                  84.0        79.4
  Local Currency Share of Sovereign Bonds (%)                                86.4        87.1
  Local Currency Share of Private Bonds (%)                                  81.5        71.9

Note: This table includes data for Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru; South Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan,
Philippines, Thailand; and Israel, Russia, South Africa and Turkey.




                                              27
                              Figure 2: Currency Composition of Bond Markets

                                      Figure 2a. Amounts in Billions of Dollars


                             Total Bonds Outstanding: Government Bonds
              3000
                        Local Currency        USD
              2500


              2000
Billion USD




              1500


              1000


               500


                 0
                     2009      2010          2011         2012      2013          2014   2015




                            Total Bonds Outstanding: Private-Sector Bonds
              3000
                        Local Currency        USD
              2500


              2000
Billion USD




              1500


              1000


              500


                0
                     2009      2010          2011         2012      2013          2014   2015




                                                     28
             Figure 2b. As a Share of GDP: Sovereign Local Currency Bonds

                                     Latin America
 1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6                                                                             Chile

0.5                                                                             Mexico
0.4                                                                             Colombia
0.3                                                                             Peru
0.2
0.1
 0
      2007    2008   2009   2010    2011    2012    2013     2014     2015


                                            Asia
  1
0.9
0.8
                                                                              S Korea
0.7
0.6                                                                           Malaysia

0.5                                                                           Thailand
0.4                                                                           Philippines
0.3                                                                           India
0.2                                                                           Pakistan
0.1
  0
      2007    2008   2009   2010   2011    2012    2013    2014     2015


                                           Others
  1
0.9
0.8
0.7                                                                          South Africa
0.6                                                                          Hungary
0.5
                                                                             Israel
0.4
0.3                                                                          Turkey
0.2                                                                          Russia
0.1
  0
      2007    2008   2009   2010   2011    2012    2013    2014     2015




                                             29
      Figure 2c. As a Share of GDP: Private Sector Local Currency Bonds

                               Latin America
 1
0.9
0.8
0.7
                                                                     Chile
0.6
0.5                                                                  Mexico
0.4                                                                  Colombia
0.3                                                                  Peru
0.2
0.1
 0
      2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015


                                    Asia
  1
0.9
0.8                                                                S Korea
0.7
                                                                   Malaysia
0.6
0.5                                                                Thailand
0.4                                                                Philippines
0.3
                                                                   India
0.2
                                                                   Pakistan
0.1
  0
      2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015


                                  Others
  1
0.9
0.8
0.7                                                               South Africa
0.6                                                               Hungary
0.5
                                                                  Israel
0.4
0.3                                                               Turkey
0.2                                                               Russia
0.1
  0
      2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015




                                     30
        Figure 2d. As a Share of All Sovereign Bonds: Local Currency Bonds


                                    Latin America
 1
0.9
0.8
0.7
                                                                              Mexico
0.6
0.5                                                                           Chile
0.4                                                                           Colombia
0.3                                                                           Peru
0.2
0.1
 0
      2007   2008   2009   2010    2011    2012    2013    2014     2015


                                           Asia
  1
0.9
0.8                                                                         Thailand
0.7
                                                                            India
0.6
0.5                                                                         Pakistan
0.4                                                                         S Korea
0.3                                                                         Malaysia
0.2
                                                                            Philippines
0.1
  0
      2007   2008   2009   2010   2011    2012    2013     2014    2015


                                          Others
  1
0.9
0.8
0.7                                                                        South Africa
0.6                                                                        Israel
0.5
                                                                           Russia
0.4
0.3                                                                        Hungary
0.2                                                                        Turkey
0.1
  0
      2007   2008   2009   2010   2011    2012    2013    2014    2015




                                            31
       Figure 2e. As a Share of All Private Bonds: Local Currency Bonds

                               Latin America
  1
0.9
0.8
0.7
                                                                      Mexico
0.6
0.5                                                                   Chile
0.4                                                                   Colombia
0.3
                                                                      Peru
0.2
0.1
  0
      2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015


                                    Asia
  1
0.9
0.8                                                                 Thailand
0.7
                                                                    India
0.6
0.5                                                                 Pakistan
0.4                                                                 S Korea
0.3
                                                                    Malaysia
0.2
0.1                                                                 Philippines
  0
      2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015


                                   Others
 1
0.9
0.8
0.7                                                                South Africa
0.6                                                                Israel
0.5
                                                                   Russia
0.4
                                                                   Hungary
0.3
0.2                                                                Turkey
0.1
 0
      2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015




                                     32
Table 3. Bond Market Structure Regressions
The annual panel data spans 2007 to 2015 and includes 15 Emerging Market Economies (EMEs). Because of data
limitations, some EMEs enter the panel later than 2007. In Table 3a, time-fixed effects are included and
independent variables are, in the order that they are listed, local currency bonds (all, sovereign or private)
scaled by GDP; foreign currency bonds (all, sovereign or private) scaled by GDP; and the share of local currency
to total bonds (all, sovereign or private). Independent variables are, in order, fiscal balance (scaled by GDP),
current account balance (scaled by GDP), inflation volatility, real GDP growth, size of the local economy
(calculated as the log nominal GDP in USD), our Regulatory quality/Creditor Rights variable and openness. In
Panels b-d, the time-fixed effects are replaced by global variables (the non-LSAP portion of US 10-year Treasury
yields and the LSAP effect on US 10-year Treasury yields). Constants are included but not reported. Estimates are
calculated using panel-feasible generalized least squares (FGLS), allowing for heteroscedastic error structures
and different autocorrelation coefficients within countries. p-values are reported in parentheses. ***, ** and *
denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. Wald tests (not reported) show that the explanatory
variables are always jointly significant.




                                                       33
Table 3a. Bond Market Structure Regressions (with Time-Fixed Effects)
                                 Sovereign                                   Private
                                                 Share of                                Share of
                    Local                                       Local
                                   USD            Local                      USD          Local
                   Currency                                    Currency
                                                 Currency                                Currency
                   LC Govt        FC Govt      LCShr Govt       LC Pvt       FC Pvt      LCShr Pvt
     fbal           -0.004*        0.001          -0.007***       0.002      0.000         0.024***
                    (0.002)        (0.000)        (0.002)        (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.005)
     cab            0.234**        -0.000          0.192*         0.285**    0.160***      0.518**
                    (0.108)        (0.024)        (0.115)        (0.123)     (0.035)      (0.251)
     infvol         -0.011**       -0.001          0.004         -0.003      -0.001       -0.022**
                    (0.005)        (0.001)        (0.004)        (0.003)     (0.001)      (0.010)
     growth         0.671**        -0.057          0.328         -0.122      0.078        -1.006
                    (0.299)        (0.048)        (0.348)        (0.195)     (0.070)      (0.675)
     nomgdp         -0.000         -0.000***       0.000**       -0.000      -0.000***     0.000***
                    (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)
     trade_gdp      -2.532***      -0.834**        8.130*         2.680**    1.276***      4.213**
                    (0.618)        (0.360)        (4.726)        (1.290)     (0.340)      (1.770)
     regcr          0.138***       -0.029***       0.123**        0.077*     0.058***      0.377***
                    (0.038)        (0.010)        (0.056)        (0.046)     (0.014)      (0.092)
     caopen         0.042          0.004          -0.022          0.023      0.034***      0.183*
                    (0.038)        (0.006)        (0.046)        (0.032)     (0.009)      (0.099)
     2008.year      -0.019*        -0.004**       -0.003         -0.004      0.004         0.040**
                    (0.010)        (0.002)        (0.010)        (0.009)     (0.003)      (0.020)
     2009.year      0.039**        -0.001         -0.002          0.027*     0.011**       0.089***
                    (0.016)        (0.003)        (0.016)        (0.015)     (0.005)      (0.033)
     2010.year      0.049***       0.000           0.003          0.016      0.013**       0.046
                    (0.015)        (0.003)        (0.016)        (0.015)     (0.006)      (0.034)
     2011.year      0.043***       -0.000          0.010          0.001      0.016***     -0.023
                    (0.014)        (0.003)        (0.016)        (0.016)     (0.005)      (0.033)
     2012.year      0.060***       0.003           0.006          0.013      0.022***     -0.037
                    (0.013)        (0.003)        (0.016)        (0.015)     (0.005)      (0.031)
     2013.year      0.073***       0.003           0.005          0.013      0.031***     -0.070**
                    (0.014)        (0.003)        (0.017)        (0.016)     (0.005)      (0.033)
     2014.year      0.081***       0.003           0.005          0.007      0.037***     -0.089***
                    (0.015)        (0.004)        (0.018)        (0.017)     (0.006)      (0.034)
     2015.year      0.086***       0.006          -0.011          0.007      0.043***     -0.106***
                    (0.015)        (0.004)        (0.018)        (0.017)     (0.006)      (0.036)
     N            123            123             123            123         123          120




                                                       34
Table 3b. Bond Market Structure Regressions (with 10 Year Treasury Yield Decomposition)
                                       Sovereign                                  Private
                                                     Share of                                 Share of
                          Local                                     Local
                                          USD         Local                        USD         Local
                         Currency                                  Currency
                                                     Currency                                 Currency


       Fbal                -0.007***       0.000      -0.006***        0.001        -0.000     0.014***
                            (0.002)       (0.000)       (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.004)
       cab                  0.328***       0.012         0.107       0.345***     0.125***       0.505**
                            (0.102)       (0.022)       (0.116)       (0.119)       (0.041)     (0.220)
       infvol              -0.012***      -0.001        -0.001        -0.001        -0.001      -0.011
                            (0.004)       (0.001)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.002)     (0.008)
       growth                0.119        -0.070*        0.226        -0.083        -0.149*     -0.372
                            (0.245)       (0.042)       (0.295)       (0.188)       (0.081)     (0.500)
       nomgdp               -0.000      -0.000***       0.000**     -0.000***       -0.000     0.000***
                            (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.000)
       trade_gdp           -2.783***      -0.375*        6.144*        1.868*      1.140**       1.431
                            (0.620)       (0.214)       (3.581)       (1.082)       (0.538)     (1.969)
       regcr                 0.087**    -0.030***       0.117**        0.049      0.097***     0.423***
                            (0.039)       (0.009)       (0.049)       (0.045)       (0.013)     (0.080)
       caopen                0.038         0.005        -0.024         0.041      0.041***       0.090
                            (0.039)       (0.006)       (0.046)       (0.033)       (0.011)     (0.093)
       usi10_nonlsap       -0.017***      -0.001        -0.000      -0.011***     -0.005**       0.004
                            (0.004)       (0.001)       (0.005)       (0.004)       (0.002)     (0.008)
       usi10_lsap           -0.021        -0.001        -0.006        -0.021*        0.009      -0.030
                            (0.014)       (0.003)       (0.017)       (0.012)       (0.007)     (0.029)
       vix                 -0.244***    -0.026***       -0.013        -0.033     -0.052***     0.241***
                            (0.051)       (0.009)       (0.050)       (0.040)       (0.019)     (0.089)
       _cons                0.297***     0.091***      0.765***        0.103**      -0.016       0.202
                            (0.038)       (0.011)       (0.057)       (0.050)       (0.017)     (0.124)
       N                  123           123            123          123           123         120




                                                      35
Table 3c. Bond Market Structure Regressions (with LSAP)
                                   Sovereign                                 Private

                                                  Share of                               Share of
                      Local                                     Local
                                     USD           Local                      USD         Local
                     Currency                                  Currency
                                                  Currency                               Currency

                     LC Govt        FC Govt      LCShr Govt     LC Pvt       FC Pvt      LCShr Pvt
   fbal              -0.006***        0.000        -0.005***     0.001        0.000        0.013***
                     (0.002)         (0.000)       (0.002)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.004)
   cab                0.290***        0.008         0.081        0.420***     0.129***     0.480**
                     (0.104)         (0.021)       (0.105)      (0.128)      (0.041)      (0.227)
   infvol            -0.010**        -0.001        -0.002        0.001       -0.002       -0.008
                     (0.004)         (0.001)       (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.008)
   growth             0.115          -0.067*        0.074        0.025       -0.095       -0.296
                     (0.217)         (0.039)       (0.263)      (0.185)      (0.080)      (0.475)
   nomgdp            -0.000         -0.000***       0.000       -0.000***    -0.000*       0.000***
                     (0.000)         (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)
   trade_gdp         -2.761***       -0.394*       16.687***    -1.299        1.615*       2.169
                     (0.617)         (0.204)       (4.875)      (1.779)      (0.969)      (2.183)
   regcr              0.106***      -0.032***       0.092**      0.069        0.081***     0.475***
                     (0.040)         (0.009)       (0.046)      (0.043)      (0.013)      (0.079)
   caopen             0.040           0.004        -0.009        0.008        0.036***     0.106
                     (0.039)         (0.006)       (0.043)      (0.033)      (0.011)      (0.094)
   usi10             -0.019***       -0.001        -0.000       -0.009**     -0.006***     0.009
                     (0.004)         (0.001)       (0.005)      (0.004)      (0.002)      (0.008)
   lsap_flow_gdp      0.097           0.005         0.056        0.089*       0.011        0.080
                     (0.063)         (0.011)       (0.059)      (0.053)      (0.029)      (0.133)
   vix               -0.267***      -0.027***      -0.012       -0.089**     -0.033*       0.241***
                     (0.048)         (0.008)       (0.044)      (0.042)      (0.019)      (0.085)
   N                123            123            123          123          123          120




                                                     36
Table 3d. Bond Market Structure Regressions (with Unconventional Monetary Policy)
                                Sovereign                                Private Sector
                                             Share of                                     Share of
                    Local                                    Local
                                  USD         Local                          USD           Local
                   Currency                                 Currency
                                             Currency                                     Currency
     fbal           -0.007***       0.000      -0.006***      0.001          0.000          0.011***
                    (0.002)        (0.000)     (0.002)       (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.004)
     cab             0.325***       0.015       0.174         0.372***       0.140***       0.497**
                    (0.102)        (0.020)     (0.108)       (0.121)        (0.041)        (0.218)
     infvol         -0.012***      -0.001       0.000         0.001         -0.002         -0.007
                    (0.004)        (0.001)     (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.001)        (0.008)
     growth          0.096         -0.061*      0.266        -0.067         -0.056         -0.350
                    (0.219)        (0.034)     (0.267)       (0.183)        (0.078)        (0.458)
     nomgdp         -0.000      -0.000***       0.000        -0.000***      -0.000          0.000***
                    (0.000)        (0.000)     (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)
     trade_gdp      -2.815***   -0.932***       3.545        -1.162          1.121***       1.788
                    (0.604)        (0.209)     (2.943)       (2.105)        (0.396)        (2.094)
     regcr           0.085**    -0.032***       0.142***      0.055          0.098***       0.477***
                    (0.039)        (0.009)     (0.050)       (0.045)        (0.012)        (0.078)
     caopen          0.034          0.005      -0.027         0.032          0.040***       0.082
                    (0.039)        (0.006)     (0.045)       (0.034)        (0.012)        (0.091)
     usi10          -0.016***      -0.001       0.001        -0.010***      -0.005***       0.007
                    (0.004)        (0.001)     (0.005)       (0.004)        (0.002)        (0.008)
     ump_i10        -0.011         -0.003       0.024**       0.003         -0.021***       0.035
                    (0.011)        (0.002)     (0.011)       (0.008)        (0.005)        (0.022)
     vix            -0.280***   -0.033***       0.046        -0.045         -0.084***       0.313***
                    (0.052)        (0.009)     (0.055)       (0.043)        (0.021)        (0.102)
     N             123           123          123           123            123            120




                                                   37
                  Table 4. US Portfolios of EME Bonds
                                                               2009        2015
 Size of EME Local Currency Bond Markets
  $ billions                                                   2289        3281
  % sovereign                                                  52.7        54.1
  % of GDP                                                     41.9        45.7
  % of global bond market                                       2.7         3.5
 Size of EME USD-denominated Bond Markets
  $ billions                                                    357         714
  % sovereign                                                   44.1        31.0
  % of GDP                                                       6.5         9.9
  % of global bond market                                        0.4         0.8
 Ratio of Local Currency to Total Bonds (%)                     84.0        79.4
  Local Currency Share of Sovereign Bonds (%)                   86.4        87.1
  Local Currency Share of Private Bonds (%)                     81.5        71.9


 US Holdings of EME Local Currency Bonds
  $ billions                                                     20           72
  % of outstanding EME Local Currency bonds                    0.87         2.20
  % of US bond portfolio                                       0.08         0.24
  RelWgt                                                      0.029         0.07

 US Holdings of EME USD-denominated Bonds
  $ billions                                                     73         152
  % of outstanding EME USD bonds                               20.5        21.3
  % of US bond portfolio                                       0.29        0.51
  RelWgt                                                      0.684       0.674

Notes. For ease of comparison, the top half of this table is identical to Table 2.
This table, and the below Figure 3, includes data for Chile, Colombia, Mexico,
Peru; South Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines, Thailand; and Israel, Russia,
South Africa and Turkey.




                                       38
Figure 3. US Investors’ Portfolio in EME Bonds


                                      US Holdings: Government Bonds
     125
                          Local Currency          USD
     100
Billion USD




          75


          50


          25


              0
                   2009        2010        2011         2012        2013   2014   2015




                                      US Holdings: Private Sector Bonds
       125
                             Local Currency         USD
       100
Billion USD




              75


              50


              25


              0
                   2009        2010        2011         2012        2013   2014   2015




                                                               39
Figure 4. US Investors’ Relative Weights

                                        Latin America
 1.6
 1.4
 1.2                                                                    All USD

 1.0                                                                    Government USD

 0.8                                                                    Private USD

 0.6                                                                    All Local Currency

 0.4                                                                    Government Local
 0.2                                                                    Private Local Currency
 0.0
       2009     2010    2011     2012      2013      2014        2015


                                              Asia
 1.6
 1.4
 1.2                                                                    All USD

 1.0                                                                    Government USD

 0.8                                                                    Private USD

 0.6                                                                    All Local Currency
 0.4                                                                    Government Local
 0.2                                                                    Private Local Currency
 0.0
       2009     2010    2011     2012      2013      2014        2015


                                             Other
 1.6
 1.4
 1.2                                                                    All USD

 1.0                                                                    Government USD

 0.8                                                                    Private USD

 0.6                                                                    All Local Currency
 0.4                                                                    Government Local
 0.2                                                                    Private Local Currency
 0.0
       2009     2010    2011     2012      2013      2014        2015




                                                            40
Table 5. Determinants of US Investment in Local Currency Bonds

This note is for Tables 5 and 6. In both, sovereign bonds are in Panel a and private-sector bonds are in Panel b.
Annual panels span the period 2007 to 2015 and includes 15 EMEs. Because of data limitations, some EMEs
enter the panel later than 2007. Dependent variables are normalized relative weights for local currency bonds in
Table 5 and USD-denominated bonds in Table 6. Constants are included but not reported. Estimates are
calculated using panel-feasible generalized least squares (FGLS), allowing for heteroscedastic error structures and
different autocorrelation coefficients within countries. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, ** and *
denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                         41
Table 5a. Determinants of US Investment: Sovereign Local Currency Bonds
                                     (1)            (2)            (3)         (4)
               fbal                 0.002***       0.003***       0.003***    0.001
                                   (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)
               cab                  0.065          0.022          0.004       0.111*
                                   (0.050)        (0.055)        (0.056)     (0.057)
               infvol               0.004*         0.005***       0.004**     0.005**
                                   (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)     (0.002)
               yield                0.174*         0.185**        0.194**     0.204**
                                   (0.091)        (0.093)        (0.095)     (0.102)
               growth              -0.042         -0.052         -0.033       0.241*
                                   (0.107)        (0.115)        (0.121)     (0.144)
               nomgdp              -0.000***      -0.000***      -0.000***   -0.000***
                                   (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)     (0.000)
               trade_gdp            2.828***       2.973***       2.957***    2.944***
                                   (0.576)        (0.457)        (0.478)     (0.495)
               regcr                0.042**        0.047**        0.044**     0.060***
                                   (0.021)        (0.021)        (0.021)     (0.023)
               caopen               0.015          0.012          0.007       0.019
                                   (0.014)        (0.015)        (0.015)     (0.016)
               usi10               -0.013***      -0.011***
                                   (0.003)        (0.003)
               ump_i10              0.012*
                                   (0.006)
               vix                 -0.077***      -0.106***      -0.088***
                                   (0.028)        (0.025)        (0.024)
               lsap_flow_gdp                       0.026
                                                  (0.033)
               usi10_nonlsap                                     -0.012***
                                                                 (0.003)
               usi10_lsap                                        -0.026***
                                                                 (0.008)
               2008.year                                                      0.001
                                                                             (0.005)
               2009.year                                                      0.010
                                                                             (0.009)
               2010.year                                                      0.029***
                                                                             (0.009)
               2011.year                                                      0.038***
                                                                             (0.009)
               2012.year                                                      0.047***
                                                                             (0.009)
               2013.year                                                      0.048***
                                                                             (0.009)
               2014.year                                                      0.049***
                                                                             (0.009)
               2015.year                                                      0.044***
                                                                             (0.010)
               N                     123            123            123          123



                                                   42
Table 5b. Determinants of US Investment: Private Local Currency Bonds
                                         (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)
                      fbal              -0.016*     -0.024**     -0.018*    -0.030**
                                         (0.009)     (0.011)      (0.010)     (0.012)
                      cab                -0.062      -0.188       -0.271      -0.139
                                         (0.524)     (0.590)      (0.569)     (0.599)
                      infvol             -0.002      -0.014        0.004      -0.012
                                         (0.020)     (0.022)      (0.023)     (0.024)
                      yield               0.113      -0.600       -0.346      -0.852
                                         (1.034)     (1.120)      (1.100)     (1.050)
                      growth              1.551       1.476        1.356       1.833
                                         (0.971)     (1.027)      (1.129)     (1.309)
                      nomgdp              0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000
                                         (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)
                      trade_gdp          -2.987      -4.065       -3.473      -4.473
                                         (3.022)     (2.608)      (3.163)     (2.884)
                      regcr               0.225       0.161        0.264       0.185
                                         (0.204)     (0.200)      (0.212)     (0.195)
                      caopen            -0.248*      -0.219      -0.287*      -0.210
                                         (0.141)     (0.146)      (0.156)     (0.147)
                      usi10               0.035       0.043*
                                         (0.022)     (0.024)
                      ump_i10            -0.019
                                         (0.053)
                      vix                -0.184       0.013       -0.194
                                         (0.263)     (0.256)      (0.256)
                      lsap_flow_gdp                  -0.644
                                                     (0.407)
                      usi10_nonlsap                                0.039
                                                                  (0.024)
                      usi10_lsap                                   0.096
                                                                  (0.084)
                      2008.year                                               -0.032
                                                                              (0.053)
                      2009.year                                              -0.139*
                                                                              (0.076)
                      2010.year                                               -0.079
                                                                              (0.076)
                      2011.year                                               -0.063
                                                                              (0.068)
                      2012.year                                              -0.130*
                                                                              (0.069)
                      2013.year                                              -0.135*
                                                                              (0.072)
                      2014.year                                               -0.103
                                                                              (0.070)
                      2015.year                                               -0.099
                                                                              (0.072)
                      N                116         116          116         116




                                                    43
Table 6. Determinants of US Investment in USD-denominated Bonds

                Table 6a. Determinants of US Investment: Sovereign USD-denominated Bonds
                                       (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)
               fbal                   0.006*          0.010**         0.006            0.012**
                                     (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.005)
               cab                    0.444**         0.512**         0.425*           0.567**
                                     (0.224)         (0.259)         (0.258)          (0.287)
               infvol                -0.015*         -0.018**        -0.018**         -0.009
                                     (0.008)         (0.008)         (0.009)          (0.009)
               yield                 -0.744**        -0.663*         -0.906**         -0.249
                                     (0.315)         (0.398)         (0.393)          (0.455)
               growth                -0.672*         -0.843*         -0.869*          -0.142
                                     (0.383)         (0.451)         (0.458)          (0.560)
               nomgdp                -0.000**        -0.000**        -0.000*          -0.000***
                                     (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)          (0.000)
               trade_gdp              0.130           0.330          -0.074            0.881
                                     (1.275)         (1.392)         (1.429)          (1.353)
               regcr                  0.243***        0.226**         0.215**          0.317***
                                     (0.087)         (0.091)         (0.093)          (0.092)
               caopen                 0.124*          0.038           0.056            0.001
                                     (0.074)         (0.083)         (0.084)          (0.069)
               usi10                 -0.026***       -0.029***
                                     (0.009)         (0.011)
               ump_i10                0.088***
                                     (0.022)
               vix                    0.054          -0.217**        -0.180*
                                     (0.101)         (0.106)         (0.100)
               lsap_flow_gdp                          0.157
                                                     (0.159)
               usi10_nonlsap                                         -0.019*
                                                                     (0.011)
               usi10_lsap                                             0.001
                                                                     (0.035)
               2008.year                                                              -0.038*
                                                                                      (0.023)
               2009.year                                                               0.072**
                                                                                      (0.036)
               2010.year                                                               0.084**
                                                                                      (0.036)
               2011.year                                                               0.121***
                                                                                      (0.034)
               2012.year                                                               0.136***
                                                                                      (0.033)
               2013.year                                                               0.100***
                                                                                      (0.036)
               2014.year                                                               0.126***
                                                                                      (0.036)
               2015.year                                                               0.086**
                                                                                      (0.038)
               N                       111              111             111              111




                                                      44
Table 6b. Determinants of US Investment: Private USD-denominated Bonds
                     (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)
fbal               -0.001        -0.000         -0.001         -0.003
                   (0.005)       (0.006)        (0.006)        (0.006)
cab                -0.407        -0.464         -0.496         -0.692**
                   (0.333)       (0.321)        (0.344)        (0.320)
infvol              0.007         0.007          0.009          0.009
                   (0.012)       (0.013)        (0.013)        (0.015)
yield               1.092         1.085          0.983          0.752
                   (0.724)       (0.764)        (0.746)        (0.796)
growth             -0.601        -0.952         -0.899         -1.211
                   (0.679)       (0.728)        (0.769)        (0.768)
nomgdp             -0.000***     -0.000**       -0.000**       -0.000**
                   (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)
trade_gdp          17.136***     17.521***      17.469***      16.530***
                   (1.870)       (2.221)        (1.978)        (1.848)
regcr               0.178         0.172          0.131          0.195
                   (0.128)       (0.121)        (0.127)        (0.129)
caopen              0.009         0.031          0.017         -0.000
                   (0.093)       (0.095)        (0.099)        (0.093)
usi10              -0.001         0.003
                   (0.013)       (0.013)
ump_i10             0.062*
                   (0.035)
vix                -0.054         -0.166        -0.228
                   (0.162)        (0.145)       (0.147)
lsap_flow_gdp                     -0.166
                                  (0.218)
usi10_nonlsap                                    0.007
                                                (0.014)
usi10_lsap                                       0.043
                                                (0.048)
2008.year                                                      -0.032
                                                               (0.034)
2009.year                                                      -0.058
                                                               (0.048)
2010.year                                                      -0.047
                                                               (0.047)
2011.year                                                      -0.040
                                                               (0.043)
2012.year                                                      -0.009
                                                               (0.043)
2013.year                                                      -0.033
                                                               (0.044)
2014.year                                                      -0.012
                                                               (0.045)
2015.year                                                      -0.050
                                                               (0.046)
N                    120            120            120            120



                                   45
