                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               DISCLOSURE RULES AND DECLARED ESSENTIAL PATENTS

                                            Rudi Bekkers
                                          Christian Catalini
                                          Arianna Martinelli
                                             Cesare Righi
                                           Timothy Simcoe

                                        Working Paper 23627
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w23627


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                             July 2017, Revised March 2019




Support for this research was provided by the Hoover IP2 initiative. The authors have received useful
comments and suggestions from Jorge Contreras, Florian Schuett and seminar participants at Drexel,
Duke, Mannheim, Tilburg, the Toulouse School of Economics, and the University of Wisconsin. Timothy
Simcoe has consulted for various companies, including Apple, Microsoft and HTC, on matters related
to topic of this study. Rudi Bekkers has consulted for various companies and served as an expert witness
on several court cases related to the topic of this study. All opinions and any errors are attributable
to the authors. Address for correspondence: tsimcoe@bu.edu. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23627.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by Rudi Bekkers, Christian Catalini, Arianna Martinelli, Cesare Righi, and Timothy Simcoe.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Disclosure Rules and Declared Essential Patents
Rudi Bekkers, Christian Catalini, Arianna Martinelli, Cesare Righi, and Timothy Simcoe
NBER Working Paper No. 23627
July 2017, Revised March 2019
JEL No. D22,K2,K21,L15,L17,L24,L63

                                              ABSTRACT

Many standard setting organizations (SSOs) require participants to disclose patents that might be infringed
by implementing a proposed standard, and commit to license their “essential” patents on terms that
are at least fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory (FRAND). Data from these SSO intellectual property
disclosures have been used in academic studies to provide a window into the standard setting process,
and in legal proceedings to assess the relative contribution of different parties to a standard. We develop
a simple model of the disclosure process to illustrate the link between SSO rules and patent-holder
incentives, and examine the model's core predictions using a novel dataset constructed from the disclosure
archives of thirteen major SSOs. The central message of the paper is that subtle differences in the rules
used by different SSOs can influence which patents are disclosed, the terms of licensing commitments,
and ultimately long-run citation and litigation rates for the underlying patents.


Rudi Bekkers                                         Cesare Righi
Eindhoven University of Technology                   Boston University
Room IPO 2.36, PO Box 513                            School of Law
5600MB Eindhoven                                     Technology & Policy Research Initiative
The Netherlands                                      765 Commonwealth Avenue
r.n.a.bekkers@tue.nl                                 Boston, MA 02215
                                                     crighi@bu.edu
Christian Catalini
MIT Sloan School of Management                       Timothy Simcoe
100 Main Street, E62-480                             Boston University
Cambridge, MA 02142                                  Questrom School of Business
and NBER                                             595 Commonwealth Avenue
catalini@mit.edu                                     Boston, MA 02215
                                                     and NBER
Arianna Martinelli                                   tsimcoe@bu.edu
Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna
Laboratory of Economics and Management (L.E.M.)
Piazza Martiri della Libertá 33
56127 Pisa (Italy)
a.martinelli@sssup.it
1        Introduction

Voluntary consensus standardization is an important activity in the information and communica-

tions technology sector, where compatibility standards can help launch markets or promote major

upgrades to existing platforms. However, new standards may fail to produce these catalytic effects

if users fear they are built on proprietary technology, and therefore carry substantial legal or fi-

nancial risks. Standard Setting Organizations (SSOs) address this concern by requiring members

to disclose relevant patents during negotiations over the design of new standards, and by seeking a

commitment that any essential intellectual property (IP) will be licensed on liberal terms. Patents

disclosed as part of this process are often called “declared essential” patents (dSEPs).1

        Data from declared essential patents have been used in academic studies to provide a window

into the standard setting process, and in legal proceedings to assess the relative contribution of

different parties to a standard.2 Because standard-setting is a form of horizontal coordination,

the rules for disclosure and licensing of dSEPs have also attracted the interest of antitrust au-

thorities, and played a role in several prominent cases.3 In this paper, we analyze how SSO rules

governing disclosure influence the selection of patents that are disclosed, the terms of the licensing

commitments for those patents, and the patents’ subsequent citation and litigation rates.

        We begin by describing differences in SSOs’ disclosure policies, and developing a simple model

of the disclosure process. The model emphasizes two choices made by the owner of a possibly essen-

tial patent: whether to make a specific or “blanket” disclosure, and whether to offer a royalty-free

or a fair reasonable and non-discriminatory (FRAND) licensing commitment. Blanket disclosures

do not list specific patents, and in the equilibrium of our model, firms use them to increase the

odds that relatively weak patents are nevertheless infringed by the standard. Royalty-free licens-
    1
      Although many authors call any patent disclosed to a SSO a Standards Essential Patent (SEP), we use the
acronym dSEP to emphasize the distinction between disclosure and essentiality, which will be important below.
    2
      Academic studies include Rysman and Simcoe (2008), Kang and Bekkers (2015), Baron, Pohlmann, and Blind
(2016), Kuhn, Roin, and Thompson (2016) and a number of others cited below. For an example of a court that used
declared essential patent counts to apportion royalties, see In re Innovatio IP Ventures, LLC, No. 11 C 9308, slip
op. at 82–84 (N.D. Ill. Sept. 27, 2013)
    3
      See, for example, the remarks of FTC Chair Deborah Platt Majoras Majoras (2005), the docket in F.T.C. vs.
Rambus (https://www.ftc.gov/enforcement/cases-proceedings/011-0017/rambus-inc-matter) and the compe-
tition policy brief on dSEPs by the Competition Directorate-General of the European Commission (European Com-
mission, 2014).




                                                        1
ing commitments occur when there is ex ante competition between technologies for inclusion in

the standard, and the benefits of implementing familiar technology outweigh the costs of forgone

FRAND royalties.

   The second half of the paper uses data from thirteen SSOs to study the disclosure process and

its impact on long-term citation and litigation rates for declared essential patents. Our empirical

analysis reveals six facts that are consistent with the assumptions or predictions of the theoretical

model. The first three facts are related to a firm’s choice between FRAND and royalty-free licensing

commitments. The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) has disclosure rules that encourage ex

ante competition by promoting early disclosure and discouraging blankets, and we show that (1)

royalty-free commitments are far more common at IETF than the other SSOs in our sample. We

also show that (2) firms with a “downstream” business model focused on implementation rather

than licensing or component supply are more likely to offer royalty-free licensing commitments.

Finally, difference-in-differences estimates reveal that (3) self-citations increase more following a

royalty-free than a FRAND commitment, while the reverse is true for non-self citations. This third

fact is consistent with the idea that firms make royalty-free commitments if they can profit by

owning proprietary complements (such as the citing patents).

   Our fourth empirical fact is related to the choice between blanket and specific disclosure. The

theory predicts that a mandatory specific disclosure policy will lead firms to disclose weaker patents

that are less likely to remain technically essential. The European Telecommunications Standards

Institute (ETSI) has such a mandatory specific disclosure policy, and accounts for more than half of

the dSEPs in our data. Matched sample difference-in-differences regressions show that (4) forward

citations decline after disclosure to ETSI, and increase after disclosure to other SSOs.

   The last two facts are related to dSEP assertion. We show that (5) litigation rates increase

following disclosure unless there is a royalty-free licensing commitment. And finally, (6) dSEPs

disclosed by upstream licensors and component suppliers are more likely to be litigated than dSEPs

disclosed by downstream implementers.

   Overall, this study makes several contributions to the literature on standard setting and intel-

lectual property. First, we provide a theory that links SSO rules to variation in disclosure terms



                                                  2
and dSEP outcomes. To our knowledge, the only other model of the disclosure process is found in

Lerner, Tabakovic, and Tirole (2016), and we emphasize a different set of mechanisms and strate-

gies. Second, we extend the empirical analyses of citation and litigation rates in Rysman and Simcoe

(2008) and Simcoe, Graham, and Feldman (2009) by using additional data and new methods, and

by developing a theoretical framework to interpret heterogeneity in the impact of disclosure across

SSOs. Our findings reinforce the idea that SSOs both select important technologies, and contribute

to their value. However, they also show that SSO policies have a substantial impact on the patents

that get disclosed and the terms of associated licensing commitments. It is important to account

for these differences in studies that rely on dSEP data.

    A third contribution of our work is to provide the first empirical evidence linking the terms of

licensing commitments to SSO policies and patent-level outcomes. Not surprisingly, patents dis-

closed on royalty-free terms are less likely to be litigated. More interestingly, the IETF intellectual

property policy is associated with a much higher share of royalty-free commitments than at other

SSOs. Finally, our paper provides some preliminary evidence on the link between business models

(which we operationalize as a firm’s location in the ICT value chain) and the terms of SSO licensing

commitments. Licensors and component suppliers are less likely to make royalty-free commitments

and more likely to litigate their dSEPs, consistent with the idea that these firms are more reliant

on intellectual property to appropriate the returns to innovation.

    Our findings have implications for the academic literature that uses data from dSEPs, for

courts that rely on dSEP counts in damage calculations, and for SSOs (or antitrust agencies)

evaluating alternative disclosure rules. In particular, several of our results illustrate the trade-offs

that SSOs face in crafting an effective intellectual property policy. For example, we find that

allowing blanket disclosures can have a substantial impact on the amount of IP declared. This is

not surprising, since it will typically be cheaper and less risky for firms to make a blanket licensing

commitment, even if that leads to an incomplete picture of the overall patent landscape. At the

same time, mandatory specific disclosure rules may increase the likelihood that disclosed patents

are not actually essential.4 Similarly, we find that a substantial amount of disclosure occurs before
  4
    As discussed below, firms often make an informal announcement about potentially essential IPR to a technical
committee, and these announcements may precede the formal blanket declaration. We have no data to indicate



                                                       3
patents issue, when there can still be considerable uncertainty about the scope of their claims.

Later disclosure might therefore reduce uncertainty, but could also increase the risk of hold-up.5

We view these timing and specificity problems, combined with the economic importance of dSEPs

and the difficulty of determining a FRAND price after a standard is widely deployed, as jointly

causing the high dSEP litigation rate. At a more general level, our results show that seemingly

small changes in disclosure rules may have a large impact on outcomes. This broad lesson parallels

the findings of studies that examine disclosure as a policy instrument in other domains (e.g., Fung,

Graham, and Weil, 2007; Dranove and Jin, 2010)

    The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes SSO policies, and presents our

model of the disclosure process. Section 3 analyzes disclosure characteristics. Section 4 analyzes

dSEP characteristics. Section 5 uses matched-sample difference-in-differences regression to estimate

the effect of disclosure on citation and litigation rates. Section 6 concludes.



2     Intellectual Property Policies and the Disclosure Process

In one of the first systematic studies of SSO intellectual property policies, Lemley (2002) suggests

that they typically have three components: search, disclosure and licensing rules. Because none of

the thirteen organizations that we examine below have a mandatory search rule, our discussion will

focus on policies governing disclosure and licensing. Disclosure rules specify how and when firms

must notify other participants in an SSO that they own IP that may be infringed by implementing

a standard. Licensing rules specify the commitments that patent holders are requested to make

regarding future licensing, the conditions that can be attached to those commitments, and the

methods of enforcement. Table 1 provides an overview of the IPR policies for the SSOs in our

data set, and Appendix A contains a detailed description of the hand-collected data on individual

disclosures.6
whether these informal declarations provide more details about specific patents, and might therefore be useful to a
technical committee in evaluating potential trade-offs between technical quality and implementation costs.
   5
     Hold-up occurs when an essential patent-owner charges royalties that exceed the ex ante competitive price for
their technology, and therefore appropriates (part of) the economic returns to implementers’ sunk investments in a
standard. See Farrell, Hayes, Shapiro, and Sullivan (2007) for an overview of the extensive literature on this topic.
   6
     See Bekkers and Updegrove (2012) for additional information on policies governing disclosure and licensing
commitments. It is important to note that these policies may change over time, and our data on SSO policies were



                                                         4
2.1    Disclosure rules

SSOs take different approaches to disclosure specificity. All of the organizations that we study

allow for specific disclosure statements that list one or more patents (or pending applications)

that may be infringed by a standard. Two of the SSOs in our sample (ETSI and the Open Mobile

Alliance (OMA)) require specific disclosures, and the IETF requires specificity unless the disclosure

is accompanied by a royalty-free licensing commitment. The ten remaining SSOs also allow general

patent disclosure statements, or “blankets.” A blanket disclosure indicates that a participant

believes it owns relevant IP, without revealing any information about specific patents or patent

applications.7

    Blanket disclosure is clearly less costly for patent holders, since they do not have to search

through their patent portfolios to identify relevant IP as the standardization process unfolds. Thus,

allowing blanket disclosure can be efficient if the main purpose of a disclosure policy is to reassure

prospective implementers that a license will be available. On the other hand, blanket disclosure

shifts search costs from the patent holder (who presumably has a comparative advantage at finding

its own essential patents) onto other interested parties, such as prospective licensees who wish to

evaluate the scope and value of a firm’s dSEPs; other SSO participants seeking to make explicit

cost-benefit comparisons of alternative technologies before committing to a standard; and regulators

or courts that might use information about relevant dSEPs to determine reasonable royalties.

    Most SSOs encourage early disclosure. For example, ETSI seeks disclosures “in a timely fashion”

and the ANSI IPR Policy Guidelines (ANSI, 2006) encourage “early disclosure.” However, few SSOs

provide explicit deadlines or milestones. In practice, disclosure often has two stages: an initial Call

for Patents and the subsequent filing of a formal notice or declaration. At most SSOs, the call for

patents occurs at the beginning of each technical committee meeting. Participants are expected

to mention any IPR related to their own proposals (which may or may not become part of the

standard), and may also draw attention to patents owned by others. We know of no systematic
collected between 2012 and 2014.
   7
     In the dSEP database, we distinguish between a blanket disclosure (which does not list any patents or pending
applications) and a blanket licensing commitment (which extends to all disclosed and undisclosed essential patents).
Many declarations combine specific disclosure and blanket commitments, but in some cases the scope of the licensing
commitment is limited to only the disclosed IP.



                                                         5
information that indicates when, or with what degree of specificity, the first stage call for patents

is answered at any particular SSO. The second stage of the disclosure process occurs when a firm

formally notifies an SSO in writing of dSEPs for a specific standard or draft. Our data come from

these letters, which we henceforth refer to as declarations.

       If a dSEP issues before the patented invention is proposed for inclusion in a standard, the owner

is usually required to respond to the call for patents at the meeting where this proposal is discussed.

Although their response does not leave a public paper trail, the patent holder typically follows up

with a formal declaration (which we do observe) sometime after the publication of a draft standard,

and preferably before the final specification is approved (though Layne-Farrar (2014) suggests that

some disclosures occur much later in practice). However, many dSEPs remain under review at

the patent office while the standardization process proceeds.8 Thus, while formal IPR declarations

can provide a great deal of information, it is important to recognize that SSOs may receive them

well-after the date when the IPR was first disclosed to a technical committee, or when the key

technical decisions that determine a patent’s essentiality were made.9

       Policies that encourage or require specific disclosure typically apply to any patent or patent ap-

plication that an SSO member believes might be technically essential, meaning that infringement

would be necessary to produce a compliant implementation of the standard. However, SSO partic-

ipants are not necessarily required to disclose commercially essential patents, which cover methods

of implementation that deliver dramatic cost reductions or quality improvements. In economic

terms, a technically essential patent has no substitutes, while a commercially essential patent has

at least one (possibly unattractive) alternative. Patents covering both mandatory and optional

features of a standard are normally considered essential, as are patents required to implement only

a certain category of products.10 However, patent owners are not typically required to indicate

whether their dSEPs apply to optional features, or to certain product categories.

       SSOs do not adjudicate essentiality, and many dSEPs are not in fact essential. Over-disclosure
   8
     Figure C-1 provides a graphical depiction of these two scenarios.
   9
     In principle, since most declarations do indicate the relevant standard, one could identify the dates of key technical
decisions. However, that information can be hard to find, the links are often messy, and standards often see improved,
updated releases, so we have not taken that step.
  10
     For example, in the Compact Disc standard, some patents are infringed by the disc, others are infringed by the
player, and some cover both components or a combination thereof. All of these patents are considered essential.



                                                            6
is often caused by changes in a draft standard or the claims of a patent application during the

standardization process. Mandatory specific disclosure policies also create incentives to err on the

side of inclusivity by making undisclosed essential patents unenforcible, while providing no penalty

for disclosure of patents that are only vaguely related to a standard. Because courts ultimately

determine essentiality, it is hard to estimate the share of dSEPs that are truly essential. Although

studies by Goodman and Myers (2005) and Van Audenrode, Royer, Stitzing, and Saaskilahti (2017)

suggest that only 20 to 40 percent of the patents disclosed to ETSI are essential, we expect that

these figures vary across SSOs and over time.


2.2      Licensing Commitments

All declarations, regardless of the type or timing of the disclosure, offer some guidance about the

licensing terms that an IP owner will offer to prospective standards implementers for essential IP.

We refer to this part of the declaration as a licensing commitment.

       The most common form of licensing commitment is a promise to license on Reasonable and Non-

Discriminatory (RAND) or Fair, Reasonable and Non-Discriminatory (FRAND) terms.11 There is a

substantial legal and economic literature, reviewed by Farrell, Hayes, Shapiro, and Sullivan (2007),

and a considerable amount of controversy over the precise meaning of FRAND. At a minimum, it

implies that an IP owner is required to enter good faith negotiations and grant a license to any firm

wishing to implement the standard. There is also a broad consensus – at least among economists

– that FRAND commitments are intended to prevent hold-up by constraining prices to an ex ante

competitive rate that reflects the value of essential patents relative to alternatives available at the

time of standardization (e.g. Swanson and Baumol, 2005).12

       Most of the SSOs in our data allow, but do not require, more stringent types of licensing

commitments than FRAND. For example, many firms promise to grant a royalty-free license to

any standards implementer, or provide a covenant not to assert their essential patents. Many firms

add conditions to their licensing commitments, though SSOs vary in their willingness to allow
  11
   Like most observers, we view the terms RAND and FRAND as equivalent for all practical purposes.
  12
   Recently, courts have also issued a number of rulings that clarify several aspects of FRAND, including the
remedies available to the owner of a valid and infringed FRAND-encumbered patent.




                                                     7
free-form declarations.13

    Licensing commitments can also vary in scope. Some commitments only apply to specifically

disclosed patents, while others apply to a particular standard (document), all work by a particular

technical committee (Working Group), or even to the entire SSO. One very common type of decla-

ration combines a specific disclosure with a blanket FRAND licensing commitment that covers all

work on a particular standard.

    SSO intellectual property policies typically specify a set of procedures for dealing with the rare

event that a firm is unwilling to offer a licensing commitment for essential IPR. In most cases, the

SSO will halt work on the standard in question, and investigate opportunities to invent-around the

essential patents. If these efforts fail, the SSO might stop working on the standard altogether, or

withdraw a specification that was already issued.

    The data we examine come from public IP disclosure records, and most SSOs provide a set of

standard disclaimers with their disclosure data.14 Beyond common disclaimers, SSOs differ in what

they require, what they (explicitly) allow, and what they seem to tolerate in practice.15


2.3    A Model of Disclosure

This subsection develops an economic model of the disclosure process. The model’s purpose is

twofold: to illustrate some basic trade-offs for SSO participants, and to explain how variation in

SSO policies can generate patterns that we observe in the dSEP data.

    For simplicity, we assume two players: a firm and an SSO. The SSO wishes to incorporate a

new feature into its standard, and the firm holds patents on a technology that may be used to

implement that feature.16 Standardizing the firm’s patented technology will produce an expected
   13
      Common conditions include defensive suspension provisions (which terminate the FRAND commitment if an
implementer sues the essential patent holder for infringement) and reciprocity requirements (which make a FRAND
commitment conditional on receiving similar terms from any implementer who also holds essential patents).
   14
      These include: (1) The statements are self-declarations and the SSO takes no responsibility that the list is
complete and correct, (2) members agree to reasonable endeavors to identify their own essential IPR, yet do not have
an obligation to perform patent searches, (3) it is up to the patent owner and the prospective licensees themselves to
negotiate licensing agreements, and (4) the SSO does not handle disputes; in such cases, parties should go to court.
   15
      The formal requirements may be part of the IPR policy itself (usually these are binding rules, such as statutes,
by-laws, or undertakings), but may also become clear from the administrative procedures, such as templates that
firms should use for their declarations, or from the actual declarations that are made public.
   16
      The “SSO player” is interpreted as a reduced form representation of all other participants in an actual SSO,
allowing us to abstract away from issues of social choice in order to focus on disclosure and licensing. We use the


                                                          8
surplus of v1 per implementation, and the best alternative (if one exists) yields an expected surplus

of v2 . The firm’s payoff can be written as:


                                         π F = σ(V + wb) + (1 − σ)r
                                               | {z } | {z }
                                                 Implementation    Licensing


where σ ∈ [0, 1] represents the firm’s share of the downstream implementation market; V ∈ {v1 , v2 }

is the surplus produced by the standard; w ∈ {0, 1} is an indicator that equals one if and only if

the SSO standardizes the firm’s patented technology; b ≥ 0 captures the benefits of implement-

ing familiar technology; and r denotes expected royalties from patent licensing. The familiarity

benefits b reflect a combination of time-to-market advantages, avoidance of redesign costs, greater

compatibility with proprietary complements, and backwards compatibility with the firm’s installed

base. By assumption, a pure licensor (σ = 0) receives no benefit from implementing a superior or

more familiar technology, whereas firms with a larger share of the implementation market place

more weight on those factors. We also assume the substitute v2 is freely available (if discovered),

so there is no licensing cost to the firm if its technology is not chosen.17

    The SSOs’ payoff is π S = (1−σ)(V −r), which reflects the total surplus (net of royalty payments)

for all other implementers of the standard.18 These payoffs imply that total profits π F + π S depend

upon technology selection, but not actual or expected royalty payments, which are a pure transfer

between the firm and the SSO. Although we believe this is a reasonable assumption for studying

patent disclosure and licensing, it clearly limits the model’s usefulness for analyzing other outcomes,

such as consumer welfare.

    The patent disclosure and licensing process has two periods:

    • At the beginning of stage t = 1, ex ante substitutes are revealed: with probability ρ the SSO

      identifies an alternate technology whose expected surplus v2 is drawn from the cumulative
term feature because patents typically cover a small part of the relevant standard. For our purposes, it does not
matter whether the firm proposed the new feature because it wishes to insert its patent into the standard, or just
happens to hold patents for technology that can be used to implement a desirable feature.
  17
     We can derive similar results under the assumption of Bertrand competition between two patented technologies,
but the exposition is simpler for the case of a free and open substitute.
  18
     Lerner and Tirole (2006) also model an SSO’s preferences in terms of a parameter that reflects the relative weight
attached to the interests of technology sponsors versus users.



                                                          9
         distribution F (x). If a substitute is found, the firm observes a quality signal vb2 = v2 + ε,

         where v2 is the true quality of the substitute (known to the SSO) and ε is a mean-zero random

         variable.19 Next, the firm makes an initial disclosure, which consists of an announcement that

         can be either Blanket or Specific and a licensing commitment that can be either FRAND or

         Royalty-free.20 Finally, the SSO selects a technology to standardize.

       • At stage t = 2, if there was no ex ante competition, then ex post substitutes are revealed.

         The SSO once more has a probability ρ of discovering a substitute with surplus v2 . If an ex

         post substitute is found, the SSO can pay a switching cost c to incorporate that technology

         into the standard. Finally, licenses are negotiated and payoffs are realized.

       The switching cost c reflects technology-specific sunk costs of implementing the original tech-

nology, as well as the direct cost of changing the standard. These switching and coordination costs

create a hold-up problem that many observers take as the primary rationale for SSO intellectual

property policies.

       A royalty-free commitment implies that r = 0. Although FRAND is a commitment to license

at the ex ante competitive price, we assume that actual prices are determined through ex post

Nash bargaining, so hold-up can occur.21 The Nash bargaining outcome depends upon the quality

of substitutes, whether they are discovered ex ante (t = 1) or ex post (t = 2), and whether they

infringe the firm’s patent.

       We call the firm’s patent technically essential (e = 1) if it is infringed by all available technolo-

gies, and commercially essential (e = 0) if v2 represents a non-infringing alternative.22 Note that

it is impossible to bypass a technically essential patent, so its owner collects royalties regardless of
  19
      This element of private information introduces some uncertainty (on the firm’s part) about the SSO’s technology
choice, but is otherwise not important to the model. The Condorcet (1785) jury model could be invoked to provide
micro-foundations for the random component, and we consider the case where the variance of ε shrinks to zero below.
   20
      Assuming that licensing commitments can be of two types – FRAND or Royalty-free – simplifies the analysis. In
reality, firms might also commit to a price cap. While many economists have suggested that price commitments are
desirable (e.g., Lerner and Tirole, 2015), they remain quite rare in practice.
   21
      In principle, the SSO could rely on courts to enforce a FRAND commitment by capping reasonable royalties at
rF = v1 − v2 . But in practice, courts find it difficult to measure v1 and (especially) v2 ex post, and to decide how the
ex ante surplus should be divided. SSO policies often discourage explicit discussion of pricing, and as noted above,
ex ante commitments to a specific price remain quite rare.
   22
      When discussing our model, we use the terms technically and commercially essential differently from most SSOs.
In particular, we allow a patent to be either technically or commercially essential ex ante (i.e. before the standard is
finalized), whereas most SSOs only view a patent as essential after the final specification is approved.


                                                           10
the SSO’s choice of technology to incorporate in the standard.

   Following Lerner, Tabakovic, and Tirole (2016), we model the choice between blanket and

specific disclosure as a trade-off between obfuscation – which increases the probability of technical

essentiality – and enforcement risk. Let δ be an index of patent scope, such that when δ = 0 the

patent is inevitably technically essential: it is impossible to implement the desired feature without

infringing. When δ = 1, the patent is so narrow that it is trivial to avoid infringement by using

a different technology. We assume the firm can use generic disclosure to obscure the details of its

patent, and increase its probability of essentiality. In particular, a standard based on a substitute

technology will infringe the firm’s patent with probability 1 − δ under specific disclosure and 1 − δθ

(where θ < 1) under blanket disclosure.

   Although specific disclosure reduces the likelihood of technical essentiality, it can strengthen

a patent in the eyes of licensors and courts. For example, Lim (2014) suggests that firms favor

specific disclosure because antitrust concerns can arise if they sue based on patents that were not

disclosed, and because they believe that by declaring a large number of patents, they can obtain

better leverage in negotiations. The latter belief may be justified if declared essential patent counts

are used to apportion royalties in an arbitration or damages in a patent lawsuit. We capture this

idea by assuming that blanket disclosure lowers expected royalties from r to (1 − γ)r.


2.3.1   Equilibrium Disclosure

We solve for the subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium of this disclosure model starting from the

final period. There are two outcomes to consider at t = 2: royalties and the decision to switch

technologies. The SSO will standardize an alternative technology discovered in period 2 if and only

if v2 − c > v1 . Under a royalty-free commitment, we always have r = 0. If there is a FRAND




                                                  11
commitment, Nash bargaining yields:
                                     
                                      1 v1
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                      2                            if v2 = 0
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                      1 max{v1 , v2 − c}
                                     
                                     
                                       2                            if v2 > 0 and e = 1
                  r(v1 , v2 , e) =
                                       1
                                     
                                       2 (v1 − max{0, v2 − c})      if v1 + c > v2 > 0 and e = 0
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     0
                                                                   if v2 > v1 + c and e = 0


The two middle cases show that when a substitute is found, the firm can benefit if its patent

remains technically essential, and may lose bargaining leverage if the patent becomes commercially

essential (though both effects are dampened by switching costs).23

    We are now ready to move backwards to t = 1 and consider the firm’s disclosure decision. There

are two cases to consider:

    Case 1: No Competition: If there are no ex ante substitutes, the firm’s technology will be

standardized. The firm will offer a FRAND commitment, because that leaves open the possibility

of monetizing its patents. The choice between specific and blanket disclosure will not affect the

implementation part of the firm’s payoff, and therefore depends only on expected royalties. In

Appendix B, we prove that the firm will make a specific disclosure if and only if

                   n       v1              o
                  γ (1 − ρ) + ρE[r(v1 , 1)] ≥ ρδ(1 − θ(1 − γ))E[r(v1 , 1) − r(v1 , 0)]                                (1)
                           2

where the expectation is taken with respect to v2 . On the left side of this inequality are the

marginal royalty benefits from specific rather than blanket disclosure of an ex post technically

essential patent. The right side of the expression measures the marginal cost of specific rather than

blanket disclosure in the event of ex post competition.

    Several results follow immediately. A firm with an “ironclad” patent (δ = 0) will always make a

specific disclosure. The probability of specific disclosure increases when obfuscation is less effective

(θ → 1), when enforcement risk under blanket disclosure increases (γ → 1), or when ex post
  23
     In each case, the equilibrium royalty is r = 12 (V − V 0 ), where V 0 is a disagreement payoff that depends on v2 and
e. These payoffs do not depend on b because the SSO already selected v1 to be the initial standard.




                                                            12
competition becomes less likely (ρ → 0). In the appendix, we show that specific disclosure also

increases with the value of the firm’s technology (v1 ).24 All of these observations can be collected

as:

Prediction 1. When there is no ex ante competition, the firm makes a specific FRAND disclosure if

and only if (1) is satisfied, and a blanket FRAND disclosure otherwise. Specific disclosure increases

with patent scope 1 − δ, patent value v1 , and enforcement risk γ; and declines with the probability

of ex post competition ρ, and the effectiveness of obfuscation 1 − θ.

       Case 2: Competition: When a substitute is discovered ex ante the firm makes a specific

disclosure, because there is no longer any benefit from obfuscation. If its patent is technically

essential, the firm will make a FRAND commitment. But if the patent is commercially essential,

the firm may opt for a royalty-free licensing commitment to influence the SSO’s decision.

       At t = 1, the SSO will standardize the firm’s patented technology whenever v1 − r > v2 . A

risk-neutral firm would be willing to commit to a FRAND price rF ≤ v1 − vb2 to try and induce

a favorable choice. But if the firm cannot commit, the threat of hold-up could lead the SSO to

standardize a competing technology.

       Given our assumption that the firm can only commit to royalty-free licensing, let G and G

denote the probability that the SSO picks the firm’s technology under a FRAND or royalty-free

commitment respectively.25 In Appendix B, we show that the firm will offer a royalty-free licensing

commitment if and only if

                                                         σ G−G
                                    r(v1 , vb2 , 0) ≤          (v1 − vb2 + b)                                       (2)
                                                        1−σ G

It follows immediately that implementers with a larger share of the downstream market (higher

σ), or who derive more benefits from standardizing a familiar technology (higher b) are more

likely to offer a royalty-free commitment.26 Holding vb2 fixed, the risk that SSO will choose a
  24
     The firm’s downstream activities do not influence the trade-off, except by making it more “salient” in the sense
of these costs and benefits representing a larger share of the firm’s total payoff.
  25
     Formally, we have G = F (v1 − vb2 − r) and G = F (v1 − vb2 )
  26
     In the appendix, we show that in the limiting case where there is no uncertainty, the firm will make a royalty-free
commitment if and only if the SSO would choose the competing technology under FRAND. In that case, the terms
of the licensing commitment do not vary with σ or b.


                                                           13
substitute technology disappears as v1 grows large, leading the firm to make a FRAND commitment.

Gathering these observations together, we have:

Prediction 2. When there is ex ante competition, the firm makes a specific disclosure. It will make

a royalty-free licensing commitment if and only if (2) is satisfied. Royalty-free commitments increase

with downstream market share σ, increase with the benefits of implementing familiar technology b,

and decrease as the quality of a firm’s technology v1 grows large.

   The relationship between switching costs and licensing commitments under ex ante competition

depends on a firm’s business model. Because ex post royalties are weakly increasing in c, licensors

will favor FRAND commitments. At the same time, increased royalties imply a greater chance that

the SSO will select a substitute technology, leading implementers to favor royalty-free commitments.

In Appendix B, we formalize this intuition by showing that there is a critical value σ
                                                                                     b(v1 , b) such

that the probability of a FRAND commitment is increasing in c for σ < σ
                                                                      b and decreasing in c for

all σ > σ
        b.


2.3.2   Implications and Extensions

Figure 1 summarizes the equilibrium of our disclosure model. When there is ex ante competition,

firms will make a specific FRAND disclosure if they have a technically essential patent or clearly

superior technology (v1  v2 ), and a specific royalty-free disclosure when the patent is commercially

essential and competition is “neck and neck” (v1 ≈ v2 ). Firms are also more likely to make a royalty-

free commitment when they have a larger share of the implementation market. When there is no

ex ante competition, firms will make a specific FRAND disclosure for “strong” patents (where δ is

small or v1  E[v2 ]), and a blanket FRAND disclosure otherwise. The SSO will revise the standard

ex post only if it discovers an alternative technology that is significantly better than the original.

   Disclosure policies and patent outcomes: In the empirical analysis below, we focus on two

long-run patent-level outcomes: citations and litigation. Although our model of disclosure empha-

sizes the selection process behind the dSEP data, it can easily be linked to these two outcomes. In

particular, we expect more valuable patents (higher v1 and lower δ) to experience a larger increase

in citations following disclosure, because they are more likely to become and remain technically

                                                  14
                                 Figure 1: Equilibrium Disclosure and Licensing

                                                  Competition                No Competition
                                                      (v2 > 0)                     (v2 = 0)



                                              • Specific Disclosure        • Specific or Blanket



                                Ex Ante
                                      (t=1)
                                                                             Disclosure
                                              • FREE or FRAND
                                                commitment                 • FRAND commitment
                                Ex Post


                                              • Revise iff v2 > v1 + c     • Royalties = r(v1, 0)
                                      (t=2)




                                              • Royalties = r(v1, v2, e)




essential. We also expect more valuable patents to have a higher litigation rate, unless they are

offered on royalty-free terms.27

       The model also sheds some light on debates about blanket disclosure. Allowing blankets will lead

to a larger number of weak patents actually becoming essential. On the other hand, prohibiting

blankets will produce a list of dSEPs that contains more non-essential patents. To analyze a

mandatory specific disclosure policy, consider the case where γ = 1, which implies that firms

cannot collect royalties for essential patents declared in a blanket disclosure. It should be obvious

(and equation (1) confirms) that every relevant patent is specifically disclosed under such a policy.

Thus, patents disclosed under a mandatory specific disclosure policy should have (weakly) higher

values of v1 , lower values of δ and a lower rate of ex post technical essentiality.

       Extensions: One natural extension of our model is to assume that firms must determine

whether they own potential SEPs. Many observers (e.g., Biddle, 2015) suggest that search costs

are in fact substantial, and provide an important rationale for the blanket option. In our model,

these costs can enter through γ, making blanket disclosure relatively more attractive.

       Another extension would be to allow for the creation of a “profile” that incorporates both tech-

nologies (v1 and v2 ), leaving the final decision to implementers. If the profile creates no loss in overall
  27
       This prediction can be derived, for example, within the Priest and Klein (1984) model of litigation.




                                                                 15
compatibility, this option should reduce the incentive to offer royalty-free licensing commitments,

because a firm can always implement the more familiar technology in cases where v1 < v2 < v1 + b.

However, a more realistic model might incorporate some risk of coordination failure, so that V

declines in expectation when the SSO fails to make a clear choice between competing options.



3         Disclosure Characteristics

This section uses our novel database of intellectual property declarations to document a number of

stylized facts about the standardization process at thirteen major SSOs. The data contain 45,349

disclosures (general or specific licensing statements) that can be grouped into 4,910 declarations

(statements submitted to a single SSO by a single firm on a given date).28 The total number

of declarations in our data has grown dramatically over time, and there was a sharp increase in

disclosure size around 2000.29 Appendix A provides additional information about the dataset.

         Table 2 examines disclosure characteristics by SSO. The first column in this table shows that

the distribution of declarations across SSOs is very uneven. While several SSOs have 500 or more

declarations, others have only a handful. For this reason, we pool the organizations in some of the

analyses below. The last column in Table 2 shows this grouping. Our first group are the three

“Big I” international Standards Developing Organizations, IEC, ISO and ITU. Our second group

contains the regional umbrella organizations CEN/CENELEC for Europe and ANSI for the US,

along with the Broadband Forum. IEEE, ETSI and IETF each constitute their own group. The

final group consists of several smaller forums that develop mobile telecommunications standards.

         The second column in Table 2 shows variation in the share of blanket declarations that list no

specific patent or application numbers. Overall, roughly half of all declarations are blankets. The

SSO with the lowest share is ETSI, which has a policy of mandatory specific disclosure. The average

disclosure size at ETSI is almost 40 patents, which is four times larger than the next largest SSO,
    28
      Tables A-3 and A-4 show the most active firms in our data, in aggregate and by SSO. The ten most active
firms account for 33% of the declarations (and an even larger share of dSEPs), but we observe a total of 926 unique
organizations that make one or more disclosures, and the “long tail” of small organizations is collectively substantial.
   29
      Figure C-2 graphs the total number of declarations in our data, starting in 1985. The increase in disclosure size
is linked to a relatively small number of declarations that list very large numbers of patents, particularly at ETSI.
But the overall pattern is one of a rapidly increasing number of disclosures, and a rapidly expanding base of declared
essential patents.


                                                          16
and the total amount of IP disclosed at ETSI is over half our sample of dSEPs. Other differences

in the size and frequency of disclosure across SSO may reflect the scope of the work carried out

within the SSO, the different IP policies summarized in Table 1, and differences in the patenting

propensity of participating firms.

    The next set of columns in Table 2 focus on the terms of licensing commitments. As noted above,

the overwhelming majority (89%) of disclosures offer a FRAND commitment (in some cases because

that is the only option allowed by an SSO). Overall, 9 percent of licensing commitments are royalty-

free, and we observe only a handful of disclosures that either withhold a commitment or provide

specific licensing terms and conditions. When looking across SSOs at the distribution of licensing

commitments, the clear outlier is the IETF, where more than one third of the declarations provide

a royalty-free commitment. One explanation for this discrepancy is that many IETF Working

Groups have a stated preference for royalty-free standards, though others will consider royalty-

bearing technology if justified on technical merits. Our model suggests that royalty-free disclosures

emerge only if there is ex ante competition for inclusion in the standard, which requires knowledge

of relevant IP relatively early in the standardization process, before design decisions have become

entrenched. Thus, it is interesting to note that the last two columns in Table 2 show that patents

are generally disclosed earlier at the IETF – on average six months before they even issue.30

    In order to examine the predictions from our theoretical model within a regression framework, we

created a variable that captures whether a firm is primarily a “downstream” standards implementer,

as opposed to an “upstream” licensor or component vendor (i.e. a proxy for σ). While any such

distinction is inherently somewhat arbitrary, we found it relatively easy to classify the most active

firms in our data into a handful of business model categories, and have made the data public so

that interested readers can experiment with alternative classification schemes.31 We classified all

entities that made five or more declarations, and believe that most of the remaining unclassified

observations would fall into the “upstream” category, based on inspecting the data and because
  30
     The disclosure of potential dSEPs to an SSO before the patent issues illustrates one reason that some SSOs have
given for their resistance to explicit pricing commitments during the standardization process: it is not yet clear what
the claims of the issued patent will say. In general, we find considerable variance in the elapsed time between patent
application (or issuance) and disclosure to an SSO in our sample. See Appendix Figure C-3 for additional detail.
  31
     See Table A-5 for summary statistics related to our business model categories.




                                                          17
scale economies in implementation lead most downstream firms to be familiar brands.32

         Table 3 presents coefficients from linear probability (OLS) models of the two choice variables in

our theoretical model: specific versus blanket disclosure, and royalty-free versus FRAND commit-

ments. Because all of the explanatory variables are dummies, each coefficient can be interpreted as

a percentage-point change in the probability of the outcome variable.33 The estimates in column

(1) show that upstream firms are less likely to offer a royalty-free licensing commitment, as pre-

dicted by our model. Unclassified firms are indistinguishable from downstream firms who are closer

to the implementation market. Column (2) adds SSO dummies, and we see that this correlation

declines in magnitude, but remains statistically significant. Not surprisingly, there is also a large

and statistically significant coefficient on the IETF dummy.

         Columns (3) and (4) in Table 3 show that upstream licensors are also more likely to offer

blanket disclosures, and that blanket disclosure is less prevalent at ETSI and IEEE.34 Interestingly,

blanket disclosure is used at IETF as much as ANSI, even though blanket disclosure creates a

strong preference for royalty-free licensing at the former SSO.



4         Declared Standard Essential Patents (dSEPs)

This section examines the declared essential patents contained in our data. While the declarations

list patents from many countries, we limit our patent-level analyses to a group of 6,723 granted

US patents that were either declared essential, or share a common priority application with a

European declared essential patent.35 The United States is the most common issuing country in

our overall dataset, and limiting the analysis to US patents keeps the presentation and interpretation
    32
     Unclassified observations comprise 63 percent of all claimants, but only 16 percent of disclosures and 4 percent
of the declared essential patents in the data set.
  33
     In the linear probability models, we multiply the binary outcome variables by 100 for an easier interpretation
of the coefficients as percentage-point changes. Table C-1 shows that we obtain nearly identical estimates of the
marginal effects from a logit specification.
  34
     The coefficient for ETSI in the blanket regression is identified because there are a very small number of SSO-wide
blanket FRAND commitments included in our data set, even though firm’s still must specifically declare to ETSI any
patent they intend to enforce.
  35
     We use PATSTAT to identify US patents that share a common priority application with a declared essential
patent. Our algorithm follows four steps: (1) take the appln id of all DOCDB family members for each dSEP, (2) for
applications identified in step 1, find the appln id for the parent application of any continuations, (3) for applications
identified in step 1 and 2, find the appln id for the earliest parent application associated with each focal application,
(4) identify any issued US patent originating from an application identified in steps 1 through 3.


                                                           18
of statistics relatively simple. Henceforth, we refer to this sample as dSEPs.

       As a point of comparison, we also created two “control” samples. The first group of comparison

patents was selected by randomly choosing an undeclared US patent with the same primary (3 digit)

technology class, grant year, patent type (i.e. regular utility or reissue utility patent) and with

roughly the same number of claims as each of the dSEPs.36 This one-to-one matching procedure

ensures that the joint distribution of technology classes, grant years, patent type and claims is

balanced in the two samples. We refer to these patents as Random Matches. For the second

comparison group, we also matched on a count of patents in the same DOCDB patent family

within one year of the earliest priority date associated with the focal patent. Our goal in creating

this second comparison set was to use family size as a proxy for the perceived value of the patent to

the applicant – since it is more expensive to file for protection in more countries – without providing

too much time for family size to grow, so it does not become a function of essentiality.

       To be clear, neither set of “control” patents is meant to provide an estimate of the true counter-

factual outcome for dSEPs had they not been declared essential. Rather, these comparison groups

yield an estimate of the “average outcome” in a set of patents with similar ages, technical character-

istics and perceived importance around the time of application. Rysman and Simcoe (2008) discuss

this type of matching in detail, and note that a diff-in-diff comparison of these two groups before

and after disclosure can measure both selection effects (differences that would exist regardless of

standardization) and marginal effects (differences caused by disclosure and/or standardization).

       Because the IP declarations are not an ideal data source in all respects, it is worth reiterating

several caveats before presenting our initial patent-level analyses. First, these data do not contain

all essential patents, since many SSOs allow blanket disclosure. We know of no easy way to

identify undeclared essential patents, including those in blanket disclosures. Second, any sample

of dSEPs will contain some patents that are not technically essential. As described above, both

standards and patent applications change over time, so a patent or pending application that was

essential to a particular draft may no longer be infringed by the time an SSO settles on the final

specification. Firms may also “overdeclare” out of caution (since non-disclosure could render their
  36
    For matching on claims, we chose a control patent from the same decile of the cumulative distribution of total
claims as the focal dSEP patent.


                                                       19
IP unenforceable) or because they have a strategic motive to inflate their dSEP counts, possibly

with an eye towards litigation or future negotiations. Finally, when we examine disclosure timing, it

is important to recall that declaration dates are only loosely connected to the underlying standard

development process. Depending on the rules of a particular SSO, formal declarations can predate

the key technical decisions, occur at roughly the same time, or appear long after a standard is

published and diffused.37

       All of our patent-level outcomes data come from the USPTO, with the exception of the data

on patent litigation, which was obtained from the Thomson Innovation database in April 2016.38


4.1      The Significance of dSEPs

Table 4 provides an initial comparison of dSEPs and the randomly matched control patents.The

main message of the table is that dSEPs score higher than controls on a variety of metrics used to

proxy for value and technological significance.

       The first two rows in Table 4 examine “long run” differences between SSO and Control patents.

The first row shows that SSO Patents are cited as prior art by other US patents 70% more than

the random matches. The second row shows that the probability of litigation in the sample of

SSO Patents is four times higher than the random matches (7.27 percent versus 1.76 percent), and

more than three times higher than in the family matches.39 It is important to note that dSEPs and

control patents have the same distribution of grant years (and as the table shows, application year),

so these differences in long-run outcomes are not caused by any difference in exposure to the risk

of a citation or a lawsuit. While it is hard to place a value on a forward citation, or understand the

precise significance of a particular lawsuit, these measures are widely used by innovation researchers

and rarely show differences of the size and statistical significance observed in our analysis.
  37
     Our database provides details on the underlying technical committee and document wherever possible, and we
encourage enterprising researchers to supplement these declarations data with more precise dates of key technical
decisions as part of future research.
  38
     We combine data from various sources, including PATSTAT, PatentsView (http://www.patentsview.org), the
USPTO Patent Assignment Dataset (Marco, Myers, Graham, D’Agostino, and Kucab, 2015), the Harvard Patent
Dataverse and the Fung Institute GitHub website (Li, Lai, D’Amour, Doolin, Sun, Torvik, Amy, and Fleming, 2014).
Details are available upon request.
  39
     We measure litigation at the level of the individual patent, so a suit that incorporates two or more declared
essential patents may be counted more than once.




                                                       20
       The third row in Table 4 examines the rate of reassignment (i.e. transfer of patent ownership)

and finds differences that are statistically significant, but rather small, between dSEPs and control

samples. In the fourth row, we see a very large difference in the family size of the dSEPs and the

random match comparison group. This suggests that applicants are aware of the value of declared

essential patents from a relatively early date, and motivated our construction of the additional

family matched control group.40 Interestingly, even after matching on the size of the international

patent family within one year from the priority date, we see a significant difference in the overall

family size for dSEPs and family matched controls.

       Finally, Table 4 shows that dSEPs have more listed inventors, and make more references to

both patent and non-patent prior art. These findings suggest that they are “broader” than the

controls, and that applicants were more careful in delineating the underlying innovation (relative

to prior patents) in their application. Large differences between dSEPs and control patents at the

time of filing suggest a selection effect, whereby SSOs attract and select high-value technologies.

However, Bekkers, Bongard, and Nuvolari (2011) show that firms often file for patents and submit

the underlying technology to an SSO almost simultaneously, so even ex ante value metrics may

reflect an SSO’s influence.41


4.2      Cross-sectional Comparison Between dSEPs and Control Patents

Our next set of patent-level analyses examine how differences in long-run outcomes (i.e. citations

and litigation) vary with the “visibility” of disclosures, the business model of the claimant, the

SSO, and the type of licensing commitment. We continue to use the randomly matched control

sample as a way to adjust for differences in technology class, age, patent type and the total number

of patent claims. However, we now adopt the following regression framework:



                                Yij = Declaredi βj + αj + λg + γc + Xi θ + εi                                      (3)
  40
    Summary statistics for the family-matched controls are presented in Table C-2 in the Appendix.
  41
    To see whether “simultaneous” application and disclosure had a large impact on our results, we re-ran the analysis
in Table 4 on the sub-sample of dSEPs (and matched controls) in the upper quartile of the application-to-disclosure
lag distribution, which were declared 7.7 or more years after their application date. The results of this unreported
analysis are quite similar to those reported in Table 4, suggesting that there is a substantial element of selection on
observed (to the patent-holder) quality in our sample of dSEPs.


                                                          21
where Yij is either a citation count or a litigation indicator for patent i in group j, Declaredi is

an indicator variable that equals one if patent i was declared essential to an SSO, and Xi is a

vector of control variables that includes the number of claims, patent references and non-patent

prior art references made by the patent. We focus on four groups (indexed by j): dSEPs (versus

undeclared family members), business models (Upstream, Downstream or Unclassified), Licensing

Commitments, and SSOs.42 The coefficients λg and γc are a set of issue-year and technology class

fixed-effects, while the coefficients αj measure differences in control patent outcomes across groups.

We are interested in the vector of coefficients βj that measures a group-specific difference between

the SSO and matched control patents.

       Table 5 reports estimates of βj , using both citations and litigation as outcomes.43 For the

citation models, we estimate equation (3) as a Poisson regression with robust standard errors.44

For the litigation outcome, we use a linear probability model.

       Columns (1) and (5) in Table 5 compare the “disclosure effect” for patents that were actually

listed as dSEPs to the effect for family members that were not specifically declared. We find a

statistically significant increase in citations and litigation for both groups, though the effect is

much larger for the dSEPs. A coefficient of 0.55 in column (1) indicates that dSEPs receive about

73% more forward citations than the random match controls, compared to around 14% for their

family members.45 The coefficient of 5.56 in column (5) indicates that the difference in probability

of a lawsuit is 5.6 percentage points.

       Columns (2) and (6) in Table 5 examine the relationship between the patent holder’s business

model and dSEP citation and litigation rates. We created a separate business-model category

for the control patents, whose owners we did not attempt to code, and use that as the omitted

category in these regressions. In column (2), we see that patents disclosed by pure-licensors,

universities and component producers receive more citations than those disclosed by downstream
  42
     When a patent is declared essential to more than one SSO, we assign it to the one where it was first declared.
  43
     Table 5 focuses on the full sample of SSO Patents and Random Matches. We get similar results when focusing
on the Family Matched comparison group.
  44
     The is sometimes called the Poisson quasi-likelihood estimator, and using the robust standard errors corrects for
any overdispersion in the outcome.
  45
     Poisson coefficients can be translated into a percentage change by exponentiating and subtracting one, i.e. e0.55 −
1 = 0.73.




                                                          22
implementers. Column (6) shows that firms with upstream business models are also more likely

to assert their dSEPs in litigation. These findings are consistent with the idea that upstream

technology developers are more reliant on patent monetization as part of their overall business

model. Interestingly, we find similar results of even larger magnitude for the group of unclassified

patent-holders. One interpretation of the latter finding is that the unclassified firms are relatively

small, and consequently face similar incentives to monetize their patents instead of relying on

complementary assets for capturing value.

       Columns (3) and (7) in Table 5 examine how the citation and litigation of dSEPs vary according

to the terms of the licensing commitment. We consider four types of commitment: FRAND; Free

(which includes both a royalty-free license and a non-assertion covenant); Terms (for a specific set

of conditions, including price) and None. Column (3) shows that the difference in forward citations

between dSEPs and randomly matched control patents is largest for commitments to license the

patents free of charge. However, the standard errors associated with non-FRAND commitments

are all relatively large due to small sample sizes. Column (7) shows how the probability of litigation

varies with the terms of the licensing commitment. For patents under a Free licensing commitment,

there is no difference in the probability of litigation between the dSEPs and matched control patents.

However, the FRAND patents have a 5.1 percentage point increase in litigation probability (roughly

300% compared to the baseline litigation rate for the controls), and the patents with no licensing

commitment are 9.6 percentage points more likely to be litigated than their associated control

patents.

       The fact that royalty free patents are less likely to be litigated may not be surprising: there

is little incentive to sue if a patent can be freely infringed (though defensive suspension provisions

and applications of the patented technology outside of the scope of the standard may explain why

these patents are still litigated in some cases).46 However, the larger citation increase for royalty

free dSEPs suggests a greater willingness to “build on” royalty free technology (as long as one

is prepared to accept that relatively common interpretation of patent citations). These results
  46
    Note that even though a patent may be offered royalty-free when implemented in the context of a specific standard,
the owner my ask monetary compensation for that same patent if used in a different context. If that latter scenario
results in litigation, it would be recorded in our database.




                                                         23
also suggest that FRAND offers some additional degree of certainty relative to patents where no

licensing commitment was provided.

    Columns (4) and (8) in Table 5 examine differences across the “SSO Groups” defined in Table 2

and discussed above. Column (4) shows that dSEPs receive more citations than their matched

controls at every SSO, though the magnitude of the difference varies considerably. The citation

gap between declared essential and “average” patents is greatest for the “Other” group containing

Open Mobile Alliance, TIA and ATIS, and also at the IETF. The citations gap is notably smaller

for ETSI, ANSI, and the Big-I international organizations. This variation in the citation gap may

reflect differences in either the selectivity or the “treatment effect” of different SSOs, or more likely

a combination of both effects. However, the use of control patents, along with the technology-

class and issue-year fixed effects, should capture any broad differences in citing patterns across

technologies and time (i.e. the part of the selection effect that is linked to these observables).

    Column (8) examines heterogeneity in litigation rates between dSEPs and control patents. Once

again, we see considerable variation across SSOs. The difference in litigation probabilities between

Control and SSO Patents is largest at ANSI, where there is a 12.06 percentage point increase in

litigation. The gap is smaller at IETF, where one third of the commitments are royalty-free, and

at ETSI, where a mandatory specific disclosure may lead to weaker patents and a lower rate of ex

post technical essentiality.47

    While one might have expected the estimated citations and litigation coefficients to co-vary

positively across SSOs, Table 5 does not show any obvious relationship. For example, ANSI has

the largest litigation gap and the second-lowest gap in citations, while the patents declared to IETF

are cited at a very high rate relative to their controls, and have one of the smaller litigation gaps.

This may say something about the relative efficacy of alternative disclosure policies. However, we

remain cautious about placing a causal interpretation on any of these comparisons. In particular,

all of the measured “effects” could be explained by unobserved differences in technology or the

types of firm participating in different SSOs. Moreover, we have no way of knowing the citation or

litigation rates for patents declared under a blanket disclosure.
  47
     In Appendix C, Table C-3 shows robustness to using the family-matched controls, and Table C-4 shows robustness
to using a logit specification rather than OLS for the litigation outcome.



                                                        24
5         Disclosure Effects

Up to this point, we have emphasized that disclosure timing is not tightly linked to the adoption

of a standard. Some patents are disclosed long after a standard has emerged, and in other cases,

SSO participants may be aware that sponsors of a proposal own related IP well before a formal

declaration is made. Nevertheless, most of the SSOs in our data encourage early disclosure, and a

pair of “patent ambush” cases filed by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission against Dell and Rambus

provide strong incentives to comply.48 If one is willing to assume that disclosure is a reasonable

proxy for the timing of standards development (at least over a fairly long time-series), then we

can use panel data to further explore the idea that standardization has a causal impact on the

long-term outcomes of declared essential patents. This section provides evidence of a “Disclosure

Effect” on citations and litigation using difference-in-differences regressions.


5.1        Citation Effects

To explore the relationship between disclosure and citations, we created a panel data set that

contains one observation per year for each dSEP and Control patent with an age between -5 and

20 (where age is defined as calendar-year minus issue-year). Our outcome variable is a count of

references from all issued patent applications filed in year t to each dSEP or control patent i.

         Figure 2 graphs the average annual citation rate by age for dSEP and random match control

patents in the raw data. The first panel in this figure shows that dSEPs receive roughly 20% more

citations than control patents by the time they issue. This gap widens for about 10 years, as the

dSEPs’ average annual citation rate climbs from 5 to 6, and the control patent rate stays constant

at about 4. The second panel in Figure 2 provides a separate annual citation rate for each SSO,

and shows that much of the “bump” in the first panel is linked to two groups: IETF, and the

“telecom” group consisting of ATIS, TIA and OMA.

         Overall, these graphs suggest that there is both a substantial selection effect, whereby dSEPs

receive a higher baseline citation rate prior to standardization, and a smaller standardization effect
    48
    See In Re Dell Computer and FTC vs. Rambus. In particular, the outcome of Dell Computer suggests that
firms that fail to disclose essential IP may lose the right to assert their patents.




                                                     25
(perhaps concentrated in particular SSOs) whereby citations increase after a patent is declared

essential. To further explore the standardization effect, we created an additional set of citation

matched control patents that have the same average level and trend in forward citations as the

dSEPs. We constructed the citation matched controls by drawing a single patent having the same

application year and technology class as each dSEP, and also having the same number of cumulative

patent citations two years prior to disclosure. If the dSEP is disclosed eight or more years after the

corresponding application is filed, we also match on cumulative citations eight and three years prior

to disclosure. Because this matched control sample is constructed to have the same pre-disclosure

citation trends as the dSEPs, it is more plausible to assume that these controls provide a valid

estimate of the counterfactual post-Disclosure outcomes for the declared essential patents.

   Figure 3 plots the coefficients and standards errors from a pair of event study regressions using

the dSEPs and their citation matched controls. The underlying regression specification is


                         Citesit = DeclaredEssentiali βk + αi + γay + εit                         (4)


where DeclaredEssentiali is an indicator for a dSEP; αi is a patent-level fixed effect; and γay is

a full set of age-by-year effects that should absorb both secular trends in the overall citation rate

and the underlying shape of the citation-age distribution. We plot the coefficients βk , where k

indexes years-to-disclosure (i.e. calendar year minus the year when a patent is declared essential),

normalizing β−2 = 0. We chose this normalization because both the data and our discussions

with standards practitioners suggest that committee members obtain information about potentially

essential patents during the year before disclosure, although normalizing β−1 = 0 produces similar

results.

   The first panel in Figure 3 is based on the complete sample of dSEPs and citation matched

controls, using a regression that omits the patent fixed effects (αi ). There are three important

features of this graph. First, even without providing a patent-specific intercept, it is apparent that

our citation-matching procedure produces a good match in the pre-disclosure levels and trends of

citations between the dSEPs and the control group. In particular, none of the βk for k < −2 is

statistically significantly different from zero. Second, we see a sharp increase in cites starting the

                                                 26
year before formal disclosure. And third, following disclosure we observe a long-term persistent

difference in the citation rate of the dSEPs and citation-matched controls. That is, the coefficients

βk are all statistically different from zero for k = −1 to 10. We interpret this pattern as indicating

that the standardization process has a causal impact on the economic and technical importance of

declared essential patents.

       The second panel in Figure 3 changes the regression specification by adding patent fixed-effects,

and more importantly drops the patents declared essential at ETSI and their associated controls.49

We have plotted the two figures on the same scale to show that dropping ETSI from the estimation

sample roughly doubles the size of the “disclosure bump” that is apparent around the time of

standardization, and leads to a long-term impact that is substantially higher, at just over half a

citation per year.

       Table 6 illustrates similar results to Figure 3, only using a more parsimonious regression model,

building on the approach developed in Rysman and Simcoe (2008). Our specification is


                             Citesit = P ostDisclosureit βj + SSOi α + γay + εit                                    (5)


where P ostDisclosureit is an indicator for a patent that has been declared essential to an SSO.

Columns (1) and (2) show how pre-disclosure citation-matching helps address the strong selection

issue in these data. If we use the randomly matched control sample, the regression suggests a

very strong selection effect of 1.3 citations per year (on a baseline of 2.3 cites per year), but no

post-disclosure increase in citations. However, when we switch to the citation matched controls,

there is no pre-disclosure difference in cites by construction, and we estimate a 12 percent increase

in citations following disclosure to the SSO. In column (3) we add patent fixed effects, and the

estimated disclosure effect falls to 0.17 citations per year (around 5 percent).50 However, dropping

ETSI from the estimation sample in column (4) leads to a four-fold increase in the estimated
  49
     Recall that ETSI has a mandatory specific disclosure policy that our theory suggests will lead to disclosure of
patents that are less likely to be ex post technically essential than at SSOs permitting blankets.
  50
     Chabé-Ferret (2016) shows that it is not obvious a priori whether we should prefer the specification in column (2)
or (3). Because the latter specification includes two high-dimensional vectors of unobserved effects, for both patents
(αi ), and age-years (γay ), we estimate (5) via OLS using a Stata package and estimator described in Guimaraes and
Portugal (2010).



                                                          27
disclosure effect.51

       The results in Table 6 are broadly consistent with the findings in Rysman and Simcoe (2008),

and indicate that SSOs produce both a strong selection effect, by choosing patented technologies

that are ex ante more valuable, as well as a disclosure effect by encouraging coordinated adoption

of those technologies. The two contributions we make relative to that study are the construction

of a citation-matched control sample, and the observation that the disclosure effect is dramatically

reduced by including ETSI in the estimation sample. We argue that ETSI’s mandatory specific

disclosure policy is driving this heterogeneity. If this argument is correct, it may be appropriate to

view even the result in column (4) as a lower bound on the true disclosure effect, given that all of

our SSOs include a share of disclosed patents that are not truly essential.

       Our novel data on multiple SSOs and licensing terms also allow us to explore heterogeneous

disclosure effects by letting βj in equation (5) vary with the SSO or the terms of the licensing

commitment. Table 7 illustrates the results of this approach. Columns (1) and (2) in Table 7

examine heterogeneity across different types of licensing commitment. Not surprisingly, we find

results similar to Table 6 for the FRAND patents that comprise 90% of the estimation sample.

Estimates for the FREE, Specific and No Commitment groups are all positive but imprecisely

estimated. Columns (4) and (5) report estimates from the same set of regressions using Self

Citations (i.e. cites from patents owned by the same firm) as the outcome variable. There, we

find the largest effect for patents disclosed under a Royalty Free licensing commitment. While the

terms of the commitment are clearly endogenously selected by the patent holder, one interesting

interpretation of this finding is that companies may be more likely to offer free commitments when

they also hold a number of proprietary complements (i.e. the citing patents). In particular, if firms

have the option to conduct research that builds upon a dSEP, leading to more patents that cite the

focal dSEP, that option should increase the b parameter in our model leading to a higher probability

of a Royalty Free commitment.

       Finally, in Column (3) (and in Column (6) for Self Cites) we allow the disclosure effect to vary

by SSO. The most notable finding here is the negative disclosure effect for patents declared essential
  51
       In Appendix C, Table C-5 we show robustness to a Poisson specification.




                                                          28
to ETSI. It is also interesting that the disclosure effect at IETF is not statistically significant, even

though Figure 2 suggests that patents disclosed to IETF are among the most highly cited. This

finding that the two SSOs with specific disclosure rules have the smallest disclosure effect on citation

rates is broadly consistent with our theoretical model, as discussed above. Setting aside ETSI and

IETF, we find larger effects at ANSI and the mobile consortia (ATIS, TIA, OMA), a somewhat

smaller and less precisely estimated effects at the Big-I organizations and IEEE.52

       Overall, if one is willing to maintain the assumptions that citations reflect value and that

disclosure is a reasonable proxy for essentiality, these results suggest that SSOs are both selecting

high quality patents and contributing to their long-term importance. In the next sub-section, we

will see that SSOs are performing less well at the related task of mitigating conflict over declared

essential IP.


5.2       Litigation Effects

Our final set of analyses will examine the relationship between disclosure and litigation. The data

consist of a patent-year panel that retains all never-litigated patents, and all litigated patents

only up to the year of their first lawsuit. Dropping patent-year observations that post-date the

initial suit for a given patent simplifies the setup of our hazard models, and allows us to ignore

the complexities that emerge when considering how outcomes of one suit impact future litigation

propensity for the same patent.

       Figure 4 shows the 20-year cumulative hazard of litigation for declared essential and the citation-

matched control patents. The dramatic divergence over time illustrates the same gap in litigation

probabilities that we saw with the cross-sectional results in Section 4. However, where the cross-

sectional models report a difference in litigation rates averaged over patents at different ages, this

Figure shows that the difference in the propensity to litigate dSEPs versus controls grows larger

over time. By age 20, the cumulative difference in litigation probabilities is considerably larger

than the 5 to 7 percentage point difference reported in Section 4, reflecting the fact that litigation

probabilities increase over time for declared essential patents, and that we have many “young”
  52
       In Appendix C, Table C-6 we show the results are robust to a Poisson specification.




                                                          29
patents in the entire sample.

   We now examine the relationship between disclosure-timing and litigation. A patent that is

litigated prior to its disclosure suggests that patent characteristics are causing selection into the

dSEP group, whereas an increase in litigation following disclosure is more consistent with the

idea that SSOs help boost patent value, and therefore the probability of assertion and subsequent

disputes.

   To measure the link between disclosure and litigation, we estimate linear probability models

that include a complete set of patent-age and calendar-year effects to control for the baseline hazard

and any time-trends in the overall patent litigation environment. The basic specification is:


                        Litigationit = P ostDisclosureit βj + γa + λy + Xit θ + εit                 (6)


where Litigationit equals 100 in any year where a patent is first litigated, so coefficients represent a

percentage-point increase in the hazard rate. The parameters γa measure age effects (or equivalently

the baseline hazard), starting in the grant-year when a patent is first eligible for assertion. The

parameters λy are calendar year effects, and the vector of controls Xit includes Claims, Patent

References and Non-Patent References (which are all fixed at patent grant), as well as lagged

citations and a dummy for Reassignment, which indicates a change in patent ownership. Table 8

presents the results.

   We begin by focusing on the full sample of dSEPs, omitting all controls. The coefficient in

column (1) shows that the probability of first-lawsuit for a dSEP increases by 0.33 percentage

points following disclosure, controlling for age, and calendar-year time trends. In column (2)

we add time-invariant controls and find little change in the estimated impact of disclosure on

litigation. Columns (3) to (6) in Table 8 re-introduce the citation-matched control sample, and

use a difference-in-differences specification to examine the litigation rate of dSEPs before and after

disclosure relative to the controls. In column (3) we see that dSEPs are 0.22 percentage points

more likely to be litigated than the controls before disclosure, and that this rate increases by 0.23

percentage points following disclosure. In column (4), we see that the marginal impact of disclosure

on litigation is larger for firms that focus on licensing, as opposed to downstream implementation,

                                                    30
and is particularly large for the the small firms that are difficult to classify. Column (5) presents

some evidence in-line with priors regarding the role of licensing commitments. For patents disclosed

under a royalty-free licensing commitment, there is no change in litigation rates. Indeed, the point

estimate is negative. Patents disclosed under FRAND terms see a 0.24 percentage point increase

in the litigation hazard. This is similar to the estimate for patents disclosed with specific licensing

terms and conditions, although the small sample of specific patents leads to imprecise estimates.

Column (6) examines heterogeneity in the link between disclosure and litigation across SSO groups.

We find a large statistically significant correlation for ANSI, the Big-I organizations, and IEEE.

There is no evidence of a correlation between disclosure and litigation for ETSI and IETF. The

latter result is interesting because it suggests at least two different intervening mechanisms. At

ETSI, the absence of a relationship may be due to the specific disclosure policy encouraging many

“false positives” (i.e. disclosure of marginal patents), and efforts targeted at designing around. The

IETF, on the other hand, has a strong culture of favoring standards that are not IP-encumbered,

as evidenced by its large share of royalty-free licensing commitments.53

      The general finding that disclosure is correlated with litigation naturally raises the question of

whether this is evidence of actual or attempted patent holdup. If one is willing to assume that

disclosure is a reasonable proxy for the timing of standardization, an increase in litigation rates is

certainly consistent with the idea that declared essential patent holders are trying to capture some

of the value created by widespread implementation of a standard. However, we cannot observe

whether plaintiffs are seeking royalties that exceed the ex ante value of the patented technology,

or whether the settlements and remedies that emerge from these cases systematically exceed the

appropriate benchmark. Moreover, the large selection effects that we find in our cross-sectional and

difference-in-differences models suggest that many dSEPs would have a relatively high litigation

rate even if they were not incorporated into a standard, and we cannot disprove the claim that

time-varying unobserved factors may be driving both disclosures and litigation. Nevertheless, if

one considers SSO intellectual property policies through a contractual lens, our belief is that both

the high overall dispute rate and the positive correlation between disclosure and litigation tend
 53
      Appendix C, Table C-7 shows robustness to Cox and Logit specifications using the declared essential patents.




                                                         31
to undermine any presumption that these contracts are “optimally incomplete” as some observers

have suggested (e.g., Tsai and Wright, 2015).



6    Conclusion

SSOs adopt IP disclosure and licensing policies to promote widespread diffusion of standards that

may incorporate intellectual property rights. In the first part of our paper, we provide an overview of

disclosure policies, develop a formal model of the disclosure process, and describe a novel database

containing information on declared essential patents. In our data, the 6,723 declared essential

US patents score much higher than a set of “average” patents with similar age and technology

profiles on a variety of indicators of patent value and technical significance. We also show that

the difference between declared essential patents and their matched controls varies across SSOs,

licensing commitments and disclosure timing.

    In the second part of our paper, using a set of control patents that is matched to the dSEPs

based on their pre-disclosure citation patterns, we find evidence that disclosure and incorporation

into a standard increase both citation rates and the probability that a patent is asserted in litigation

in US courts. Exploring heterogeneity in these results uncovers a number of novel patterns. The

citation and litigation effects are smaller for two SSOs – ETSI and the IETF – and we argue

that this reflects the significant differences in their policies captured by our formal model. ETSI

has a mandatory specific disclosure policy that leads to specific disclosure of more patents that

individually have a lower probability of remaining technically essential. This leads to smaller

estimated disclosure effects. Conversely, at SSOs that allow for blanket disclosures, consistent with

the selection effects highlighted in our model, we estimate larger disclosure effects. At the IETF, we

see earlier disclosures, and a much higher number of royalty-free licensing commitments, and argue

that this reflects a culture of encouraging ex ante competition among alternative technologies during

the standardization process, leading to fewer citations when a disclosed patent is circumvented, and

lower litigation rates when it is available for free.

    The data also allow us to describe how changes in citation and litigation rates vary with the

terms of licensing commitments. Consistent with the prior theoretical literature on the topic, after

                                                   32
disclosure, litigation increases more for patents disclosed under FRAND terms than royalty free

terms, and more for patents that have no licensing commitment than for FRAND encumbered IP.

Interestingly, we see a large increase in self-citation to patents declared under royalty-free terms,

and future research might explore the idea that this reflects a strategic decision to offer essential

IP for free when a firm owns a large stock of proprietary complements.

   Our findings suggest several novel hypotheses and avenues for future research. First, we docu-

ment a substantial increase in dSEPs in recent years. Future research might examine the relative

contribution of various factors to this pattern. Second, a stylized fact that clearly emerges from

our analysis is the key role played by dSEPs in the information technology and communications

industries. Consistent with Rysman and Simcoe (2008), compared to an average patent with sim-

ilar observable characteristics, these patents score considerably higher on a range of metrics that

are correlated with value or importance. A key question for evaluating the relative role of different

institutional rules in supporting standardization, and the potential for patent hold-up, is whether

these differences were caused by inclusion in a standard, or reflect a selection effect whereby SSOs

and firms identify technologies that were already on their way to prominence (e.g. patents with

a high technical merit). By introducing data on licensing terms and improving on the matching

methods used in prior studies, our paper is a first step in this direction: Subtle differences in the

polices different SSOs rely on to elicit contributions and support collaboration can have a large

influence on the types of patents that are ultimately disclosed, on the terms they are disclosed at,

and on key economic outcomes.

   Factual essentiality is another topic that merits further investigation. Although our analysis

allows for the possibility that a declared essential patent is not truly essential, this is not something

we can observe. However, many observers (e.g. European Commission, 2017) have argued that

dSEPs should be subject to greater scrutiny on this dimension, and research on predictors of

essentiality may have substantial practical significance for licensing. Our hope is that by making

our data public we will encourage researchers in this space to further explore questions related to

the economics of standard setting and intellectual property strategy.




                                                   33
References
ANSI (2006): “ANSI Essential Requirements: Due process requirements for American National
 Standards,” http://www.ansi.org (accessed January 2009).

Baron, J., T. Pohlmann, and K. Blind (2016): “Essential Patents and Standard Dynamics,”
 Research Policy, 45(9), 1762–1773.

Bekkers, R., R. Bongard, and A. Nuvolari (2011): “An empirical study on the determinants
 of essential patent claims in compatibility standards,” Research Policy, 40(7), 1001–1015.

Bekkers, R., and A. Updegrove (2012): A study of IPR policies and practices of a repre-
 sentative group of Standards Setting Organizations worldwide. National Academies of Science,
 Washington, D.C.

Biddle, B. (2015):         “Five Reasons Why Patent Disclosure in                Standards-Setting
  Organizatiaons Doesn’t Work (and What To Do Instead),”                         Working Paper,
  https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract id=2669893.

Chabé-Ferret, S. (2016): “Bias of Causal Effect Estimators Using Pre-Policy Outcomes,” Work-
 ing Paper.

Condorcet, M. (1785): Essai sur l’application de l’analyse à la probabilité des décisions rendues
 à la pluralité des voix. Imprimerie Royale.

Dranove, D., and G. Jin (2010): “Quality Disclosure and Certification: Theory and Practice,”
 Journal of Economic Literature, 48(4), 935–963.

European Commission (2014): “Standard-essential Patents,” Competition Policy Brief, 8.

         (2017): “Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council
  and the European Economic and Social Committee: Setting out the EU approach to Standard
  Essential Patents,” Com(2017) 712 final, brussels, 29.11.2017.

Farrell, J., J. Hayes, C. Shapiro, and T. Sullivan (2007): “Standard Setting, Patents and
  Hold-Up,” Antitrust Law Journal, 74, 603–670.

Fung, A., M. Graham, and D. Weil (2007): Full Disclosure. Cambridge University Press.

Goodman, D., and R. Myers (2005): “3G Cellular Standards and Patents,” in 2005 International
 Conference on Wireless Networks, Communications and Mobile Computing, ed. by IEEE, pp.
 415–420.

Guimaraes, P., and P. Portugal (2010): “A Simple Feasible Alternative Procedure to Estimate
 Models with High-Dimensional Fixed Effects,” Stata Journal, 10(4), 628–649.

Kang, B., and R. Bekkers (2015): “Just-in-time patents and the development of standards,”
 Research Policy, 44(10), 1948–1961.

Kuhn, J. M., B. N. Roin, and N. C. Thompson (2016): “Causal Inference on Patent Protec-
 tion,” Working Paper.

                                                34
Layne-Farrar, A. (2014): “Assessing IPR Disclosure Within Standard Setting: An ICT Case
  Study,” in Modern Trends Surrounding Information Technology Standards and Standardization
  Within Organizations, ed. by K. Jacobs. IGI Global.

Lemley, M. (2002): “Intellectual Property Rights and Standard Setting Organizations,” California
  Law Review, 90, 1889–1981.

Lerner, J., H. Tabakovic, and J. Tirole (2016): “Patent Disclosures and Standard-Setting,”
  NBER Working Paper No. 22768.

Lerner, J., and J. Tirole (2006): “A Model of Forum Shopping,” American Economic Review,
  96(4), 1091–1113.

         (2015): “Standard-Essential Patents,” Journal of Political Economy, 123(3), 547–586.

Li, G.-C., R. Lai, A. D’Amour, D. M. Doolin, Y. Sun, V. I. Torvik, Z. Y. Amy, and
  L. Fleming (2014): “Disambiguation and co-authorship networks of the US patent inventor
  database (1975–2010),” Research Policy, 43(6), 941–955.

Lim, D. (2014): “Standard Essential Patents, Trolls and the Smartphone Wars: Triangulating the
  End Gmae,” Penn State Law Review, 119.

Majoras, D. (2005): “Recognizing the procompetitive potential of royalty discussions in
 standard setting,” in Standardization and the Law: Developing the Golden Mean for Global
 Trade.       https://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/documents/public statements/recognizing-
 procompetitive-potential-royalty-discussions-standard-setting/050923stanford.pdf    (accessed
 July 2017).

Marco, A. C., A. F. Myers, S. Graham, P. D’Agostino, and J. Kucab (2015): “The
 USPTO Patent Assignment Dataset: Descriptions, Lessons, and Insights,” Working Paper.

Priest, G. L., and B. H. Klein (1984): “The Selection of Disputes for Litigation,” Journal of
 Legal Studies, 13, 1–55.

Rysman, M., and T. Simcoe (2008): “Patents and the Performance of Voluntary Standard Setting
 Organizations,” Management Science, 54(11), 1920–1934.

Simcoe, T., S. Graham, and M. Feldman (2009): “Competing on Standards? Entrepreneur-
  ship, Intellectual Property and Platform Technologies,” Journal of Economics and Management
  Strategy, 18, 775–816.

Swanson, D., and W. Baumol (2005): “Reasonable and Nondiscriminatory (RAND) Royalties,
  Standards Selection, and Control of Market Power,” Antitrust Law Journal, 73(1), 1–58.

Tsai, J., and J. Wright (2015): “Standard Setting, Intellectual Property Rights, and the Role
 of Antitrust in Regulating Incomplete Contracts,” Antitrust Law Journal, 80(1), 157–183.

Van Audenrode, M., J. Royer, R. Stitzing, and P. Saaskilahti (2017): “Over-Declaration
 of Standard Essential Patents and Determinants of Essentiality,” Working Paper.



                                              35
Tables and Figures

                                Table 1: SSO Intellectual Property Policies




       (1) Includes JTC-1 activities. (2) For General IPR Licensing Declarations, ETSI allows the declarant to restrict its
       commitment only to IPRs contained in its own technical contributions. (3) These SSOs provide the option to make an
       explicit RF commitment, and the option to make a less restrictive FRAND commitment. (4) ETSI’s general licensing
       statement (known as “GL”) allows participants to commit to license any essential patents at FRAND terms, but does
       not indicate any belief that a participant actually owns essential patents, and does not replace the obligatory disclosure
       of specific patents. (5) If the patentee submits a refusal to license, a specific patent statement is “strongly desired” by
       ISO, IEC, CEN and CENELEC. (6) There is a requirement that the list of disclosed patents must include all essential
       patents for that standard. (7) There is an option to limit to standards-track IETF documents. (8) In the ANSI baseline
       policies, disclosures are not obligatory, but ANSI-accredited SSOs may include them in their procedures.




                                                                36
                                                 Table 2: Disclosure Summary Statistics

                    Total          Percent   Mean    Unique        Commitment Terms (Percent)            Disclosure Lag (Years)       SSO
     SSO         Declarations      Blanket   Size     IPR         FRAND Free Specific None               App-Disc Grant-Disc         Group

     ANSI             346             57      1.3      273           83       8        5        4           3.0         0.4            2
     ATIS             99              66      5.1      217           84       8        1        7           3.4         -0.1           6
     BBF              23              26       5.6      44           87       9        0        4           2.6         -1.8           2
     CEN               5              0        4.2      5           100       0        0        0           5.3         1.2            2
     CENELEC          11              73       0.4      4           100       0        0        0           5.3         3.0            2
     ETSI             699             10      39.2    3,839         100       0        0        0           5.5         2.0            3
     IEC              362             55       3.9     402           98       2        0        0           5.9         2.6            1
     IEEE             716             46       2.6     712           95       2        1        2           4.2         1.0            4
     IETF             821             57       2.7     694           57       37       0        6           3.5         -0.5           5
     ISO              519             64       2.3     341           96       3        0        1           7.5         4.4            1
     ITU              927             68       1.9     586           94       6        0        0           5.0         2.0            1
     OMA              100             0        9.2     295          100       0        0        0           5.4         2.0            6
     TIA              282             91       1.4      94           96       1        0        3           8.6         6.1            6




37
     Total           4,910            52      7.8     6,723          89       9        1        2           5.0         1.6
      Blanket declarations list no specific IPR (defined as a US or EPO patent or patent application number). Mean Size is the average number
      of specific IPR per non-blanket disclosure. “Free” licensing commitments include both royalty-free pledges and non-assertion covenants.
      Disclosure lag measure elapsed time between application/grant and formal declaration. SSO Group defines a set of related SSOs whose
      disclosed IPR is pooled in later regressions.
           Table 3: Disclosure Choice Models

Specification                                   OLS
Outcome                Royalty Free (%)                 Blanket (%)

                         (1)           (2)             (3)       (4)

Unclassified            -0.3            1.2            -0.8      -4.0
                        [1.2]          [1.1]           [2.1]     [2.1]
Upstream                 -6.3           -2.3            7.6       6.1
                       [1.0]**        [0.9]**         [2.0]**   [1.8]**
BIG-I                                  -2.6                      7.0
                                       [1.5]                    [2.9]*
ETSI                                    -6.7                     -46.1
                                      [1.4]**                   [3.0]**
IEEE                                    -4.6                      -9.6
                                      [1.5]**                   [3.2]**
IETF                                   30.0                       1.6
                                      [2.2]**                    [3.2]
Other                                   -4.0                     10.9
                                      [1.5]**                   [3.4]**
Disclosure Year FEs     Yes            Yes             Yes       Yes

Observations           4,731          4,731           4,731     4,731
R-squared              0.02           0.21             0.01      0.14
  Robust standard errors in brackets. *Significant at 5%; **sig-
  nificant at 1%. The omitted business model is “Downstream”
  and the omitted SSO is ANSI.




                                 38
     Table 4: dSEPs vs. Matched Control Patents

                             dSEP          Control   T-stat   Norm Diff

Forward citations            67.77          39.29    16.40      0.28
Percent litigated             7.20          1.76     15.40      0.27

Reassigned Dummy              0.30          0.28      3.13      0.05
Family Size                  13.09          4.47     33.98      0.59
Inventors (count)             2.76          2.44     10.93      0.19
Patent References            29.32          21.05     8.88      0.15
Non-patent References         9.30          4.63     11.80      0.20
Claims                       23.23          22.70     1.68      0.03
Application year              2000          1999      0.57      0.01
Issue year                    2003          2003      0.00      0.00

Observations                 6,723          6,723
 Controls are a randomly select 1-1 match to dSEPs based on
 patent type (regular utility or reissue utility), grant year, 3-digit
 US primary technology class, and number of claims. The nor-
 malized difference
            q       of sample means X1 and X2 is defined as
                1   2        2
 (X1 − X2 )/    2
                  (σX 1
                          + σX 2
                                 ).




                                      39
               Table 5: Cross-Section Comparison of dSEPs vs. Matched Control Patents

Outcome                               Forward Citations                             Percent Litigated
Specification                             Poisson                                         OLS
                              (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)

SEP Family                   0.13                                          3.42
                           [0.04]**                                      [0.52]**
Declared SEP                 0.55                                          5.56
                           [0.03]**                                      [0.43]**
Upstream                                0.60                                          6.54
                                      [0.05]**                                      [0.66]**
Unclassified                            0.77                                         15.60
                                      [0.08]**                                      [2.28]**
Downstream                              0.41                                          3.59
                                      [0.03]**                                      [0.40]**
Declared SEP * FRAND                               0.47                                          5.10
                                                 [0.03]**                                      [0.38]**
Declared SEP * Free                                0.67                                         -0.54
                                                 [0.09]**                                       [0.67]
Declared SEP * Terms                               0.56                                          6.89
                                                 [0.14]**                                       [4.44]
Declared SEP * None                                0.47                                          9.60
                                                 [0.17]**                                      [3.05]**
Declared SEP * ANSI                                             0.25                                        12.06
                                                              [0.11]*                                     [2.22]**
Declared SEP * Big-I                                            0.22                                        6.39
                                                              [0.10]*                                     [1.38]**
Declared SEP * ETSI                                             0.27                                        3.83
                                                              [0.10]**                                    [1.09]**
Declared SEP * IEEE                                             0.41                                        7.46
                                                              [0.10]**                                    [1.41]**
Declared SEP * IETF                                             0.61                                        2.58
                                                              [0.11]**                                    [1.28]*
Declared SEP * Other                                            0.93                                        8.61
                                                              [0.11]**                                    [1.76]**
Grant Year Effects           Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Patent Class Effects         Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Additional Controls          Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes

Observations                13,446     13,446    13,446       13,446     13,446     13,446     13,446     13,446
(Pseudo) R-squared           0.45       0.45      0.44         0.46       0.06       0.07       0.06       0.06
  Robust standard errors in brackets. *Significant at 5%; **significant at 1%. The omitted business-model category
  is a separate category for the control patents, whose owners we did not attempt to code. Additional Controls are
  log(Patent References), log(Non-patent References) and log(Claims).




                                                         40
                  Table 6: Citation Diff-in-Diffs


Specification                                     OLS
Outcome                                     Citationsit
Estimation               Random          Cite        Cite           Drop
Sample                    Match         Matched     Matched         ETSI
                            (1)            (2)            (3)        (4)

PostDisclosure            -0.13            0.34           0.17       0.65
                          [0.08]        [0.09]***       [0.06]**   [0.10]**
Declared Essential          1.33          0.07
                         [0.09]***       [0.10]

Patent Fixed Effects       No             No              Yes        Yes
Age-Year Effects           Yes            Yes             Yes        Yes

E[Citationsit ]            2.34           2.81           2.81       3.03
Observations             167,461        160,279         160,279    74,728
Patents                  13,384         12,200          12,200     5,604
R-squared                 0.08            0.06            0.60      0.60
  Robust standard errors (clustered on patent) in brackets. *Signif-
  icant at 5%; **significant at 1%.




                                   41
                Table 7: Citation Diff-in-Diffs: Heterogeneous Effects


Specification                                                     OLS
Outcome                                Citationsit                                 SelfCitationsit

Estimation                   Cite        Drop           Cite             Cite          Drop       Cite
Sample                      Matched      ETSI          Matched          Matched        ETSI      Matched
                              (1)          (2)           (3)              (4)            (5)           (6)

PostDisclosure * FRAND        0.17        0.70                            0.07          0.06
                            [0.06]**    [0.11]**                        [0.02]**      [0.02]**
PostDisclosure * FREE         0.20        0.20                            0.27          0.26
                             [0.18]      [0.19]                         [0.07]**      [0.07]**
PostDisclosure * TERMS        0.58        0.68                            0.01          0.05
                             [0.53]      [0.51]                          [0.13]        [0.13]
PostDisclosure * None         0.25        0.20                            0.06          0.06
                             [0.66]      [0.67]                          [0.03]        [0.03]
PostDisclosure * ANSI                                    1.29                                          0.13
                                                       [0.35]**                                      [0.06]*
PostDisclosure * Big-I                                   0.55                                          0.03
                                                       [0.13]**                                       [0.02]
PostDisclosure * ETSI                                    -0.25                                         0.07
                                                       [0.07]**                                      [0.03]*
PostDisclosure * IEEE                                    0.40                                          0.09
                                                       [0.15]**                                      [0.04]*
PostDisclosure * IETF                                    0.33                                          0.17
                                                        [0.20]                                       [0.05]**
PostDisclosure * Other                                   1.99                                          0.06
                                                       [0.31]**                                       [0.04]
Patent Fixed Effects          Yes         Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes
Age-Year Effects              Yes         Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes

E[Yit ]                       2.81        3.03          2.81             0.27           0.34          0.27
Observations                160,279      74,728        160,279          160,279        74,728        160,279
Patents                     12,200       5,604          12,200           12,200         5,604         12,200
R-squared                    0.60         0.60           0.60             0.47          0.45           0.47
  Robust standard errors (clustered on patent) in brackets. *Significant at 5%; **significant at
  1%.




                                                  42
                            Table 8: Litigation Hazard Models

Specification                                      Linear Probability (OLS)
Outcome                                            100 x Litigation Indicator
Estimation                 Declared    Declared         Cite        Cite         Cite       Cite
Sample                      SEP         SEP            Matched     Matched      Matched    Matched
                              (1)         (2)             (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)

PostDisclosure               0.33        0.30            0.23
                           [0.10]**    [0.10]**        [0.06]**
Declared Essential                                       0.22        0.17         0.17       0.17
                                                       [0.04]**    [0.04]**     [0.04]**   [0.04]**
PostDisc * Upstream                                                  0.31
                                                                   [0.09]**
PostDisc * Unclassified                                              1.09
                                                                   [0.26]**
PostDisc * Downstream                                                0.13
                                                                    [0.06]*
PostDisc * FRAND                                                                  0.24
                                                                                [0.06]**
PostDisc * FREE                                                                  -0.18
                                                                                 [0.13]
PostDisc * Terms                                                                  0.47
                                                                                 [0.37]
PostDisc * None                                                                   0.59
                                                                                 [0.40]
PostDisc * ANSI                                                                              0.87
                                                                                           [0.23]**
PostDisc * Big-I                                                                             0.46
                                                                                           [0.12]**
PostDisc * ETSI                                                                              0.08
                                                                                            [0.06]
PostDisc * IEEE                                                                              0.31
                                                                                           [0.12]**
PostDisc * IETF                                                                             -0.00
                                                                                            [0.12]
PostDisc * Other                                                                             0.32
                                                                                            [0.17]
Age Effects                   Y           Y               Y           Y            Y          Y
Year Effects                  Y           Y               Y           Y            Y          Y
Other Controls                N           Y               N           Y            Y          Y

Observations                70,732      70,732         156,757     156,715      156,715    156,715
Patents                      6,691      6,691           12,196      12,194       12,194     12,194
Lawsuits                      467        467             507         507          507        507
  Robust standard errors (clustered on patent) in brackets. *Significant at 5%; **significant at 1%.
  Patents are dropped from the panel after first litigation event. Other Controls are log(Patent
  References), log(Non-patent References) and log(Claims). Outcome equals 100 in litigation year,
  so coefficients are the average percentage point increase in patent-year probability of a lawsuit.




                                                  43
                                       Figure 2: Citations for dSEPs and Matched Controls




                       6
                       5
            Predicted Citations
               3       2
                       1 4




                                  -5           0              5             10             15          20
                                                       Patent Age (Year - Grant year)

                                                   Declared Essential             Matched Control
                     10       8
            Predicted Citations
            4        6
                     2




                                  -5          0               5             10             15          20
                                                       Patent Age (Year - Grant year)

                                          Controls            ANSI             Big-I                ETSI
                                          IEEE                IETF             US Telcom


Top panel shows mean citation rate conditional on age for all dSEPs and matched controls. Bottom panel shows
separates the citation rate by SSO.



                                                                 44
                                                          Figure 3: Disclosure Event Studies


                                                  All SSOs                                       ETSI Omitted
                            2




                                                                                 2
    Patent Effects
                     Coefficient βk
                               1




                                                                                 1
                       0




                                                                                 0
                            -1




                                                                                 -1


                                      -10    -5       0        5       10             -10   -5         0          5    10
                            2




                                                                                 2
    No Patent FEs
                     Coefficient βk
                                1




                                                                                 1
                       0




                                                                                 0
                            -1




                                                                                 -1




                                      -10    -5        0        5      10             -10   -5          0          5   10
                                            Years to IPR Disclosure                          Years to IPR Disclosure


Each panel graphs coefficients (βk ) from the event-study difference in difference specification described in the text
(see equation 4), for a sample that includes SSO and citation-matched control patents. Specification for the top row
includes patent fixed effects, while bottom does not. Estimation sample for left column includes all SSOs, while
right column excludes ETSI patents and their matched controls.




                                                                            45
                                                            Figure 4: Litigation for dSEPs and Matched Controls
                                                 0.15
             Cumulative Litigation Probability
                                                 0.10
                                                 0.05
                                                 0.00




                                                        0               5               10               15            20
                                                                                 Years Since Grant

                                                                       Declared Essential            Matched Control


Figure shows the cumulative litigation hazard (beginning at grant-year) for dSEPs and citation-matched controls.




                                                                                     46
Appendix A: The Declared Essential Patent (dSEP) Database
The dSEP data were collected from the publicly available archives of thirteen major SSOs as
of March 2011. The intellectual property policies of these 13 SSOs are summarized in Table 1.
The data were then cleaned, harmonized, and all disclosed USPTO or EPO patents or patent
applications matched against patent identities in the PATSTAT database. The resulting data set
is available for download at www.ssopatents.org and anyone is free to use the data, provided
that any resulting publication includes a citation to this paper.54 The remainder of this appendix
provides summary information and variable definitions for the dSEP database.

Database Overview
The dSEP database consists of a “Disclosures” table and a “Patents” table. The Disclosures table
contains 45,349 records, where each record refers to a single patent, patent application or blanket
disclosure statement made to a specific SSO on a specific date for a specific standard. The number
of records in the dSEP Disclosure table is greater than the number of statements submitted to a
single SSO by a single firm on a given date – what we call “declarations” in the paper – because each
declaration may include multiple patents and/or blankets, referring to one or more standards.55
The “Patent” table contains 6,900 records, where each record links a declared essential USPTO or
EPO patent in our data set to the unique patent application identifier in the April 2014 release
of the EPO’s PATSTAT database. Variable names and definitions for both of the dSEP database
tables are provided in Tables A-1 and A-2.

Firm Names and Business Models
We cleaned and standardized the names of all individuals and organizations making any declaration
in the dSEP dataset. The vast majority of declarations come from companies, and the name of the
declaring company is typically (though not always) the owner of the declared IP. However, because
patent rights are bought and sold over time, the declaring company may or may not be the same
as the original assignee listed on a declared essential patent or the patent owner in a lawsuit where
a dSEP is asserted. Tables A-3 and A-4 list the organizations that made the most declarations for
the entire dSEP data set and by SSO respectively.
    We also attempted to classify the business model of any organization that made five or more
declarations in the dSEP database. The classification is based on the authors own understanding of
relevant markets and industries as of 2016. Although we believe that it provides a useful depiction
of the information technology sector value chain, we have not checked our proposed categoriza-
tion against any third-party industry categorization, such as NAICs codes. The categories in our
classification scheme, along with examples and summary statistics are provided in Table A-5.




  54
     Although we took the greatest care in compiling the data, the authors cannot be held legally responsible for any
error or inaccuracy.
  55
     While some SSO archives are organized around disclosure events and others are not, our disclosure events are
constructed from the data in a uniform way.


                                                         47
                     Table A-1: Variable Definitions for the dSEP Disclosures Table

Variable                   Description

RECORD IDENTIFIER          Unique ID for a firm-SSO-date-IPR, where an “IPR” may be a patent, patent application or
                           blanket statement.
DISCLOSURE EVENT           Unique ID for a firm-SSO-date. Disclosure events can refer more than one standard.
SSO                        Name of Standard setting organization.
PATENT OWNER (HAR-         Cleaned and harmonised name of disclosing organization (may differ from owner for third-
MONIZED)                   party disclosures). Accounts for different spellings, but not changes in ownership.
PATENT OWNER        (UN-   Name of the disclosing organization as it appears in the original disclosure.
HARMONIZED)

DATEYR/MONTH/DAY           Year/Month/Day of that formal disclosure was submitted to SSO.
STANDARD                   Name of the standard (if provided in the original disclosure).
COMMITTEE PROJECT          Name of the committee for disclosed IPR (if provided).
TC/SC/WG name              Name of Technical Committee, Standardization Committee or Working Group (if provided).
BLANKET TYPE               Indicates scope of blanket disclosures: (0) No blanket, (1) Blanket for all SDO activities,
                           (2) Blanket for a project, committee, subcommitee or technical committee, (3) Blanket for a
                           specific standard or technical specification.
BLANKET SCOPE              Name of the project, subproject, standard or technical specification that a blanket refers to
                           (requires that BLANKET TYPE have the value 2 or 3).
LICENSING   COMMIT-        Licensing commitment with respect to the disclosed patents
MENT
RECIPROCITY                Indicates that licensing commitment is offered conditional on licensee reciprocity (this condi-
                           tion may be automatically implied for some SSOs).
THIRD PARTY                Indicates that disclosure was made by a third party.
COPYRIGHT                  Indicates that disclosed IPR is a copyright instead of a patent.
PATENT OFFICE              Patent office of the disclosed patent: US(PTO), EP(O), OR “OTHER”
FOR OTHER COUNTRIES        Name of Country when PATENT OFFICE equals “OTHER”
SERIAL CLEANED             Standardized serial number of US or EP patent application that was provided in
                           the original disclosure (if any).   To translate some serial numbers, we relied on
                           http://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/ac/ido/oeip/taf/filingyr.htm
PUB CLEANED                Standardized publication of US or EP patent that was provided in the original disclosure (if
                           any).
TYPE                       Type of patent information matched to PATSTAT: USPTO serial number, EPO serial number,
                           USPTO publication number or EPO publication number.
MANUAL REMOVAL             Indicates that publication or serial number was cleaned and formatted, but found to refer to
                           a wrong patent in PATSTAT and thus removed.
PATSTAT 2014APRIL          Link to PATSTAT unique patent application ID (appln id).
 APPLN ID




                                                   48
                          Table A-2: Variable Definitions for the dSEP Patents Table

Variable                     Description

appln id                     Inique patent application ID (links to PATSTAT).
appln auth                   Patent office (US or EP).
appln nr                     Application number at the patent office.
appln title                  Title of the patent application
appln filing date            Application filing date.
appln nr epodoc              Harmonized number from PATSTAT that allows the application to be linked to other
                             databases, such as the free EPO Espacenet web interface.
inpadoc family id            Unique ID for the INPADOC family of the disclosed patent application. INPADOC families
                             group national and international patents sharing at least one priority document.
docdb family id              Unique ID for the DOCDB family of the disclosed patent application. DOCDB families group
                             national and international patents having precisely the same set of priority documents.
associated publications      All publications associated with this patent application as present in PATSTAT. In general,
                             the codes ’A’, B1’, ’B2’ refer to granted patents, whereas ’A1’, ’A2’ refer to published patent
                             applications. See the national patent office documentation for more details.


                               Table A-3: Declaration Count by Firm

                             Company                    Disclosures   Cum. Pct.

                             Nokia                           283         5.76
                             Nortel Networks                 235        10.55
                             Qualcomm                        233        15.30
                             Cisco Systems                   228        19.94
                             Ericsson                        148        22.95
                             Motorola                        122        25.44
                             Siemens                         115        27.78
                             AT&T                            101        29.84
                             Huawei Technologies              89        31.65
                             IBM                              81        33.30
                             Alcatel                          66        34.64
                             France Telecom                   65        35.97
                             Microsoft                        65        37.29
                             Philips                          63        38.57
                             Alcatel Lucent                   53        39.65

                             Total∗                          4,910      100.00
                               Each declaration is a unique Company-Date-
                               SSO pair. The dSEP dataset contains decla-
                               rations from 926 distinct entities.


                                                        49
            Table A-4: Declarations by SSO Group

                  ANSI                       ISO/IEC/ITU
 1.   IBM                      23     Nokia                   70
 2.   Nortel Networks          22     Siemens                 52
 3.   AT&T                     19     Qualcomm                42
 4.   Qualcomm                 18     France Telecom          34
 5.   Hewlett Packard          9      Nortel Networks         32
 6.   Cisco Systems             9     Fujitsu                 31
 7.   Alcatel Lucent            9     Ericsson                29
 8.   McDATA Corp               7     NTT                     29
 9.   Motorola                  7     Philips                 27
10.   Ericsson                  6     Motorola                27
      Unique firms: 186        385    Unique firms: 487     1,808

                  ETSI                           IEEE
 1.   Nokia                    70     Cisco Systems           38
 2.   Qualcomm                 54     Nortel Networks         35
 3.   Siemens                  43     Nokia                   34
 4.   Motorola                 38     Motorola                18
 5.   Nokia Siemens Networks   30     Broadcom                17
 6.   Ericsson                 25     IBM                     15
 7.   Alcatel                  24     Philips                 15
 8.   Huawei Technologies      19     Qualcomm                14
 9.   Samsung Electronics      19     AT&T                    13
10.   Nortel Networks          18     Huawei Technologies     13
      Unique firms: 145        699    Unique firms: 248      716

                  IETF                      ATIS/TIA/OMA
1.    Cisco Systems            147    Nortel Networks         87
2.    Nokia                    71     Qualcomm                81
3.    Ericsson                 53     Nokia                   34
4.    Nortel Networks           41    Ericsson                25
5.    Huawei Technologies      33     Motorola                19
6.    Microsoft                31     AT&T                    16
7.    Qualcomm                  24    Siemens                  8
8.    AT&T                     21     NEC                      8
9.    Certicom                 19     Cisco Systems            7
10.   Alcatel Lucent           18     Philips                  7
      Unique firms: 139        821    Unique firms: 119      481
 Each declaration is a unique Company-Date-SSO pair. Data from 1985
 to 2011.




                               50
                          Table A-5: Business Model Categories

                                                        Claimants   Declarations    Patents
Business Model            Examples           Category   (Percent)    (Percent)     (Percent)

Pure upstream R&D,        Dolby, DTS,             U        2.7          3.0           9.8
patent holding            InterDigital
Universities, public      Columbia Univ.,         U        2.6          2.8           0.5
research institutes       Fraunhofer Inst.
Components (incl.         Qualcomm, Intel         U        6.6          11.5         18.2
semiconductors)           Harting
Individual Patent owner                           U        0.7          0.3           0.1


Software and s/w-         Microsoft, Sun,         D        3.1          5.4           4.9
based services            Oracle
Product & equipment,      Ericsson, Nokia,        D       15.1          50.2         55.9
suppliers, integrators    Dell, HP
Service providers         Vodafone, BBC,          D        3.0          8.5           5.4
(telecom, radio, etc.)    Comcast
SSO, consortia,           Konnex Assoc.,          D        0.3          0.2           0.1
technology promoters      ETSI
Instruments, testing      Tektronix, Rhode        D        2.0          1.8           0.8
and Measurement           & Schwarz

Too small or diverse                          O         63.8        16.3              4.4
to classify
  Category abbreviations: U = Upstream; D = Downstream; O = Other/unclassified.




                                             51
Appendix B: Mathematical Appendix
Derivation of Equation (1)
Given the Nash bargaining outcomes at t = 2, expected royalties under specific and blanket disclo-
sure are:
                                                v1
     E[r(v1 , v2 , e)|Specific] = (1 − σ)[(1 − ρ)  + ρ(δE[r(v1 , 0)] + (1 − δ)E[r(v1 , 1)])]
                                                 2
                                                       v1
     E[r(v1 , v2 , e)|Blanket] = (1 − σ)(1 − γ)[(1 − ρ) + ρ(δθE[r(v1 , 0)] + (1 − δθ)E[r(v1 , 1)])
                                                       2
Taking the difference and simplifying, we have that E[r|Specific] > E[r|Blanket] if and only if
                 n       v1               o
               γ (1 − ρ) + ρE[r(v1 , 1)] ≥ ρδ(1 − θ(1 − γ))E[r(v1 , 1) − r(v1 , 0)]
                          2

Specific Disclosure increases with v1
Recall that v2 has cumulative distribution
                                     R∞          F (x). Using the Nash bargaining outcomes,
                                                                                         R∞        we can
write E[r(v1 , 1)] = v21 F (v1 + c) + v1 +c (x − c)dF (x) and E[r(v1 , 1) − r(v1 , 0)] = c (x − c)dF (x).
Plugging these expressions into (1) yields:
                                   Z ∞                                        Z ∞
           v1
 γ (1 − ρ) + ρ v1 F (v1 + c) +              (x − c)dF (x)    > ρδ(1 − θ(1 − γ))        (x − c)dF (x) (A-1)
            2                         v1 +c                                         c

Differentiating with respect to v1 reveals that the left side of this inequality is increasing in v1 , while
the right side is constant. Thus, increasing v1 leads to a greater probability of specific disclosure.

Derivation of Equation (2)
Recall that G and G are the probabilities that the SSO selects the firm’s technology under a FRAND
and royalty-free commitment respectively. The firm’s expected profits are therefore:

                   E[π|FRAND] = σG(v1 + b) + σ(1 − G)vb2 + (1 − σ)Gr(v1 , vb2 , 0)
                       E[π|Free] = σG(v1 + b) + σ(1 − G)vb2

and taking the difference shows that E[π|Free] > E[π|FRAND] if and only if σ(G−G)(v1 − vb2 +b) >
(1 − σ)Gr(v1 , vb2 , 0).

FRAND vs. Royalty-Free with Complete Information
The SSO will always choose the substitute technology when v2 > v1 , so the firm will offer a royalty-
free commitment only if it has a superior technology, but the SSO would choose the substitute under
FRAND. Because the firm cannot commit to a non-zero price cap at t = 1, the SSO selects the
substitute technology whenever the firm makes a FRAND commitment and v2 > v1 − r(v1 , v2 , 0).
Recall that when the firm has a commercially essential patent, it can charge ex post royalties
r(v1 , v2 , 0) = 21 (v1 − max{v2 − c, 0}) before the SSO will switch.




                                                    52
    In the case where, v2 < c, so r = v21 , the firm will offer a royalty-free commitment if v21 < v2 .
In the case where, v2 < c, so r = 12 (v1 − v2 + c), the firm will offer a royalty-free commitment if
v1 − c < v2 .
    Note that in this complete information setting, the use of a royalty-free commitment is entirely
driven by commitment and contracting problems. In particular, the firm would prefer to commit
to some FRAND price rF ≤ v1 − v2 but cannot do so.

Existence of σ
             b(v1 , b)
We mean to show that there is a critical value σ       b(v1 , b) such that the probability of a FRAND
commitment is increasing in c for all σ < σ    b and decreasing in c for all σ > σ b.
    To begin, let M represent the cdf of ε, and note that G = M (v1 − v2 − r(c)). Next note that
only two terms in equation (2) depend upon r(c). So, differentiating both sides of the inequality
(and ignoring the case where v2 < c, so there is no change in any term), we have dr           1
                                                                                         dc = 2 on the left
              σ Gm
side, and 12 1−σ G M (v1 − v2 + b) on the right side. The critical value σ b(v1 , b) equates the two sides.
When σ > σ   b(v1 , b) increasing c leads a to a greater chance of royalty-free licensing, and conversely,
when σ < σ  b(v1 , b) increasing c leads the firm to favor FRAND over royalty-free.




                                                    53
Appendix C: Supplemental Tables and Figures

                                Figure C-1: Two Disclosure Timing Scenarios


                                      Patent         Applica%on        Patent
                         Inven%on
     Paten%ng                       applica%on        published        grant
     process                1          2                3                 4


                                                                                        Inven%on           Approval of dra<            Approval of
     Standardiza%on                                                                  submi8ed to SSO          standard                ﬁnal standard
     process                                                                                5                 6                                7



                                                                                            8                            9
     Patent disclosure
     process                                                                                                         Formal
                                                                                         Mee%ng                    declara%on
                                                                                        disclosure

                         Scenario A: patent granted before inven3on is proposed for inclusion in standard



                                                               Patent                            Applica%on                             Patent
                                                 Inven%on                                         published                             grant
     Paten%ng                                                applica%on
     process                                        1               2                                  3                                   4


                                                                Inven%on               Approval of                  Approval of
     Standardiza%on                                          submi8ed to SSO          dra< standard                ﬁnal standard
     process                                                       5                    6                                7



                                                                   8                                                              9
     Patent disclosure
     process                                                       Mee%ng                                                      Formal
                                                                  disclosure                                                 declara%on

                         Scenario B: inven3on is proposed for inclusion in standard while patent applica3on is s3ll in prosecu3on phase



                                        Not public                      Usually known to par3cipants only                Public




                                                                       54
                       Figure C-2: Declarations and Declared IPR Counts: 1985 to 2010




                                                                                                                          8000
                         500
                         400




                                                                                                                          6000
Declarations (Count)

                         300




                                                                                                                          IPRs (Count)
                                                                                                                             4000
                         200




                                                                                                                          2000
                         100
                         0




                                                                                                                          0
                                  1985          1990                1995              2000             2005        2010

                                                            Declarations                         Specific IPRs




                                                     Figure C-3: Disclosure Timing


                                        Application Year <= 2000                                Application Year > 2000
                           15




                                                                                 20
      App-to-Disc




                                                                                 15
                            10
                       Percent




                                                                                 10
                       5




                                                                                 5
                           0




                                                                                 0




                                   -5      0    5      10      15     20                    0              5           10
                           15




                                                                                 20
      Grant-to-Disc




                                                                                 15
                             10
                       Percent




                                                                                 10
                           5




                                                                                 5
                           0




                                                                                 0




                                   -5      0    5        10     15     20             -10         -5       0       5             10
                                                    Years                                                Years




                                                                            55
        Table C-1: Disclosure Logit Marginal Effects

Outcome                1[Royalty Free]               1[Blanket]
Specification              Logit                       Logit
                        (1)            (2)         (3)        (4)

Unclassified          -0.002           0.015     -0.008      -0.042
                      [0.011]         [0.010]    [0.021]     [0.022]
Upstream               -0.051       -0.021        0.076       0.072
                     [0.008]**    [0.008]**     [0.020]**   [0.022]**
BIG-I                                 -0.021                 0.071
                                      [0.013]               [0.029]*
ETSI                                                          -0.459
                                                            [0.029]**
IEEE                                -0.038                    -0.097
                                  [0.013]**                 [0.033]**
IETF                                0.285                     0.017
                                  [0.024]**                  [0.033]
OTHTEL                             -0.036                     0.110
                                  [0.014]*                  [0.035]**
Disc. Year Effects     Yes             Yes        Yes         Yes

Observations          4,731           4,033      4,731       4,731
Pseudo R-squared       0.05            0.25       0.01        0.11
  Robust standard errors in brackets. *Significant at 5%; **sig-
  nificant at 1%. The omitted business model category is “Down-
  stream” and the omitted SSO is ANSI.




                                 56
Table C-2: dSEPs vs. Family-Size Matched Controls

                          Control       dSEP     T-stat   Norm Diff

Forward citations          40.38        64.08    13.06      0.24
Percent litigated           2.11         6.78    12.35      0.23
Reassigned Dummy            0.26         0.31     6.50      0.12
Family Size                 8.76        10.72     6.35      0.12
Family Size (1 year)        7.34         7.50     0.74      0.01
Inventors (count)           2.53         2.76     7.06      0.13
Patent References          24.50        29.38     4.67      0.09
Non-patent References       6.06         9.28     7.04      0.13
Claims                     22.64        23.00     1.09      0.02
Application year            2000        2000      0.27      0.00
Issue year                  2003        2003      0.00      0.00

Observations               5,872        5,872
 Controls are a randomly selected 1-1 match to dSEPs based on
 patent type (regular utility or reissue utility), grant year, 3-digit
 US primary technology class, number of claims and size of
 DOCDB patent family one year after first priority date.
 Normalized difference qof sample means defined as X1 and X2 is
                           1   2        2
 defined as (X1 − X2 )/    2
                             (σX 1
                                     + σX 2
                                            ).




                                57
          Table C-3: Family-Matched OLS Cross-Section

Specification                                        OLS
Outcome                       Forward citations            Percent Litigated

                               (1)           (2)             (3)        (4)

SSO*Downstream                18.68                          3.43
                             [1.75]**                      [0.41]**
SSO*Unclassified              67.45                          15.63
                            [10.60]**                      [2.25]**
SSO*Upstream                   29.64                         6.21
                             [3.35]**                      [0.68]**

SSO*FRAND                                   25.68                       5.00
                                          [1.69]**                    [0.38]**
SSO*FREE                                   25.94                       -0.55
                                          [4.30]**                     [0.67]
SSO*TERMS                                   36.87                       7.43
                                          [13.63]**                    [4.42]
SSO*None                                    24.90                       9.65
                                          [10.89]*                    [3.05]**

Business Model Effects         Yes          No               Yes        No
Commitment Type Effects        No           Yes              No         Yes
Grant Year Effects             Yes          Yes              Yes        Yes
Tech Class Effects             Yes          Yes              Yes        Yes
Other Controls                 Yes          Yes              Yes        Yes

Observations                  13,446       13,446          13,446     13,446
R-squared                      0.22         0.21            0.06       0.06
  Robust standard errors in brackets. *Significant at 5%; **significant at
  1%. Other Controls are log(Patent References), log(Non-patent Refer-
  ences) and log(Claims).




                                     58
  Table C-4: Matched Sample Poisson and Logit Cross-Section

Specification                         Poisson                Logit (Marginal Effects)
Outcome                       Forward citations                   Percent Litigated

                                (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)

SSO*Downstream                 0.37                            0.04
                             [0.03]**                        [0.00]**
SSO*Unclassified               0.71                            0.11
                             [0.08]**                        [0.02]**
SSO*Upstream                   0.54                            0.07
                             [0.05]**                        [0.01]**

SSO*FRAND                                   0.49                             0.05
                                          [0.03]**                         [0.00]**
SSO*FREE                                    0.70                             -0.00
                                          [0.08]**                           [0.01]
SSO*TERMS                                   0.51                              0.07
                                          [0.14]**                          [0.03]*
SSO*None                                        0.41                          0.07
                                              [0.17]*                       [0.03]*

Business Model Effects         Yes             No                Yes          No
Commitment Type Effects        No              Yes               No           Yes
Grant Year Effects             Yes             Yes               Yes          Yes
Other Controls                 Yes             Yes               Yes          Yes

Observations                  13,446          13,446         13,244         13,244
  Robust standard errors in brackets. *Significant at 5%; **significant at 1%.
  Other Controls are log(Patent References), log(Non-patent References) and
  log(Claims).

                Table C-5: Citation Diff-in-Diffs Poisson


      Outcome                                      Citationsit
      Specification                                    Poisson
      Estimation             Random            Cite          Cite         Drop
      Sample                  Match           Matched       Matched       ETSI
                                (1)              (2)             (3)       (4)

      PostDisclosure           -0.02            0.12          0.08        0.19
                               [0.04]         [0.03]**      [0.02]**    [0.03]**
      Declared Essential        0.56             0.02
                              [0.04]**          [0.03]

      Patent Fixed Effects      No               No              Yes      Yes
      Age-Year Effects          Yes              Yes             Yes      Yes

      Observations            167,461         160,279       154,716      74,728
      Patents                  13,384          12,200       11,647        5,402
        Robust standard errors (clustered on patent) in brackets. *Signif-
        icant at 5%; **significant at 1%.


                                         59
                         Table C-6: Citation Diff-in-Diffs Poisson

Specification                                                     Poisson
Outcome                                 Citationsit                                  SelfCitationsit

Estimation                   Cite         Drop           Cite            Cite            Drop       Cite
Sample                      Matched       ETSI          Matched         Matched          ETSI      Matched
                               (1)          (2)           (3)                (4)           (5)           (6)

PostDisclosure * FRAND         0.07        0.21                           0.33            0.21
                             [0.02]**    [0.03]**                       [0.06]**         [0.08]*
PostDisclosure * FREE          0.06        0.04                           0.78            0.74
                              [0.06]      [0.07]                        [0.14]**        [0.14]**
PostDisclosure * TERMS         0.21        0.18                             -0.08         0.03
                              [0.13]      [0.13]                            [0.20]       [0.22]
PostDisclosure * None          0.09        0.03                              0.19         0.19
                              [0.18]      [0.19]                            [0.22]       [0.23]
PostDisclosure * ANSI                                     0.44                                           0.58
                                                        [0.10]**                                       [0.21]**
PostDisclosure * Big-I                                    0.27                                          -0.12
                                                        [0.05]**                                        [0.11]
PostDisclosure * ETSI                                     -0.08                                          0.38
                                                        [0.03]**                                       [0.07]**
PostDisclosure * IEEE                                     0.13                                           0.28
                                                        [0.05]*                                        [0.13]*
PostDisclosure * IETF                                     0.08                                           0.54
                                                         [0.06]                                        [0.10]**
PostDisclosure * Other                                    0.36                                           0.16
                                                        [0.05]**                                        [0.14]
Patent Fixed Effects           Yes         Yes            Yes                Yes          Yes            Yes
Age-Year Effects               Yes         Yes            Yes                Yes          Yes            Yes

Observations                 150,502      70,287        150,502             81,636       36,155        81,636
Patents                      11,045       5,079          11,045              5,764        2,580         5,764
  Robust standard errors (clustered on patent) in brackets. *Significant at 5%; **significant at
  1%.




                                                   60
         Table C-7: Litigation Hazard Cox and Logit Models

Outcome                                     Litigation Indicator
Sample                                 Declared Essential Patents
Specification               Cox         Logit       Logit      Logit      Logit
                            (1)            (2)       (3)           (4)     (5)

PostDisclosure              0.30         0.38
                           [0.14]*     [0.14]**
PostDisc * Upstream                                  0.49
                                                   [0.17]**
PostDisc * Unclassified                              0.21
                                                    [0.14]
PostDisc * Downstream                                1.03
                                                   [0.20]**
PostDisc * FRAND                                                0.37
                                                              [0.14]**
PostDisc * FREE                                                -0.99
                                                               [0.60]
PostDisc * Terms                                                0.54
                                                               [0.42]
PostDisc * None                                                 1.01
                                                              [0.31]**
PostDisc * ANSI                                                            0.73
                                                                         [0.22]**
PostDisc * Big-I                                                           0.47
                                                                         [0.17]**
PostDisc * ETSI                                                            0.10
                                                                          [0.15]
PostDisc * IEEE                                                            0.51
                                                                         [0.18]**
PostDisc * IETF                                                            0.10
                                                                          [0.26]
PostDisc * Other                                                           0.56
                                                                         [0.21]**
Age Effects                  na            Y          Y            Y        Y
Year Effects                 Y             Y          Y            Y        Y
Other Controls               Y             Y          Y            Y        Y

Observations               64,041       70,106     70,106     70,106     70,106
Patents                    6,659         6,691      6,691      6,691      6,691
Lawsuits                    435           467        467        467        467
  Robust standard errors (clustered on patent) in brackets. + Significant at 10%;
  *Significant at 5%; **significant at 1%. Other Controls are log(Patent Refer-
  ences), log(Non-patent References) and log(Claims).




                                      61
