                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      IS IT WHO YOU ARE OR WHERE YOU LIVE? RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION
                  AND RACIAL GAPS IN CHILDHOOD ASTHMA

                                       Diane Alexander
                                         Janet Currie

                                      Working Paper 23622
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23622


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2017




We thank the staff at the New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services for their
assistance in accessing the data used in this paper, and the Center for Health and Wellbeing for
financial support. We are grateful to Sharada Dharmasankar, who provided excellent research
assistance. All views expressed are those of the authors and cannot be attributed to the Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal Reserve System, the New Jersey Dept. of Health and
Senior Services, any of its employees, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Diane Alexander and Janet Currie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Is It Who You Are or Where You Live? Residential Segregation and Racial Gaps in Childhood
Asthma
Diane Alexander and Janet Currie
NBER Working Paper No. 23622
July 2017
JEL No. I14,R23

                                           ABSTRACT

Higher asthma rates are one of the more obvious ways that health inequalities between African
American and other children are manifested beginning in early childhood. In 2010, black asthma
rates were double non-black rates. Some but not all of this difference can be explained by factors
such as a higher incidence of low birth weight (LBW) among blacks; however, even conditional
on LBW, blacks have a higher incidence of asthma than others. Using a unique data set based on
the health records of all children born in New Jersey between 2006 and 2010, we show that when
we split the data by whether or not children live in a “black” zip code, this racial difference in the
incidence of asthma among LBW children entirely disappears. All LBW children in these zip
codes, regardless of race, have a higher incidence of asthma. Our results point to the importance
of residential segregation and neighborhoods in explaining persistent racial health disparities.


Diane Alexander
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
11th floor
230 S. LaSalle St.
Chicago, IL 60604
dalexander@frbchi.org

Janet Currie
Department of Economics
Center for Health and Wellbeing
185A Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
jcurrie@princeton.edu
1    Introduction

Higher asthma rates are one of the more obvious ways that health inequalities between
African American and other children are manifested beginning in early childhood. Asthma is
one of the most common childhood chronic conditions, accounting for approximately 774,000
visits to the emergency room in 2009 (Newacheck and Halfon, 2000; American Lung Asso-
ciation, 2012) and aﬀecting approximately one in every 11 children (Akinbami et al, 2009).
Data from the National Health Interview Survey suggest that rates are much higher among
African-Americans: in 2010, black asthma rates were double non-black rates (Akinbami et
al, 2014). Some observers even describe “being black” as a risk factor for asthma (WebMD,
2016; Mayo Clinic, 2016).
    Although many factors including income, birth weight, preventive care, and urban res-
idence have been shown to be related to asthma prevalence, it has proven diﬃcult to fully
account for the gap between African-American and other children. For example, McDaniel,
Paxson and Waldfogel (2006) find that they are unable to explain the racial disparity with the
detailed child and family characteristics available in the National Health Interview Survey.
They comment that “Many studies have documented the racial gap in asthma prevalence,
but few have explained it.”
    This paper asks whether what is manifested as a racial diﬀerence in asthma prevalence
is actually an eﬀect of neighborhoods rather than an eﬀect of race per se. This distinction is
important because unlike race, it is possible to change neighborhoods either by finding and
remediating the hazards that are causing higher asthma prevalence or by helping vulnerable
children to move. Moreover, if the underlying factor is actually residential location rather
than race, then it will aﬀect all children in a neighborhood regardless of race, meaning that
an exclusive focus on race as a risk factor may cause some aﬀected children to be overlooked.
    Using a unique data set based on the health records of all children born in New Jersey
between 2006 and 2010, we explore the roles of race, birth weight, and residential location in
explaining the incidence of emergency room visits for asthma in early childhood. In addition

                                              1
to the large scale of our data set, we are able to compare siblings born to the same mother in
order to rule out other unobserved characteristics of mothers as potential confounders, and
to examine a large sample of non-black children who live in the same neighborhoods where
most African-Americans in our sample reside.
   Consistent with previous research, we find that low birth weight (LBW) children are
more likely to have emergency visits for asthma, and that this result holds within families
when comparing siblings. Black children are more likely to be LBW, but have significantly
more visits for asthma than other children of the same birth weights at all weights, though
the gap is more pronounced at lower weights.
   Our most surprising result is that the racial diﬀerence in asthma prevalence among low
birth weight children disappears when we look within the neighborhoods where most African-
American children live. That is, when we condition on whether a mother lives in a black zip
code (defined so that half the children in the sample living in so-called black zip codes were
African-American), there is no longer any racial diﬀerence in asthma prevalence conditional
on birth weight. Put another way, all LBW children---including non-black children---are at
much higher risk of asthma if they happen to live one of the New Jersey neighborhoods where
the majority of African-American residents live. This result clearly points to the importance
of neighborhoods as a key determinant of asthma prevalence in vulnerable LBW children,
and suggests that understanding the characteristics of neighborhoods that contribute to
asthma prevalence is necessary for addressing racial gaps in children’s health status, and for
protecting the health of vulnerable LBW children more generally.
   The rest of this paper is laid out as follows: In section 2, we discuss the background for
our study. Section 3 lays out the data, and section 4 discusses methods. Results appear in
section 5, and a discussion and conclusions appear in sections 6 and 7.




                                              2
2    Background

African-Americans tend to be in worse health than whites at all ages (Boustan and Margo,
2014), a fact that is reflected both in higher rates of low birth weight and prematurity, and
in higher death rates (Currie and Schwandt, 2016). Research over the past ten years has also
shown that poor health in childhood is associated with poorer health and other outcomes in
adulthood (see Almond, Currie and Duque (2017) for a recent review). For example, Isen,
Rossin-Slater and Walker (2017) show that children born in counties that cleaned up their
air following passage of the Clean Air Acts of 1970 were more likely to work, had higher
education, and had higher earnings as young adults. Thus, it is probable that some of the
continuing health disparity between African-Americans and others over the life course has its
origins in negative health shocks to early life health, some of which, like pollution exposure
in utero and in early childhood, are due to their residential location.
    One possible contributor to the racial diﬀerential in health is low birth weight (LBW),
defined as birth weight less than 2500 grams. African-Americans are twice as likely as others
to be LBW and LBW has been shown to have negative eﬀects on a broad range of outcomes.
For example, Oreopolous et al. (2008) use a large sample of twins and show that within
twin pairs, LBW is associated with higher mortality up to age 17, as well as with lower
schooling attainment, and a higher probability of being on welfare. LBW is also associated
with a higher incidence of asthma: Research using a large sample of Swedish twins (Ortqvist
et al, 2009; Villamor, Iliadou, and Cnattingius, 2009) shows that even within twin pairs,
LBW is increases the incidence of asthma. However, as discussed above, within birth weight
categories, blacks are more likely to have asthma than others, so LBW by itself cannot be
a complete explanation for the racial disparity in asthma; rather, LBW should perhaps be
viewed as a factor that primes children to have asthma in certain circumstances. In this
paper, we examine residential location as one such circumstance.
    Social scientists have long been interested in the ways that neighborhoods aﬀect peo-
ple’s health. Pickett and Pearl (2001) and Kawachi and Berkman (2003) provide excellent

                                              3
reviews of this literature; most studies show evidence of an association between neighbor-
hood characteristics and health outcomes even after controlling for a range of measurable
individual and family characteristics. Curtis, Dooley, and Phipps (2004) look specifically
at children and show that neighborhood characteristics predict several measures of child
well-being conditional on family characteristics. Merkin et al. (2009) argue that the stress
associated with living in disadvantaged neighborhoods increases “allostatic load,” which in
turn leads to a wide range of poorer health outcomes, and find particularly large eﬀects
among African-Americans.
       Since observational studies are limited in the extent to which they can distinguish between
neighborhood eﬀects and the eﬀects of family characteristics common to people living in
disadvantaged neighborhoods, data from the Moving to Opportunities (MTO) experiment
are of particular interest. The MTO randomly assigned families to a treatment regime that
required them to move to lower poverty neighborhoods in order to obtain housing benefits.
Surprisingly, research based on the MTO data by Fortson and Sanbonmatsu (2010) and Katz,
Kling, and Liebman (2007) concluded that neighborhood characteristics had little eﬀect on
children’s physical health outcomes, including asthma.1
       However, the MTO health measures are parent or self-reported which may introduce
considerable measurement error relative to the administrative data we use here. Such error
would be a particular concern if changing neighborhoods caused people to think about or
report their health diﬀerently. It is also important to note that while all of the “treated”
children in MTO moved to lower poverty neighborhoods, the new neighborhoods were not
much less segregated than the old ones. For instance, Katz, Kling, and Liebman (2007)
report that the average share minority in the treated group was 82% after moving. Thus,
the MTO experiment leaves open the question of whether children’s health can be improved
   1
    More recently Chetty et al. (2016b) use data from the Moving to Opportunities experiment to show that
children who were randomly assigned to a program that led them to live in lower poverty neighborhoods
as young children experienced lasting improvements in adult outcomes including education and income.
However, the only health outcome available in the tax data they use is disability status, and they do not
examine that.



                                                   4
by moving away from heavily segregated neighborhoods.
      Jacob, Ludwig and Miller (2013) exploit a “natural experiment” created by the Chicago
public housing authority. In 1997, the city opened its housing-voucher wait list for the first
time in over ten years. As a result, the authority randomly chose families from a wait list to
receive Section 8 housing vouchers; these families were enabled to leave large public housing
projects and move anywhere that would accept their vouchers. The authors find suggestive
evidence of positive eﬀects of mortality among boys and large negative eﬀects of mortality
among girls. However, the standard errors are large which reflects the fact that mortality
is a rare outcome; for example among “treated” girls, there was only one death. Thus, this
study highlights the potential gains to understanding the health eﬀects of neighborhoods
from examining a relatively common health problem like asthma rather than a (thankfully)
rare one like mortality. Moreover, like the MTO, the “treated” population in the Jacob,
Ludwig and Miller (2013) study generally stayed within segregated neighborhoods.
      Research has consistently shown that the U.S. continues to be highly racially segregated,
with African-American neighborhoods (on average) suﬀering higher poverty, lower average
educational attainments, higher unemployment, higher exposure to pollution, and other ills
(Boustan, 2011).2 Thus, black mothers may de facto have less choice about where they live
compared to other observationally similar women. It is this continuing residential segregation
combined with the unexplained health diﬀerential between black and non-black children that
makes the concept of a “black” zip code salient for our research.
      The preceding discussion makes clear that while there is substantial overlap between
poor neighborhoods and black neighborhoods, they are not the same thing. People can
move to less poor neighborhoods but remain highly racially segregated, while many non
African-Americans reside in poor neighborhoods. Nevertheless, given the overlap between
poor and black neighborhoods, the literature on socioeconomic determinants of health is
certainly relevant. This is a vast literature but perhaps the key reference with respect to
  2
      Negative peer eﬀects may also contribute to poor outcomes. See Case and Katz (1991).



                                                    5
child health is Case, Lubotsky, and Paxson (2002) who show that while poor children start
life in poorer health than richer ones (by almost any measure), the gap continues to grow as
children age. Currie and Stabile (2003) demonstrate that this widening gap occurs because
of a higher arrival rate of negative health shocks (such as developing asthma). Condliﬀe and
Link (2008) show further that in the U.S. poor children also recover from each health shock
more slowly than rich children.
       Chetty et al. (2016a) is one of the few studies to bring together the literature on socioe-
conomic status and health and the literature on the eﬀects of place on health. Using rich
U.S. tax data, they explore the interaction between low household income and residential
location in the production of life expectancy. They show that life expectancy for low income
individuals varies greatly across commuting zones in the United States. Low income individ-
uals had significantly shorter life expectancy in several cities in the industrial Midwest such
as Gary, Detroit, and Cincinnati, and significantly longer life expectancy in New York City,
Miami, and Los Angeles. Unfortunately, given that the tax data do not record the race of
filers, they are unable to extend their analysis to examine racial diﬀerences in health.
       Our work contributes to this literature on the health eﬀects of place. We ask whether
what is often viewed as a racial diﬀerence in asthma prevalence is actually a neighborhood
diﬀerence in asthma prevalence. This is an important question because unlike race, we
can change people’s neighborhoods either by identifying the problem and remediating it or
by enabling people to move to safer areas. By focusing on a common illness rather than
on death, we can conduct our analysis at the zip code level, which is a much finer level of
aggregation (and a closer approximation to a neighborhood) than the commuting zone (there
are 741 commuting zones in the U.S. compared to roughly 40,000 zip codes).3 Moreover,
by comparing children born at diﬀerent birth weights to the same mother, we can isolate
the eﬀects of place per se, rather than measuring the eﬀects of place bundled with the
   3
    Previous work by Nepomnyaschy and Reichman (2006) shows that at the level of the Census tract, the
fraction of housing that is renter-occupied and vacancies are predictors of childhood asthma. Unfortunately,
we do not have suﬃcient observations within Census tract to conduct our analysis, so we use the zip code.



                                                     6
characteristics of mothers that cause them to locate in a particular place.



3         Data

Our sample is the cohort of all children born to mothers residing in New Jersey between
2006 and 2010.4 The sample is constructed by merging information from electronic birth
records filed with the state government to hospital records covering every visit to a hospital
emergency room (ER) from 2006 to 2012. These data are then collapsed, so that every
child is represented by one observation. The information on the birth certificate is used to
link siblings via identifying information about their mothers. This matching process was
conducted in Trenton at the Department of Health and Senior Services, and these data were
then de-identified on site. Below, we discussion data construction in further detail.
        New Jersey electronic birth records include detailed information about infants and moth-
ers. For the mother, we have her name, as well as information about her race, age, educa-
tion, marital status, date of birth, residence at the time of the child’s birth, and whether
she smoked during the pregnancy. For the children, we know birth weight, gender, and birth
order (including whether it was a multiple birth).
        We combine the birth records with information about ER visits from New Jersey Uniform
Billing Records from 2006-2012. These data are compiled by the state from information that
all general medical and surgical hospitals are required to submit about every individual
encounter with a patient. These records have the hospital, the child’s diagnosis, and the
type of insurance coverage.5 We include all records where there is an emergency room
    4
     We deleted a small number of children who died before their first birthday. Most of these children died
within the first month of life and so would not have been “eligible” to be diagnosed with asthma. We also
deleted a small number of children with birth weights less than 518 grams (the .25th percentile of the sample
distribution) or above 4820 grams (the 99.75th percentile) as these have a high probability of being data
entry errors.
   5
     The Uniform Billing data includes up to three detailed payer code variables for each visit (primary,
secondary, and tertiary), which reflect the specific type of insurance used. Each payer code is classified
into seven payer types: Medicare, Medicaid, Commercial, Blue Cross, HMO, Self-Pay, and Other. We re-
categorize this information into two groups based on the primary payer: The first category, “public”, consists
of Medicaid (Medicaid and Medicaid HMOs), NJ FamilyCare (New Jersey’s Children’s Health Insurance



                                                      7
revenue code on the billing record; some of these visits would have resulted in admission to
the hospital but in most cases the patient is seen in the ER and returns home. Note that
whether or not the visit resulted in admission, it appears in our data.
   We matched birth records and ER visits by sex of child, date of birth, and first and
last name of the child.6 This process created a unique patient identifier, so that we can
follow each child over time and across hospitals in the Uniform Billing Records. Similarly,
we matched siblings in the birth records using characteristics of the mother including her
first and last name, birth date, and social security number. The matching algorithm does a
good job catching slight misspellings without lumping together names that look diﬀerent in
a manual inspection of these data. More details on the matching process and the quality of
the algorithm can be found in the Data Appendix.
   Along with the sibling match, the ability to observe all visits to all hospitals is a particular
strength of these data. It is possible to measure the total number of emergency room visits
even if the child was treated at multiple hospitals. We use this aspect of these data to keep
track of the total number of times a child was treated in the emergency room for asthma.
   A key contribution of our paper is to examine non-African-American children living in
black zip codes, and to compare their outcomes to African-American children also living in
black zip codes. We define black zip codes so that half of the children living in black zip
codes are African-American (pooled across all black zip codes). That is, black zip codes are
defined as those with the highest fraction of black children in the sample. This definition
yields a sample in which the non-black zip codes have at least 73% non-black children.
   By this metric, 94 out of 676 zip codes are classified as black zip codes. The rationale
Program (CHIP)), and the indigent. (Indigent children make up just 0.5% of the public insurance category.
We include them in the public category because their expenses are likely to eventually be paid by public
insurance even if they are not publicly insured at the time of admission.) The “private” category consists
of Blue Cross, non Medicaid/NJ FamilyCare HMOs, and other commercial insurers. Those with military
insurance (CHAMPUS) are classified as “private” since their coverage is similar to that of the privately
insured. One strength of the data is that we can identify both Medicaid fee for service and Medicaid HMO
patients as publicly insured patients. Further details about the coding are in the Data Appendix.
   6
     The Levenshtein edit distance is used to match names, because of problems with typographical errors
and misspellings (stata command strgroup -- http://fmwww.bc.edu/repec/bocode/s/strgroup.html).



                                                    8
behind this choice is to have the same power to estimate birth weight-asthma profiles for
African-American and for other children in black zip codes. The zip codes we define as
“black” are also those in which the majority of black children live: 63.4% of black children
in our sample live in one of these zip codes, compared to only 15.9% of other children.
      The cutoﬀ percent black that achieves a split such that half of the children living in
black zip codes are African-American is 27% black. Our results are not sensitive to using
alternative cutoﬀs to define the black zip codes; Appendix Tables A1 through A4 show that
our results are robust to using cut oﬀs 5% higher or lower than our preferred specification.
Using a cut oﬀ requiring at least 22% of children in a zip code to be black, 109 zip codes are
designated as black zip codes; using a cut oﬀ requiring least 32% of children in a zip code
to be black yields 75 black zip codes. An alternative and reasonable categorization would
be to define the cutoﬀ such that half of the black children in our sample are in black zip
codes, and half of the black children are in other zip codes. In practice, this results in a
fairly similar threshold, and would mean setting the cutoﬀ at essentially the same level as
in Tables A.3 and A.4. On the other hand, defining black zip codes as those with at least
50 percent black seems just as arbitrary as our preferred specification, and would result in a
very small sample of non-black children residing in black zip codes.7
      Figure 1 shows that most black zip codes follow a diagonal line from the Northeast to
the Southwest of the state, along the path of the New Jersey Turnpike, while a few others
are located along the Garden State Parkway. They are also clustered around older, poorer
cities, such as Camden, Trenton, and Newark.
      Table 1 provides an overview of child and mother characteristics from the birth certificate
data, broken out by race and whether the child’s mother lived in a black zip code or not at
the time of the birth. The first two rows indicate that there is a large gap in asthma rates
by race, but that there is also a large gap by type of zip code. African-American children
  7
    Defining black zip codes as those with at least 50 percent black would result in 55 black zip codes,
with 28,258 black children and 10,601 non-black children. The sample size of non-black children in this
specification is just 20 percent of that in our preferred specification.



                                                   9
in black zip codes are 4.38 percentage points more likely to have been ever diagnosed with
asthma than African-American children in other zip codes. Among non-black children, this
gap is almost the same at 4.83 percentage points. One can see that the same patterns emerge
for birth weight, with African-American children being more likely to be low birth weight,
but also large gaps in birth weight across types of zip codes within racial groups.
   However, one can also see from Table 2 that within race groups the children in black
zip codes are negatively selected. Their mothers are more likely to have smoked during
pregnancy, are more likely to be high school dropouts, are less likely to be married, more
likely to have public rather than private insurance, and are more likely to be having a higher
order birth. The patterns of selection are somewhat diﬀerent across racial groups. For
example, non-black mothers in black zip codes are more likely to be high school drop outs
than any other group, whereas African-American mothers in black zip codes are the least
likely to be married and the most likely to be less than 20 years old. These patterns make
it unclear whether we should attribute high asthma rates among children in black zip codes
to residence in the zip code or to the characteristics of people who happen to live in those
zip codes. The models discussed below will attempt to untangle these relationships.
   Because we focus on diﬀerences in asthma by residential location, we also collect informa-
tion about zip codes from the 2010 Census including: total population in 2010, population
per square mile (population density), median age, average household size, the percentage of
people age 25 and older with less than a high school degree and with a bachelor’s degree, the
percentage of people aged sixteen and over in the labor force, the percentage of households
with an income less than $20,000 per year, the percentage of households with incomes greater
than $200,000 per year, the percentage of households below the poverty line, the median age
of the structures, the percent of housing that is owner occupied, the percentage of housing
that is vacant, the median value of owner occupied housing, and the average commute. To-
gether these variables capture many aspects of socioeconomic status and disadvantage that
are often associated with black neighborhoods.


                                             10
   In addition to neighborhood characteristics from the Census, we have created additional
measures that attempt to measure pollution exposure. For outdoor air pollution, these
measures are the average distance from zip code centroids to the 25 largest point source
emitters of PM 2.5 in New Jersey (as defined by the EPA, from 2011); and the fraction of
the population of a zip code living in census blocks with centroids within 800m or 400m of a
limited access highway (to capture pollution from vehicle emissions). For indoor air pollution,
we look at the fraction of mothers in a zip code who reported smoking during pregnancy, as
well as two measures proxying for the quality of the housing stock: the percent of housing
left vacant, and the percent built before 1960.
   Table 2 shows the population weighted means of these variables for all zip codes, black
zip codes, and other zip codes. Overall, 94 zip codes are classified as black, while 582 zip
codes are not. Table 2 indicates that black zip codes tend to be more densely populated and
to have more young children. Consistent with Table 1, residents of black zip codes tend to
be less educated, and are more than twice as likely to be in poverty. Houses are an average
of seven years older in black zip codes, and people are much more likely to be renters. Those
in black zip codes are also exposed to more pollution, both indoor and outdoor, as measured
by our proxies. Black zip codes are on average half the distance to top polluting facilities
compared to other zip codes, and a larger fraction of the population of black zip codes live
close to limited access highways. In addition, a slightly higher fraction of mothers in black
zip codes report smoking during pregnancy, and the housing stock in these areas is both older
and more likely to be vacant---both of with are associated with indoor air pollution from
mold and rodent and insect infestations. Once again, this table suggests that residents of
black zips suﬀer multiple disadvantages, which could well be reflected in lower birth weights
and a higher propensity to have asthma among their children.




                                              11
4     Methods

We explore the relationship between asthma, race, birth weight, and location, using Ordinary
Least Squares (OLS) models. We first estimate models of the form:




(1)    Asthmaiz = a0 + a1 BirthW eighti + a2 Blacki + a3 BirthW eighti ⇤ Blacki + qi + eiz ,


    where Asthmaiz is either a zero-one indicator equal to one if child i in zipcode z was
ever diagnosed with asthma in the course of a hospital visit, or a count of the number of
times the child was diagnosed with asthma during a hospital visit; BirthW eighti is a vector
of indicators for birth weight categories including 500 to 999 grams, 1000 to 1499 grams . . .
4500 to 4999 grams (the reference category is normal birth weight of 3000 to 3499 grams);
Blacki indicates that the child’s mother is African-American; and BirthW eighti ⇤ Blacki is
the intersection of the two. We also include qi : fixed eﬀects for each child’s age in quarters
as of the end of our sample (this is equivalent to including a separate control for each year
and quarter of birth combination in the data). Controlling for age allows for the fact that
older children have a longer window in which they could have been diagnosed with asthma.
This regression describes the asthma-birth weight profile, and how it diﬀers by race.
    We next add controls for child, mother, and location specific characteristics as well as
fixed eﬀects for each hospital (since asthma in young children can be diﬃcult to diagnose
and might be reported diﬀerently at diﬀerent hospitals):




      (2)   Asthmaiz = a0 + a1 BirthW eighti + a2 Blacki + a3 BirthW eighti ⇤ Blacki

                           +a4 Xindi + a5 Xzipz + a6 Hospitali + eiz ,


    where the vector Xindi captures individual mother and child characteristics including all



                                              12
of the explanatory variables listed in Table 1, as well as each child’s age in quarters as of
the end of our sample. The vector Xzipz captures the zip code level characteristics listed in
Table 2, and Hospitali is a vector of hospital fixed eﬀects.8
       Next we modify (2) by adding mother fixed eﬀects, denoted am . This specification con-
trols for all fixed characteristics of the mother including race, and asks whether within
families, lower birth weight children are more likely to have asthma:



                                                                                                      0
        (3)   Asthmaiz = am + a1 BirthW eighti + a2 BirthW eighti ⇤ Blacki + a4 Xindi

                                           0
                              +a5 Xzipz + a6 Hospitali + eiz ,


       While the main eﬀect of Blacki drops out of these fixed eﬀects regressions, we are able to
include interactions of BirthW eighti ⇤ Blacki , and the estimated coeﬃcients are indicative
of the extent to which low birth weight has a larger eﬀect on African-American than on
                                       0          0
other children. The vectors Xindi + Xzipz now include only time varying characteristics of
mothers, and zip codes.
       We expect that our measure of whether a child ever had asthma should be fairly clean:
most children with asthma will have ended up with at least one trip to the ER, since having
a child who can’t breathe is a medical emergency that is terrifying to parents. The number of
trips to the hospital for asthma, however, is related both to the severity of the child’s asthma,
but also other factors such as the availability of outpatient care for the child and how faithful
the family is about medication adherence. These are factors that may be partially controlled
by including mother-specific fixed eﬀects.
       Finally, in order to explore the eﬀect of location, we estimate models (2) and (3) separately
for black and other zip codes. These regressions address whether diﬀerent propensities to
have asthma conditional on birth weight are found across areas, and whether there are racial
   8
   If a child is seen at more than one hospital, we use the hospital the child visited the most frequently in
Hospitali .



                                                      13
diﬀerences in birth-weight specific asthma rates within areas. When we estimate maternal
fixed eﬀects models separately by type of zip code, the identifying variation comes from
mothers who have more than one child with diﬀerent birthweights (we count women as
living in a black zip code if we ever observe them giving birth in a black zip code).9 While
mother fixed eﬀects models are not a panacea, we include them for comparison with models
that control for a rich set of observable controls, and for comparison with previous work
using siblings. We show below that the estimated relationships between race, asthma, and
birth weight are quite similar with and without maternal fixed eﬀects, but diﬀer across types
of zip codes, lending further support to the conclusion that characteristics of the zip code
itself are important rather than characteristics of the people who happen to live in them
being determinative.10



5       Results

Table 3 shows estimates of the eﬀects of race and birth weight on the probability of ever
having been diagnosed with asthma during a hospital visit in columns 1 to 3. Estimates of
the number of times the child has been diagnosed with asthma during a hospital visit appear
in columns 4 to 6.11 The first column does not include any additional controls beyond birth
weight and length of time a child spent in the sample, so it provides a simple description of the
relationship between asthma prevalence and birth weight. Column 1 shows that relative to
    9
     An alternative strategy would be to use mothers who move between diﬀerent zip code types. However,
in practice very few mothers move between Black and other zip codes between children (just 3,683 mothers
have a child in both zip code types). Appendix Table A.11 restricts the sample to those that do move
between zip code types and tries to estimate the eﬀect of black zip codes via movers. Unfortunately there
are very few remaining observations, and very few of the coeﬃcients are statistically significant.
  10
     An alternative specification would involve examining models with a complete set of interactions between
an indicator for black race, LBW, and living in a black zip code. Such a specification is shown in Appendix
Table A.10. In these models, the indicator for LBW*black zip is statistically significant, but the triple
diﬀerence indicator LBW*black zip*black is not. This finding is consistent with the results discussed below
as it suggests that it is living in a black zip code rather than being black that is associated with higher
asthma rates among LBW children.
  11
     While our main specification uses OLS for both of our outcomes---whether a child has ever been diagnosed
with asthma and the number of times a child has been diagnosed with asthma at an ER---Table A.5 shows
that our results are robust to using zero-inflated negative binomial models when looking at the number of
visits. This technique is designed to deal with count data with many zeroes.


                                                     14
normal birth weight babies (3000 to 3499 grams) the lightest non African-American infants
are 15.4 percentage points more likely to be subsequently diagnosed with asthma. This
increased probability of asthma falls monotonically with birth weight and becomes negligible
around the cutoﬀ for low birth weight (2500 grams). The indicator for Black shows that
African-American babies of all birth weights are more likely to be diagnosed with asthma
than other children.
          However, the interactions between the birth weight categories and whether the baby
is African-American show that while there is a higher probability of asthma among black
infants, the racial gap in asthma prevalence is much greater for the lightest infants. An
African-American baby of 500 to 999 grams is 33.1 percentage points more likely to ever be
diagnosed with asthma than a non African-American baby with a birth weight of 3000 to
3499 grams. This gap falls to 9.1 percentage points for African-American babies 3000 to 3499
grams and to 5.6 percentage points for the heaviest African-American babies. The F-test
shown at the bottom of the table is from a test of the hypothesis that the interactions of the
four lowest birth weight categories with the indicator for black race are jointly significantly
diﬀerent than zero, and confirms that black LBW babies are more likely to suﬀer from asthma
than white babies with LBW (F=13.95).
          Comparing columns (1) and (2) of Table 3 suggests that adding a rich set of individual
and area level controls, as well as hospital fixed eﬀects, has little impact on the estimated
asthma-birth weight profiles.12 It does however, reduce the “main eﬀect” of black by about
50%, showing that much of the level eﬀect attributed to race can in fact be explained by
other observable characteristics of families and neighborhoods (though of course 50% remains
unexplained in this specification).
          We thought it important a priori to include hospital fixed eﬀects, as African-American
children may systematically use hospitals with diﬀerent practices or protocols related to
reporting or diagnosing asthma. Moreover, since people tend to use the nearest hospital in an
     12
          Table A.8 reports the coeﬃcients on the included zip code level controls, which are suppressed in Table
3.


                                                          15
emergency, adding hospital fixed eﬀects is similar to adding fixed eﬀects for the geographical
catchment area of each hospital. In practice, however, adding both hospital fixed eﬀects and
zip code level characteristics from the census have little to no impact on the magnitude or
precision of the coeﬃcients (see Tables A.6 and A.7).13
    Column (3) of Table 3 shows that adding a fixed eﬀect for each mother leaves the esti-
mated asthma-birthweight profile largely intact. Hence, even comparing siblings born to the
same mother, lower birth weight is strongly associated with a higher probability of asthma,
and this eﬀect is significantly larger for black mothers.
    Columns (4) through (6) of Table 3 show similar qualitative patterns for the number of
times a child is diagnosed with asthma during a hospital visit. Once again, the main eﬀect
of Blacki is halved when observable controls are added to the model, and the elevated eﬀect
of low birth weight among African-Americans persists even when controls for mother fixed
eﬀects are added to the model.14
    In Table 4, we pursue the analysis of the eﬀects of neighborhoods by dividing the sample
into Black zips and other zip codes. Note that children are assigned to zip codes on the
basis of their location at the time of the birth. One advantage of this procedure is that
the location is chosen before information about the child’s health is revealed. Thus, these
estimates should not suﬀer from endogeneity associated with family’s moving because of a
child’s respiratory problems.
    A comparison of columns (1) and (2) and of columns (3) and (4) in Table 4 shows that
in Black zip codes the eﬀects of low birth weight are much larger, about twice as large,
as in other zip codes for both African-Americans and others. In Black zip codes, even non
African-American babies of 500 to 999 grams are 22.6 percentage points more likely to ever
end up at the hospital ER with asthma than non African-American babies of normal birth
weight (3000 to 3499 grams). An African-American baby of 500 to 999 grams would be 26.4
  13
     Table A.7 shows that some racial gap in the the birth weight-asthma profile remains when zip code fixed
eﬀects are included, but this result is not inconsistent with the main results because there is a racial gap in
the group of “other zip codes.”
  14
     Table A.9 shows that none of the results are sensitive to removing “other race” and Hispanic mothers.


                                                      16
percentage points more likely to be diagnosed with asthma than white babies of normal birth
weight but, as discussed further below, the two estimates are not statistically significantly
diﬀerent from each other for low birth weight babies.
       Remarkably, in Black zip codes the profile of asthma and low birth weight is the same
for all low birth weight children in these zip codes. In contrast, in other zip codes, African-
American children of low birth weight still face additional increases in the probability of
having asthma beyond the level eﬀect of Blacki . In other zip codes, an African-American
baby of 500 to 999 grams would be 26.4 percentage points more likely to ever have asthma
than a non African-American baby of 3000 to 3499 grams, while for a non African American
baby of 500 to 999 grams the equivalent figure would be 13.1 percentage points. One reason a
diﬀerence might persist between black and non-black children in these other zip codes is that
the average black child in this group is less comparable to the average non-black child. We
address this issue in Table 5, which controls for time-invariant characteristics of the mother.
       Table 5 shows estimates for black zip codes and other zip codes from models including
mother fixed eﬀects. In these models, the relationship between low birth weight and asthma
is readily apparent, but remarkably, once we separate black zip codes and other zip codes,
that relationship is exactly the same for white and black children in both types of zip codes.
That is, unlike the mother fixed eﬀects models shown in Table 3, when we stratify by black vs.
non-black zip codes there is no statistically significant interaction between the birth weight
categories and the indicator Blacki . The overall relationship between low birth weight and
asthma is much the same as in Table 4, with the eﬀects of low birth weight being twice as
large for all children in black zip codes compared to other zip codes. These results strongly
suggest that there are characteristics of black zip codes that contribute to higher asthma
rates among all children living in those zip codes.15 Moreover, controlling for residential
location in addition to the detailed controls and mother fixed eﬀects completely explains the
racial diﬀerence in asthma rates conditional on low birth weight.
  15
    83,187 mothers only have children in black zip codes, 282,927 mothers only have children in other zip
codes, and a small minority, 3,683 mothers, have at least one child in both black and other zip codes.


                                                   17
   These results are the most novel and striking of this paper. As discussed above, it has
been quite diﬃcult to explain the racial gap in asthma rates. Our results suggest that while
some of the gap may be associated with characteristics of families, once we account for where
people live, the gap among LBW children entirely disappears. This finding is important
because it suggests that if we could identify the relevant characteristics of neighborhoods, it
might be possible to address them, and that addressing these characteristics would benefit
all children living in these neighborhoods.
   The estimates presented in Tables 3, 4, and 5 and their confidence intervals are graphed
as Figures 2, 3, and 4. These figures make it easier to see the overall eﬀect of being African-
American at each birth weight (which includes the main eﬀect Blacki , the baseline eﬀect of
the birth weight category, and the interaction between the two) and to compare it to the
eﬀect of low birth weight for other children. The standard error bands show visually where
the estimates are significantly diﬀerent and where their confidence bands overlap.
   The left most panels of Figure 2 show estimates corresponding to columns (1) and (4) of
Table 3. They show that the incidence of asthma, and the number of visits for asthma are
always higher for African-American children, though the risks converge as birth weight rises.
Moreover, among children who are not African-American, the risk of asthma for those at the
high end of the LBW/low end of the normal birth weight range is not much higher than for
normal birth weight children (the reference category is non-African-American children with
a birth weight of 3000-3499 grams).
   The middle panel of Figure 2 shows that the gap between African-Americans and oth-
ers is considerably narrowed by the inclusion of basic controls for individual children and
their mothers, neighborhoods, and hospitals. Remarkably, there is almost no change in the
relationship between asthma risk and low birth weight among the non-African-American
children. Hence, the narrower gap is entirely explained by the reduction in the extent to
which asthma risk is attributed to race once controls are included in the models. In other
words, much of the higher asthma risk among African-Americans can be explained by ob-


                                              18
servable characteristics of families, neighborhoods, and hospitals, though there is still a large
unexplained residual gap at low birth weights.
    The right hand panels of Figure 2 indicate that once all of the unobserved fixed char-
acteristics of mothers are controlled for (which includes race), the profile of asthma risk
and birth weight again narrows. However, the point estimates for African-Americans of low
birth weight remain somewhat higher than those for other children, and these diﬀerences are
statistically significant (see Table 3, columns 3 and 6).
    Figure 3 shows estimates comparable to those in the middle panels of Figure 2 except that
the sample is divided into black zip codes and other zip codes. Remarkably, as the left hand
panels show, within black zip codes there is no statistically significant diﬀerence between
African-American and other children in terms of the relationship between low birth weight
and asthma risk. The convergence in rates within black zip codes comes about because while
all children have higher asthma rates in black zip codes, non-African-American children have
much higher asthma rates in black zip codes than in other zip codes. That is, black zip codes
appear to be bad for all children (in terms of higher asthma rates), whereas in other zip codes
there is still a gap between African-American and other children of low birth weight.
    Any remaining diﬀerences between African-American and other children are eliminated
in Figure 4, which shows estimates comparable to Figure 3, but with mother fixed eﬀects.
This Figure suggests that within the same families, low birth weight is only associated with
higher asthma rates in black zip codes.



6     Discussion

Our study supports the growing consensus about the importance of place in the evolution of
disadvantage as children grow. Our estimates suggest that black zip codes are less healthy
places for all children, and that much of the gap in asthma rates between African-American
and other children in New Jersey is attributable to their place of residence. Moreover, we



                                               19
have shown that all low birth weight children, regardless of race, are at higher risk of asthma
if they live in these neighborhoods. This finding of course begs the question of what it is
about these neighborhoods that contributes so strongly to triggering asthma in vulnerable
low birth weight children?
   Table 6 reports correlations between a wide range of zip code level characteristics: general
neighborhood characteristics, adult respiratory disease burden, and indoor and outdoor air
pollution proxies. As can be seen in Table 6, besides living in areas with higher outdoor
air pollution (measured by distances to top emitting facilities and limited access highways),
children in black zip codes also live in places where indoor air pollution is likely to be a serious
issue. Especially if children in the worst neighborhoods spend a lot of time indoors, mold,
dust, smoke, and fecal matter from insect and rodent infestations may play an outsized role
in triggering asthma. Unfortunately there is very little systematic measurement of indoor
air pollution levels in the US, and the best we can do is proxy for indoor air pollution with
measures of the age and upkeep of the housing stock, and smoking rates.
   Table 6 also shows that adults living in black zip codes have a high respiratory disease
burden. Acute respiratory disease and allergic rhinitis (hay fever) are both known asthma
triggers, and have been shown to be independently associated with indoor and outdoor air
pollution. Adult COPD prevalence is both a measure of how much of a population smokes---
itself an important type of indoor air pollution---and is another disease which is exacerbated
by air pollution.
   Finally, Table 6 shows that all our proxies for environmental asthma triggers are highly
correlated with general neighborhood characteristics, such as the fraction of the popula-
tion living below the poverty line, and the fraction of single mothers. Given the extensive
literature on residential segregation, these strong correlations are not surprising.
   Appendix Table A.12 shows that dividing our sample by poor vs. non-poor zip codes
produces similar results to splitting by black vs. non-black zip codes. In Appendix Table
A.12 high poverty zip codes are defined analogously to black zip codes, such that there


                                                20
are approximately the same number of black and non-black children in poor zip codes (the
poverty rate that accomplishes this division is 16 percent). Nevertheless, splitting the sample
by fraction black does a slightly better job of eliminating the racial diﬀerences in the birth
weight-asthma gradient than splitting the sample by poverty rates.
       Despite the fact that areas where black children tend to live are clearly poorer neighbor-
hoods, asthma needs a physical trigger; poverty per se does not cause asthma. We think
that higher levels of pollution in black zip codes could be an important trigger, but given
the available data it is diﬃcult to investigate this hypothesis. As discussed earlier, black zip
codes tend to line up along the main highways in New Jersey, and Figure 5 shows that many
of the top emitters of PM 2.5 are also located in or close to black zip codes. Figures A1 and
A2 show that if we divide air monitoring stations into those that are within two miles of a
black zip code and those that are more than two miles from a black zip code, monitoring
stations located closer to black zip codes have higher air pollution levels.16 Unfortunately,
there are far fewer monitors than zip codes, and thus we do not have good coverage of air
pollution measures across the state (see Figures A3 and A4 for maps of monitor locations).
Figure A5 shows major highways in New Jersey. The concentration of these highways in
black zip codes is evident, but since we do not have consistent traﬃc count data, the best
measure we can construct of exposure to pollution from traﬃc is distance from one of these
roadways. When added to our main regression specifications, though, the resulting noisy
measures explain little of the variation in asthma rates.17 However, we suspect that this
result reflects the imperfections in the available measures. Finally, we suspect that indoor
air pollution is an important asthma trigger, but we were not able to find any direct and
geographically comprehensive measures of these sources.
       While we focus on explaining the racial gap in asthma rates conditional on low birth
  16
      Currie (2011) and Currie et al. (2016) suggest that living within a mile of plants emitting hazardous
chemicals has detectable eﬀects on infant health. Currie and Walker (2011) show that living within 2km of
a highway toll plaza also has negative eﬀects on infant health.
   17
      Including these noisy pollution measures has no eﬀect on the magnitude or precision of reported coeﬃ-
cients. Results available upon request.



                                                    21
weight, there is a growing literature pointing to pollution as one of the explanations for
higher rates of low birth weight among African-American children (Currie, 2011; Aizer and
Currie, 2015). African-American mothers are more likely to be exposed to many forms
of pollution during pregnancy compared to other mothers, including pollution from traﬃc,
emissions from manufacturing and power plants, and Superfund hazardous waste sites; they
are also more likely to be exposed to hazardous water pollutants (Currie et al., 2013). Thus,
pollution may explain both higher rates of low birth weight, and a higher propensity to
develop asthma conditional on birth weight among African-Americans.



7    Conclusions

In this paper, we have focused on the racial gap in asthma rates, conditional on birth weight,
and shown that the gap can be largely explained by observable characteristics of households
plus their residential locations. Our results suggest that the racial gap in asthma rates
arises for three reasons: Because African-American children are more likely to be low birth
weight, because they are more likely to come from families with other characteristics that
are associated with poorer health (such as maternal smoking and poverty), and because of
where they live. It is striking that within black zip codes, all children have much higher
asthma rates than in other zip codes, and that within these zip codes there is no statistically
significant diﬀerence in asthma rates between the races conditional on low birth weight.
Clearly, understanding what aspects of neighborhoods contribute most to these disparities
is key to reducing the racial gap in asthma, and potentially in other health conditions.



8    References

Aizer, Anna and Janet Currie. “The Intergenerational Transmission of Inequality: Maternal
Disadvantage and Health at Birth,” Science, v344, May 23, 2014, p. 856.

Almond, Douglas, Janet Currie, and Valentina Duque. “Childhood Circumstances and Adult


                                              22
Outcomes: Act II,” NBER Working Paper, #XXXX, Nov. 2016.

Akinbami, Lara, Jeanne Moorman, Paul Garbe, Edward Sondik. “Status of Childhood
Asthma in the United States, 1980-2007.” Pediatrics, 129; S131, 2009.

Akinbami, Lara, Jeanne Moorman, Alan Simon, Kenneth Schoendorf. “Trends in Racial
Disparities for Asthma Outcomes Among Children 0-17 Years, 2001-2010,” Journal of Al-
lergy and Clinical Immunology, v. 134 #3, 547-533, Sept,2014.

American Lung Association, American Lung Association, Asthma and Children Fact Sheet,
October 2012. http://www.lung.org/lung-disease/asthma/resources/facts-and-figures/asthma-
children-fact-sheet.html, accessed May 23, 2014.

Boustan, Leah. “Racial Residential Segregation in American Cities,” Oxford Handbook of
Economics and Planning, Nancy Brooks, Kieran Danaghy, Gerrit-Jan Knaap (eds.) (Oxford:
Oxford University Press), 2011, 318-339.

Boustan, Leah and Robert Margo. “Racial Diﬀerence in Health in Long-Run Perspective: A
Brief Introduction,” NBER Working paper #20765, Dec. 2014.

Case, Anne, Darren Lubotsky, and Christina Paxson. “Economic Status and Health in Child-
hood: The Origins of the Gradient,” American Economic Review, v. 92 #5, 2002: 1308-1334.

Chetty, Raj, Michael Stepner, Sarah Abraham, Shelby Lin, Benjamin Scuderi, Nicholas
Turner, Augustin Bergeron, David Cutler. “The Association Between Income and Life Ex-
pectancy in the United States, 2001-2014,” JAMA, 315 #16, 2016a, 1750-1766.

Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F. Katz. "The Eﬀects of Exposure to Better
Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment,"
American Economic Review, 106(4), April 2016b, 855-902.

Condliﬀe, Simon and Charles R. Link. 2008. "The Relationship between Economic Sta-
tus and Child Health: Evidence from the United States,” American Economic Review, v. 98
#4, Sept. 2008: 1605-1618.

Currie, Janet, Joshua Graﬀ-Zivin, Katherine Meckel, Matthew Neidell, and Wolfram Schlenker.
“Something in the Water: Contaminated Drinking Water and Infant Health,” Canadian Jour-
nal of Economics, V46 #3, August, 2013, 791-810.

Currie, Janet. “Inequality at Birth: Some Causes and Consequences,” American Economic
Review, May 2011, 101 #3, 1-22.

Currie, Janet, Lucas Davis, Michael Greenstone, and Reed Walker. "Environmental Health
Risks and Housing Values: Evidence from 1,600 Toxic Plant Openings and Closings." Amer-
ican Economic Review, 2015, 105(2): 678-709.

                                           23
Currie, Janet and Hannes Schwandt. “Mortality Inequality: The Good News from a County-
Level Approach,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2016.

Currie, Janet and Mark Stabile. “Socioeconomic Status and Child Health: Why is the
Relationship Stronger for Older Children?” American Economic Review, v 93 #5, 2003:
1813-1823.

Currie, Janet and Reed Walker. "Traﬃc Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from
E-ZPass," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, American Economic Associa-
tion, vol. 3(1), Jan. 2011: pages 65-90.

Curtis, Lori, MartinDooley and Shelley Phipps. “Child Well-Being and Neighbourhood Qual-
ity: Evidence from the Candian National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth,” Social
Science and Medicine, v 58 #10: 1917-1927.

Fortson, Jane and Lisa Sanbonmatsu. “Child Health and Neighborhood Conditions: Re-
sults from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment, “ Journal of Human Resources, v 45
#4, Fall 2010: 840-864.

Isen, Adam, Maya Rossin-Slater, W. Reed Walker. “Every Breath You Take Every Dol-
lar You’ll Make,” Journal of Political Economy, v. 125 #3, 2017: 848-901.

Jacob, Brian, Jens Ludwig, and Douglas Miller. “The Eﬀects of Housing and Neighbor-
hood Conditions on Child Mortality,” Journal of Health Economics, 32, 2013: 195-206.

Kawachi, I and Lisa Berkman. “Neighbourhoods and Health” (Oxford University Press
Inc: New York), 2003.

Kling, Jeﬀrey, Jeﬀrey Liebman and Lawrence Katz. “Experimental Analysis of Neighbor-
hood Eﬀects,” Econometrica v 75 #1, 2007: 83-119.

Mayo Clinic. “Childhood Asthma”, March 2016. Accessed July 18, 2017. http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseas
conditions/childhood-asthma/symptoms-causes/dxc-20193101?p=1

McDaniel, Marcia, Christina Paxson, and Jane Waldfogel. “Racial Disparities in Child-
hood Asthma in the United States: Evidence from the National Health Interview Survey,
1997 to 2003,” Pediatrics, 2006.

Merkin, Sharon Stein, Ricardo Basurto-Davila, Arun Karlamangla, Chloe Bird, Nicole Lurie,
Jose Escarce, and Teresa Seeman. “Neighborhoods and Cumulative Biological Risk Profiles
by Race/Ethnicity in a National Sample of U.S. Adults: NHANES III,” Annals of Epidemi-
ology, v19 #3, 2009: 194-201.

Nepomnyaschy, Lena and Nancy Reichman. “Low Birthweight and Asthma Among Young

                                           24
Urban Children,” American Journal of Public Health, 2006.

Newacheck, Paul and Neil Halfon. “Prevalence, Impact, and Trends in Childhood Disability
Due to Asthma,” Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, 154 #3, 2000, 287-293.

Oreopoulos, Philip, Mark Stabile, Randy Walld, and Leslie L. Roos. 2008.“Short-,Medium-
, and Long-Term Consequences of Poor Infant Health: An AnalysisUsing Siblings and
Twins.”J. Human Resources 43 (1): 88–138.

Ortqvist, Anne K., Cecilia Lundholm, Eva Carlstrom, Paul Lichtenstein, Sven Cnattingius,
and Catarina Almqvist. “Familial Factors do Not Confound the Association Between Birth
Weight and Childhood Asthma,” Pediatrics, v. 124 #4: e737-43, Oct., 2009.

Pickett, Kate and Michelle Pearl. “Multilevel Analyses of Neighbourhood Socioeconomic
Context and Health Outcomes: A Critical Review,” Journal of Epidemiology and Commu-
nity Health, v 55 #2, 2001: 111-122.

Villamor, Eduardo, Iliadou, Anastasia, and Cnattingius, Sven. “Is the Association Between
Low Birth Weight and Asthma Independent of Genetic and Shared Environmental Factors?”
American Journal of Epidemiology, v 169 #11, 1337-1343, 2009.

WebMD. “Asthma in Children: Symptoms and Risk Factors”, June 2016. Accessed July
18, 2017. http://www.webmd.com/asthma/children#1




                                           25
9      Figures

                                       Figure 1: Map of Black Zip Codes




                                                                                          Paterson

                                                             Plainfield                        Jersey City
                                        Somerset                                      Newark
                                                                              Linden Elizabeth

                                                                                 Perth Amboy

                                                                   New Brunswick



                                                   Trenton
                                                                                              Asbury Park




                                   Camden




                                                                          Atlantic City




Notes: Grey denotes black zip codes, white denotes other zip codes. Black zip codes are zip codes with the highest fraction of
black children, up until the point where there are approximately the same number of black children and non-black children in
the black zip codes. The resulting threshold is that a zip code is defined as a Black zip code if the share of black children is
at least 27 percent. The remaining zip codes are defined as other zip codes. As US Postal Service zip codes do not represent
contiguous geographic boundaries, we map zip codes to census zip code tabulation areas for the purpose of this figure.




                                                              26
                                                                Figure 2: Eﬀects of Low Birthweight on Asthma by Race
                                                                                                    Ever Diagnosed at Hospital
                                                              OLS, No Controls                                       OLS, Controls                                       Mother Fixed Effects




                                          .4
                                                                                                .4
                                                                                                                                                      .4




                                          .3
                                                                                                .3
                                                                                                                                                      .3




                                             .2
                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                                                                                         .2




                                      .1
                                                                                            .1
                                                                                                                                                  .1




                                     Coefficient
                                                                                           Coefficient
                                                                                                                                                 Coefficient




                                          0
                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                      0




                                          -.1
                                                                                                -.1
                                                                                                                                                      -.1
                                                   500-999      2500-2999      4500-4999                 500-999      2500-2999      4500-4999                 500-999      2500-2999      4500-4999
                                                         1500-1999      3500-3999                              1500-1999      3500-3999                              1500-1999      3500-3999
                                                               Birth Weight                                          Birth Weight                                          Birth Weight


                                                                                      Number of Times Diagnosed at Hospital
                                                              OLS, No Controls                                       OLS, Controls                                       Mother Fixed Effects




                                          1.5
                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                      1.5




27
                                          1
                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                      1




                                        .5
                                                                                              .5
                                                                                                                                                    .5




                                     Coefficient
                                                                                           Coefficient
                                                                                                                                                 Coefficient




                                          0
                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                      0




                                          -.5
                                                                                                -.5
                                                                                                                                                      -.5




                                                   500-999      2500-2999      4500-4999                 500-999      2500-2999      4500-4999                 500-999      2500-2999      4500-4999
                                                         1500-1999      3500-3999                              1500-1999      3500-3999                              1500-1999      3500-3999
                                                               Birth Weight                                          Birth Weight                                          Birth Weight



                                                                                      Black Mothers                                      White/Other Mothers


     Notes: All regressions include dummy variables for child’s age at end of sample in quarters. Additional controls included in second and third columns: indicator for other race
     (nonwhite, nonblack), indicator for whether the child ever used public insurance in a New Jersey hospital, sex of child, indicator for mother smoked during pregnancy, mother’s
     education (4 categories: 0-11 years of school; 12 years of school; 13-16 years of school; more than 16 years), mother’s age in bins (<20, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35+), mother married
     at birth, birth order (1, 2, 3, 4+), dummy for multiple birth, as well as the following zip code level variables: population, population density, median age, average household
     size, percent of people 25+ with less than high school education, percent of people 25+ with bachelor’s degree or more, percent 16+ in labor force, percent of households making
     less than 20k, percent of households making more than 200k, median year structure built, percent of housing owner occupied, percent of housing vacant, median value of owner
     occupied housing, percent of families below poverty, and hospital fixed eﬀects.
                       Figure 3: Black Zip Codes Versus Other Zip Codes (OLS)
                                                                                        OLS with Controls
                                                                                      Ever Diagnosed at Hospital
                                                              Black Zip Codes                                                                 Other Zip Codes




                              .3




                                                                                                              .3
                                   .2




                                                                                                                   .2
                        Coefficient




                                                                                                        Coefficient
                          .1




                                                                                                          .1
                              0




                                                                                                              0
                              -.1




                                                                                                              -.1
                                        500-999                2500-2999                    4500-4999                   500-999                2500-2999                    4500-4999
                                                  1500-1999                     3500-3999                                         1500-1999                     3500-3999
                                                              Birth Weight                                                                    Birth Weight


                                                                                Number of Times Diagnosed at Hospital
                                                              Black Zip Codes                                                                 Other Zip Codes
                              1.5




                                                                                                              1.5
                                    1




                                                                                                                    1
                        Coefficient




                                                                                                        Coefficient
                        .5




                                                                                                        .5
                              0




                                                                                                              0
                                        500-999                2500-2999                    4500-4999                   500-999                2500-2999                    4500-4999
                                                  1500-1999                     3500-3999                                         1500-1999                     3500-3999
                                                              Birth Weight                                                                    Birth Weight



                                                                                Black Mothers                                     White/Other Mothers



Notes: Additional controls included: dummy variables for child’s age at end of sample in quarters, indicator for other race
(nonwhite, nonblack), indicator for whether the child ever used public insurance in a New Jersey hospital, sex of child, indicator
for mother smoked during pregnancy, mother’s education (4 categories: 0-11 years of school; 12 years of school; 13-16 years
of school; more than 16 years), mother’s age in bins (<20, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35+), mother married at birth, birth order (1,
2, 3, 4+), dummy for multiple birth, as well as the following zip code level variables: population, population density, median
age, average household size, percent of people 25+ with less than high school education, percent of people 25+ with bachelor’s
degree or more, percent 16+ in labor force, percent of households making less than 20k, percent of households making more
than 200k, median year structure built, percent of housing owner occupied, percent of housing vacant, median value of owner
occupied housing, percent of families below poverty, and hospital fixed eﬀects. Black zip codes are zip codes with the highest
fraction of black children, up until the point where there are approximately the same number of black children and non-black
children in the black zip codes. The remaining zip codes are defined as other zip codes.




                                                                                                   28
           Figure 4: Black Zip Codes Versus Other Zip Codes (Mother Fixed Eﬀects)
                                                                                      Mother Fixed Effects
                                                                                     Ever Diagnosed at Hospital
                                                             Black Zip Codes                                                                Other Zip Codes




                             .4




                                                                                                            .4
                                  .2




                                                                                                                 .2
                         Coefficient




                                                                                                        Coefficient
                        0




                                                                                                       0
                             -.2




                                                                                                            -.2
                                       500-999                2500-2999                    4500-4999                  500-999                2500-2999                    4500-4999
                                                 1500-1999                     3500-3999                                        1500-1999                     3500-3999
                                                             Birth Weight                                                                   Birth Weight


                                                                               Number of Times Diagnosed at Hospital
                                                             Black Zip Codes                                                                Other Zip Codes
                             4




                                                                                                            4
                             3




                                                                                                            3
                        Coefficient




                                                                                                       Coefficient
                                2




                                                                                                               2
                         1




                                                                                                        1
                             0




                                                                                                            0
                             -1




                                                                                                            -1
                                       500-999                2500-2999                    4500-4999                  500-999                2500-2999                    4500-4999
                                                 1500-1999                     3500-3999                                        1500-1999                     3500-3999
                                                             Birth Weight                                                                   Birth Weight



                                                                               Black Mothers                                    White/Other Mothers



Notes: Additional controls included: dummy variables for child’s age at end of sample in quarters, indicator for other race
(nonwhite, nonblack), indicator for whether the child ever used public insurance in a New Jersey hospital, sex of child, indicator
for mother smoked during pregnancy, mother’s education (4 categories: 0-11 years of school; 12 years of school; 13-16 years
of school; more than 16 years), mother’s age in bins (<20, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35+), mother married at birth, birth order (1,
2, 3, 4+), dummy for multiple birth, as well as the following zip code level variables: population, population density, median
age, average household size, percent of people 25+ with less than high school education, percent of people 25+ with bachelor’s
degree or more, percent 16+ in labor force, percent of households making less than 20k, percent of households making more
than 200k, median year structure built, percent of housing owner occupied, percent of housing vacant, median value of owner
occupied housing, percent of families below poverty, and hospital fixed eﬀects. Black zip codes are zip codes with the highest
fraction of black children, up until the point where there are approximately the same number of black children and non-black
children in the black zip codes. The remaining zip codes are defined as other zip codes.




                                                                                                  29
                             Figure 5: Top 25 Point Source Emitters: PM 2.5




Notes: Grey denotes black zip codes, white denotes other zip codes. Black zip codes are zip codes with the highest fraction of
black children, up until the point where there are approximately the same number of black children and non-black children in
the black zip codes. The remaining zip codes are defined as other zip codes. As US Postal Service zip codes do not represent
contiguous geographic boundaries, we map zip codes to census zip code tabulation areas for the purpose of this figure. The
facilities displayed are the top 25 biggest emitters of PM 2.5 in New Jersey, in 2011 (EPA).




                                                             30
10   Tables

                        Table 1: Individual-Level Summary Statistics

                                                            Black             White/Other
                                                    Black Zips Other Zips Black Zips Other Zips
      Asthma: pct. ever diagnosed                      18.07         13.69         10.89          6.06
      If have asthma, # of times diagnosed             2.62          2.32          2.24           1.83
      Explanatory variables
      Pct. 500-999g                                     1.12          0.88          0.39          0.29
      Pct. 1000-1499g                                   1.48          1.29          0.87          0.66
      Pct. 1500-1999g                                   2.70          2.29          1.58          1.50
      Pct. 2000-2499g                                   7.03          6.63          5.02          4.64
      Pct. 2500-2999g                                  23.68         21.80         18.57         16.86
      Pct. 3000-3499g                                  38.08         38.91         39.78         38.80
      Pct. 3500-3999g                                  20.83         22.69         26.30         28.70
      Pct. 4000-4499g                                   4.53          4.91          6.80          7.72
      Pct. 4500-4999g                                   0.55          0.61          0.69          0.83
      Pct. other race                                   0.00          0.00         14.71         14.51
      Pct. smoked                                       8.89          7.11          6.12          5.32
      Mother’s educ.: pct. 0-11 yrs                    17.37         11.58         25.48          9.50
      Mother’s educ.: pct. 12 yrs                      42.74         33.25         32.41         21.75
      Mother’s educ.: pct. 13-16 yrs                   33.40         42.58         31.37         46.63
      Mother’s educ.: pct. 17+ yrs                      5.79         11.89         10.13         21.64
      Pct. boy                                         50.73         50.97         50.81         51.12
      Pct. married                                     29.31         46.63         52.39         79.27
      Mother’s age: pct. less than 20                  11.94          7.78          6.89          2.52
      Mother’s age: pct. 20-24                         27.17         21.97         21.97         11.84
      Mother’s age: pct. 25-29                         25.74         25.10         27.57         23.83
      Mother’s age: pct. 30-24                         20.05         24.13         25.56         34.41
      Mother’s age: pct. 35+                           15.10         21.02         18.01         27.39
      Birth order: 1                                   38.45         38.23         39.03         39.02
      Birth order: 2                                   28.95         31.43         32.82         34.11
      Birth order: 3                                   17.77         17.53         17.18         16.74
      Birth order: 4+                                  14.83         12.82         10.98         10.12
      Pct. multiple birth                               3.96          4.43          3.28          4.88
      Child age in quarters at end                     17.36         17.44         17.43         17.65
      Pct. ever publicly insured                       65.67         55.39         59.42         35.81
      Sample size
      Black Children                                   49,122        28,418          0             0
      White/Other Children                               0              0          50,844       319,652
      Notes: Facilities are the top 25 largest emitters of PM 2.5 in 2011, according to the EPA. Other
      race category is 40.8% Asian Indian, 23.1% other and unspecified race, 11.5% Filipino, 9.8% Chi-
      nese, and 8.4% Korean (the remaining categories are Vietnamese, American Indian, Japanese, and
      Pacific Islander). Black zip codes are zip codes with the highest fraction of black children, up until
      the point where there are approximately the same number of black children and non-black children
      in the black zip codes. The remaining zip codes are defined as other zip codes.




                                                       31
                    Table 2: Zip Code-Level Summary Statistics

                                            Black Zip Codes Other Zip Codes All Zip Codes

Explanatory variables
Total population 2010                             34,095               28,726              29,862
Pop. per square mile                               9,797                4,757               5,823
Median age                                         35.44                39.88               38.94
Avg. household size                                2.77                  2.72                2.73
Pct. less than high school (25+)                   19.37                10.96               12.74
Pct. bachelors or more (25+)                       24.17                38.19               35.22
Pct. in labor force (16+)                          66.04                66.95               66.76
Pct. households less than 20k                      22.19                12.07               14.21
Pct. households greater than 200k                  4.11                 10.20                8.91
Median year structure built                        1960                  1967                1965
Pct. owner occupied                                46.87                70.15               65.23
Pct. vacant units                                  11.57                 7.62                8.45
Median value owner occuptied                     270,317               353,676             336,035
Pct. families below poverty                        15.43                 6.30                8.23
Average commute                                    28.71                30.35               30.01
Pollution proxies
Distance to top polluting facility                 8.32                 16.33               14.70
Pct. within 400m of highway                        0.51                  0.44                0.45
Pct. within 800m of highway                        0.73                  0.61                0.63
Pct. smoked during pregnancy                       0.07                  0.06                0.06
Pct. housing stock built < 1960                    0.54                  0.41                0.44
Zips                                                94                   582                 676
Notes: From 2010 Census/American Community Survey. Zip code characteristics weighted by pop-
ulation. Black zip codes are zip codes with the highest fraction of black children, up until the point
where there are approximately the same number of black children and non-black children in the black
zip codes. The remaining zip codes are defined as other zip codes. Pct. smoked is the percent of
mothers in the zip code who reported smoking during pregnancy; pct. vacant is the percent of the
housing stock reported vacant; built <1960 is the fraction of the housing stock built before 1960; fa-
cility distance is the distance to nearest high polluting facility (top 25 facilities by PM 2.5 emissions
in 2011, as reported by the EPA); within 400m and 800m are the fraction of a zip code whose census
block is within that distance of a limited access highway.




                                                  32
                                  Table 3: Asthma and Low Birthweight

                                     Ever Diagnosed with Asthma                   No. Times Diagnosed with Asthma
                                   (1)           (2)           (3)                (4)           (5)            (6)
   500-999                       0.154***       0.148***         0.127***      0.411***        0.398***        0.599***
                                  (0.013)         (0.012)         (0.029)        (0.058)         (0.057)        (0.179)
   1000-1499                     0.091***       0.088***         0.078***      0.225***        0.223***        0.240***
                                  (0.007)         (0.007)         (0.014)        (0.025)         (0.024)        (0.045)
   1500-1999                     0.051***       0.056***         0.043***      0.127***        0.145***        0.133***
                                  (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.009)        (0.014)         (0.015)        (0.028)
   2000-2499                     0.020***       0.023***         0.014***      0.062***        0.073***        0.052***
                                  (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.005)        (0.007)         (0.008)        (0.015)
   2500-2999                     0.008***       0.009***         0.009***      0.021***        0.024***        0.027***
                                  (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.008)
   3500-3999                     -0.002**       -0.003***          -0.000         -0.003          -0.004         -0.001
                                  (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.002)        (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.006)
   4000-4499                    -0.006***       -0.007***          -0.005      -0.013***       -0.014***         -0.007
                                  (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.009)
   4500-4999                       -0.002          -0.005          -0.008         -0.013         -0.018*         -0.026
                                  (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.010)        (0.010)         (0.010)        (0.023)
   Black                         0.091***       0.045***           0.000       0.250***        0.113***          0.000
                                  (0.002)         (0.002)            (.)         (0.007)         (0.008)           (.)
   500-999 * black               0.086***        0.096***          0.091*       0.471***        0.489***          0.419
                                  (0.022)         (0.021)         (0.049)        (0.107)         (0.106)        (0.267)
   1000-1499 * black             0.057***        0.054***           0.035       0.309***        0.277***          0.234
                                  (0.016)         (0.016)         (0.036)        (0.069)         (0.067)        (0.157)
   1500-1999 * black             0.036***        0.028***         0.047**       0.253***        0.222***       0.319***
                                  (0.011)         (0.011)         (0.024)        (0.053)         (0.052)        (0.119)
   2000-2499 * black             0.024***        0.018***         0.031**       0.112***        0.089***        0.106*
                                  (0.006)         (0.006)         (0.015)        (0.027)         (0.026)        (0.058)
   2500-2999 * black              0.008**           0.004          -0.001       0.045***         0.029**         -0.002
                                  (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.009)        (0.014)         (0.013)        (0.031)
   3500-3999 * black             -0.008**          -0.004           0.005         -0.013          -0.001          0.015
                                  (0.004)         (0.003)         (0.009)        (0.013)         (0.013)        (0.031)
   4000-4499 * black               -0.007          -0.001           0.004         -0.001           0.021          0.043
                                  (0.006)         (0.006)         (0.017)        (0.024)         (0.024)        (0.054)
   4500-4999 * black             -0.035**         -0.027*           0.017       -0.099**          -0.074          0.033
                                  (0.016)         (0.016)         (0.045)        (0.047)         (0.046)        (0.096)
   Individual/census vars             -               x               x              -               x              x
   Hospital fixed eﬀects              -               x               x              -               x              x
   Mother fixed eﬀects                -               -               x              -               -              x
   Observations                  448,036         446,152         446,152        448,036         446,152         446,152
   R-squared                       0.026          0.066           0.023           0.024          0.056           0.022
   Mean dep. var.                 0.084           0.084           0.084          0.179            0.179          0.179
   Clusters                      369,797         368,295         368,295        369,797         368,295         368,295
   F-statistic                    11.958         10.714           2.282          18.506          15.718          2.515
   P-value                         0.000          0.000           0.058           0.000           0.000          0.039
Notes: All regressions include dummy variables for child’s age at end of sample in quarters. Other included controls: other
race, mother smoked during pregnancy, mother’s education (in years: 0-11, 12, 13-16, 16+), mother’s age (<20, 20-24, 25-
29, 30-34, 35+), mother married at birth, sex, birth order (1, 2, 3, 4+), multiple birth indicator, indicator for other race
(non-white, non-black), and indicator for child ever used public insurance; zip code level variables: population, population
density, median age, average household size, pct. with less than high school (25+), pct. with bachelor’s degree or more
(25+), pct. in labor force (16+), pct. of households making <20k, pct. of households making >200k, median year struc-
ture built, pct. of housing owner occupied, pct. of housing vacant, median value of owner occupied housing, pct. of families
below poverty. F-statistic/P-value from a test that the coeﬃcients on the first 4 birthweight bins interacted with black are
jointly equal to zero. Standard errors clustered at mother. The omitted categories are 3000-3499 and 3000-3499 * black.




                                                            33
                     Table 4: Asthma and Low Birth Weight: by Black Zip Codes

                                      Ever Diagnosed with Asthma                   No. Times Diagnosed with Asthma
                                    (1)             (2)                             (3)            (4)
                                 Black Zips     Other Zips      P-val            Black Zips     Other Zips      P-val
   500-999                        0.226***         0.131***         0.0077        0.827***          0.309***         0.0361
                                   (0.033)           (0.013)                       (0.244)            (0.044)
   1000-1499                      0.139***         0.077***         0.0046        0.537***           0.156***        0.0003
                                   (0.020)           (0.008)                       (0.104)            (0.019)
   1500-1999                      0.102***         0.047***         0.0003        0.312***           0.113***        0.0015
                                   (0.015)           (0.005)                       (0.061)            (0.013)
   2000-2499                      0.035***         0.021***         0.0581        0.135***           0.060***        0.0089
                                   (0.007)           (0.002)                       (0.028)            (0.008)
   2500-2999                      0.019***         0.007***         0.0051        0.050***           0.019***        0.0166
                                   (0.004)           (0.001)                       (0.013)            (0.003)
   3500-3999                        -0.002         -0.003***        0.7199          -0.002             -0.003        0.9357
                                   (0.003)           (0.001)                       (0.011)            (0.003)
   4000-4499                        -0.004         -0.007***        0.5698        -0.031**          -0.011***        0.1845
                                   (0.005)           (0.002)                       (0.015)            (0.004)
   4500-4999                        0.004             -0.005        0.5984          -0.017             -0.015        0.9661
                                   (0.016)           (0.005)                       (0.037)            (0.010)
   Black                          0.038***         0.045***         0.1670        0.091***          0.127***         0.0284
                                   (0.004)           (0.003)                       (0.013)            (0.010)
   500-999 * black                   0.032          0.088***        0.2772           0.135          0.456***         0.3005
                                   (0.039)           (0.033)                       (0.266)            (0.159)
   1000-1499 * black                 0.007          0.057**         0.1684          -0.030           0.341***        0.0294
                                   (0.027)           (0.024)                       (0.129)            (0.112)
   1500-1999 * black                -0.011             0.024        0.1623           0.096            0.182**        0.4664
                                   (0.019)           (0.016)                       (0.089)            (0.078)
   2000-2499 * black                 0.004          0.024**         0.1568           0.064              0.033        0.5660
                                   (0.010)           (0.009)                       (0.044)            (0.031)
   2500-2999 * black                -0.007             0.008        0.0664           0.019              0.006        0.6457
                                   (0.006)           (0.005)                       (0.022)            (0.018)
   3500-3999 * black               -0.010*             0.004        0.0573          -0.008              0.006        0.6068
                                   (0.005)           (0.005)                       (0.020)            (0.019)
   4000-4499 * black                -0.000            -0.005        0.7088         0.061*              -0.019        0.0914
                                   (0.010)           (0.009)                       (0.037)            (0.030)
   4500-4999 * black                -0.024           -0.042*        0.6091          -0.038          -0.132***        0.2897
                                   (0.026)           (0.022)                       (0.077)            (0.045)
   Individual/census vars              x                 x                             x                  x
   Hospital fixed eﬀects               x                 x                             x                  x
   Observations                    99,647           346,505                        99,647           346,505
   R-squared                        0.071            0.049                          0.057            0.042
   Mean dep. var.                   0.144            0.067                         0.357             0.128
   Clusters                        86,609           285,225                        86,609           285,225
   F-statistic                     0.330             4.852                          0.865            5.794
   P-value                          0.858            0.001                          0.484            0.000
Notes: Other included controls: other race, mother smoked during pregnancy, mother’s education (in years: 0-11, 12, 13-16,
16+), mother’s age (<20, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35+), mother married at birth, sex, birth order (1, 2, 3, 4+), multiple birth in-
dicator, indicator for other race (non-white, non-black), indicator for child ever used public insurance, and dummy variables
for child’s age at end of sample in quarters; zip code level variables: population, population density, median age, average
household size, pct. with less than high school (25+), pct. with bachelor’s degree or more (25+), pct. in labor force (16+),
pct. of households making <20k, pct. of households making >200k, median year structure built, pct. of housing owner oc-
cupied, pct. of housing vacant, median value of owner occupied housing, pct. of families below poverty. F-statistic/P-value
from a test that the coeﬃcients on the first 4 birthweight bins interacted with black are jointly equal to zero. Standard er-
rors clustered at mother. The omitted categories are 3000-3499 and 3000-3499 * black. Reported P-values are for a Chow
test that the coeﬃcient is the same across black and other zip codes.




                                                               34
Table 5: Asthma and Low Birth Weight: by Black Zip Codes, with Mother Fixed Eﬀects

                                     Ever Diagnosed with Asthma           No. Times Diagnosed with Asthma
                                        (1)              (2)                 (3)                (4)
                                     Black Zips      Other Zips           Black Zips        Other Zips
        500-999                        0.235**           0.114***           1.730*              0.429***
                                       (0.092)            (0.030)           (1.018)              (0.113)
        1000-1499                     0.165***           0.066***          0.852***             0.172***
                                       (0.048)            (0.015)           (0.279)              (0.034)
        1500-1999                     0.155***           0.033***          0.428***             0.101***
                                       (0.035)            (0.009)           (0.156)              (0.024)
        2000-2499                       0.021             0.012**           0.159**              0.029**
                                       (0.018)            (0.005)           (0.075)              (0.013)
        2500-2999                     0.033***             0.006*          0.121***              0.013*
                                       (0.011)            (0.003)           (0.043)              (0.007)
        3500-3999                       0.013              -0.002           0.071**               -0.008
                                       (0.010)            (0.002)           (0.035)              (0.005)
        4000-4499                       0.018             -0.007*            -0.007               -0.010
                                       (0.016)            (0.004)           (0.049)              (0.009)
        4500-4999                       -0.032             -0.008            0.012                -0.032
                                       (0.048)            (0.010)           (0.130)              (0.022)
        500-999 * black                  0.019             -0.006            -0.313               -0.152
                                       (0.103)            (0.092)           (1.043)              (0.295)
        1000-1499 * black               -0.022             -0.051            -0.148               -0.183
                                       (0.063)            (0.059)           (0.352)              (0.153)
        1500-1999 * black               -0.059             0.051              0.096                0.197
                                       (0.046)            (0.037)           (0.225)              (0.168)
        2000-2499 * black                0.011              0.034             0.028                0.078
                                       (0.026)            (0.023)           (0.111)              (0.082)
        2500-2999 * black              -0.029*              0.008           -0.107*                0.014
                                       (0.016)            (0.014)           (0.060)              (0.045)
        3500-3999 * black              -0.030*            0.035**            -0.068                0.068
                                       (0.015)            (0.014)           (0.053)              (0.048)
        4000-4499 * black               -0.015             0.001              0.113               -0.022
                                       (0.028)            (0.028)           (0.096)              (0.077)
        4500-4999 * black               -0.004             0.044             -0.167                0.163
                                       (0.085)            (0.053)           (0.205)              (0.106)
        Individual/census vars             x                  x                 x                    x
        Hospital fixed eﬀects              x                  x                 x                    x
        Mother fixed eﬀects                x                  x                 x                    x
        Observations                   99,647            346,505            99,647               346,505
        R-squared                       0.050             0.018              0.044                0.016
        Mean dep. var.                  0.084             0.084             0.179                 0.179
        Clusters                       86,609            285,225            86,609               285,225
        F-statistic                    0.619              1.245              0.147                1.258
        P-value                         0.649             0.289              0.965                0.284
     Notes: Other included controls: other race, mother smoked during pregnancy, mother’s education (in years:
     0-11, 12, 13-16, 16+), mother’s age (<20, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35+), mother married at birth, sex, birth
     order (1, 2, 3, 4+), multiple birth indicator, indicator for other race (non-white, non-black), indicator for
     child ever used public insurance, and dummy variables for child’s age at end of sample in quarters; zip code
     level variables: population, population density, median age, average household size, pct. with less than
     high school (25+), pct. with bachelor’s degree or more (25+), pct. in labor force (16+), pct. of house-
     holds making <20k, pct. of households making >200k, median year structure built, pct. of housing owner
     occupied, pct. of housing vacant, median value of owner occupied housing, pct. of families below poverty.
     F-statistic/P-value from a test that the coeﬃcients on the first 4 birthweight bins interacted with black are
     jointly equal to zero. Standard errors clustered at mother. The omitted categories are 3000-3499, black,
     and 3000-3499 * black.




                                                         35
                                              Table 6: Zip Code Level Neighborhood Characteristics: Correlations


                          General neighborhood characteristics                Adult respiratory disease        Indoor air pollution proxies            Outdoor air pollution proxies


                      Black zip   %Black     %Poverty %Single mom      COPD       Acute resp. Allerg. rhin. %Smoked %Vacant Built <1960 Facility dist. Within 400m Within 800m

     Black zip            1

     % Black          0.854***       1

     % Poverty        0.592***    0.663***      1

     % Single mom 0.692***        0.779***   0.794***        1

     COPD             0.127***    0.130***   0.148***    0.0985**         1




36
     Acute resp.      0.460***    0.473***   0.463***    0.424***     0.665***          1

     Allerg. rhin.    0.381***    0.429***   0.457***    0.451***     0.311***      0.471***         1

     % Smoked         0.0749*     0.0840**   0.194***    0.165***     0.447***      0.357***      0.102**       1

     % Vacant         0.117***    0.0999**   0.135***      0.0389     0.145***      0.267***      0.101**    0.176***       1

     Built <1960      0.160***    0.167***   0.197***    0.257***      0.0719*      0.160***     0.186***    -0.0424     0.0119         1

     Facility dist.   -0.231*** -0.329*** -0.288***      -0.312***    0.154***       0.0132      -0.187***   0.116***   0.136***    -0.267***         1

     Within 400m      0.0876**    0.112***   0.169***    0.111***     0.145***      0.151***      0.0505      0.0487    -0.0980**    0.0573        -0.0325          1

     Within 800m      0.144***    0.177***   0.229***    0.197***     0.0828**      0.136***     0.0907**    -0.0282    -0.123***   0.110***      -0.124***      0.937***          1

     Notes: All variables at the zip code level. COPD, pneumonia, and other respiratory are the number of hospital visits per 1000 people during our sample period by adults 50+ living
     in the zip code; pct. smoked is the percent of mothers in the zip code who reported smoking during pregnancy; pct. vacant is the percent of the housing stock reported vacant; built
     <1960 is the fraction of the housing stock built before 1960; facility distance is the distance to nearest high polluting facility; within 400m and 800m are the fraction of a zip code
     whose census block is within that distance of a limited access highway; poverty and single mom are the fraction living below the poverty line and of single moms.
11        Appendix Figures

               Figure A.1: Pollution Levels by Distance to Black Zip Code: PM 2.5
                                                                  Monthly Average Levels of PM2.5 by Month & Monitoring Station Location




                                                   20
                          PM2.5 Level (ug/m3 LC units)
                                                   15
                                                   10
                                                   5




                                                         2006m1      2008m1                               2010m1                           2012m1
                                                                                                   Date


                                                                  In or w/in 2mi of a Black ZCTA                     More than 2mi from a Black ZCTA




Notes: Black zip codes are zip codes with the highest fraction of black children, up until the point where there are approximately
the same number of black children and non-black children in the black zip codes. The remaining zip codes are defined as other
zip codes. Black zip codes are mapped to census zip code tabulation areas for calculating distance.




                  Figure A.2: Pollution Levels by Distance to Black Zip Code: CO
                                                                   Monthly Average Levels of CO by Month & Monitoring Station Location
                                                   1
                                                   .8
                          CO Level (ppm units)
                                                   .6
                                                   .4
                                                   .2




                                                         2006m1      2008m1                               2010m1                           2012m1
                                                                                                   Date


                                                                  In or w/in 2mi of a Black ZCTA                     More than 2mi from a Black ZCTA




Notes: Black zip codes are zip codes with the highest fraction of black children, up until the point where there are approximately
the same number of black children and non-black children in the black zip codes. The remaining zip codes are defined as other
zip codes. Black zip codes are mapped to census zip code tabulation areas for calculating distance.




                                                                                              37
                           Figure A.3: Pollution Monitoring Stations: PM 2.5




Notes: Grey denotes black zip codes, white denotes other zip codes. Black zip codes are zip codes with the highest fraction of
black children, up until the point where there are approximately the same number of black children and non-black children in
the black zip codes. The remaining zip codes are defined as other zip codes. As US Postal Service zip codes do not represent
contiguous geographic boundaries, we map zip codes to census zip code tabulation areas for the purpose of this figure.




                                                             38
                              Figure A.4: Pollution Monitoring Stations: CO




Notes: Grey denotes black zip codes, white denotes other zip codes. Black zip codes are zip codes with the highest fraction of
black children, up until the point where there are approximately the same number of black children and non-black children in
the black zip codes. The remaining zip codes are defined as other zip codes. As US Postal Service zip codes do not represent
contiguous geographic boundaries, we map zip codes to census zip code tabulation areas for the purpose of this figure.




                                                             39
                         Figure A.5: NJ Federal and Limited Access Highways




                                                                                                      Paterson


                                                                         Plainfield                        Jersey City
                                                    Somerset                                     Newark
                                                                                          Linden Elizabeth

                                                                                              Perth Amboy


                                                                             New Brunswick



                                                               Trenton
                                                                                                          Asbury Park




                                                 Camden




                                                                                      Atlantic City




Notes: Grey denotes black zip codes, white denotes other zip codes. Black zip codes are zip codes with the highest fraction of
black children, up until the point where there are approximately the same number of black children and non-black children in
the black zip codes. The remaining zip codes are defined as other zip codes. As US Postal Service zip codes do not represent
contiguous geographic boundaries, we map zip codes to census zip code tabulation areas for the purpose of this figure.




                                                               40
12   Appendix Tables

     Table A.1: Asthma and Low Birthweight: by Black Zip Code (22% Threshold)

                                       Ever Diagnosed with Asthma            No. Times Diagnosed with Asthma
                                          (1)              (2)                  (3)                (4)
                                       Black Zips      Other Zips            Black Zips        Other Zips
        500-999                         0.219***           0.128***           0.738***              0.306***
                                         (0.030)             (0.013)           (0.202)                (0.045)
        1000-1499                       0.128***            0.076***          0.450***               0.157***
                                         (0.018)             (0.008)           (0.085)                (0.020)
        1500-1999                       0.083***            0.049***          0.279***               0.110***
                                         (0.012)             (0.005)           (0.052)                (0.013)
        2000-2499                       0.031***            0.021***          0.136***               0.055***
                                         (0.006)             (0.002)           (0.025)                (0.008)
        2500-2999                       0.016***            0.008***          0.048***               0.018***
                                         (0.003)             (0.001)           (0.011)                (0.003)
        3500-3999                         -0.002           -0.003***             0.001                 -0.003
                                         (0.003)             (0.001)           (0.009)                (0.003)
        4000-4499                         -0.007           -0.007***          -0.030**              -0.010***
                                         (0.005)             (0.002)           (0.013)                (0.004)
        4500-4999                         0.001               -0.005            -0.026                 -0.014
                                         (0.014)             (0.005)           (0.030)                (0.010)
        Black                           0.036***           0.046***           0.088***              0.129***
                                         (0.003)             (0.003)           (0.012)                (0.011)
        500-999 * black                    0.035             0.090**             0.165               0.583***
                                         (0.036)             (0.037)           (0.225)                (0.199)
        1000-1499 * black                  0.015            0.063**              0.038              0.394***
                                         (0.024)             (0.027)           (0.111)                (0.129)
        1500-1999 * black                  0.009               0.017             0.120                0.196**
                                         (0.017)             (0.018)           (0.080)                (0.087)
        2000-2499 * black                  0.010            0.021**              0.059                  0.033
                                         (0.009)             (0.010)           (0.040)                (0.034)
        2500-2999 * black                 -0.003              0.007              0.021                  0.002
                                         (0.005)             (0.006)           (0.020)                (0.020)
        3500-3999 * black                -0.009*              0.002             -0.012                  0.008
                                         (0.005)             (0.006)           (0.018)                (0.020)
        4000-4499 * black                  0.001              -0.004             0.054                 -0.016
                                         (0.009)             (0.010)           (0.034)                (0.033)
        4500-4999 * black                 -0.021            -0.046**            -0.035              -0.136***
                                         (0.024)             (0.023)           (0.071)                (0.049)
        Individual/census vars               x                   x                 x                      x
        Hospital fixed eﬀects                x                   x                 x                      x
        Observations                    117,137             329,015            117,137               329,015
        R-squared                        0.071               0.047              0.057                 0.041
        Mean dep. var.                   0.138               0.065              0.336                 0.123
        Clusters                        101,568             270,630            101,568               270,630
        F-statistic                      0.646               3.851              1.184                 5.842
        P-value                          0.630               0.004              0.315                 0.000
     Notes: Other included controls: other race, mother smoked during pregnancy, mother’s education (in years:
     0-11, 12, 13-16, 16+), mother’s age (<20, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35+), mother married at birth, sex, birth order
     (1, 2, 3, 4+), multiple birth indicator, indicator for other race (non-white, non-black), indicator for child ever
     used public insurance, and dummy variables for child’s age at end of sample in quarters; zip code level vari-
     ables: population, population density, median age, average household size, pct. with less than high school
     (25+), pct. with bachelor’s degree or more (25+), pct. in labor force (16+), pct. of households making
     <20k, pct. of households making >200k, median year structure built, pct. of housing owner occupied, pct.
     of housing vacant, median value of owner occupied housing, pct. of families below poverty. F-statistic/P-
     value from a test that the coeﬃcients on the first 4 birthweight bins interacted with black are jointly equal
     to zero. Standard errors clustered at mother. The omitted categories are 3000-3499 and 3000-3499 * black.




                                                            41
Table A.2: Asthma and Low Birth Weight: by Black Zip Codes, with Mother Fixed Eﬀects
(22% Threshold)

                                      Ever Diagnosed with Asthma           No. Times Diagnosed with Asthma
                                         (1)              (2)                 (3)                (4)
                                      Black Zips      Other Zips           Black Zips        Other Zips
         500-999                       0.237***           0.116***           1.439*              0.432***
                                        (0.077)            (0.031)           (0.789)              (0.118)
         1000-1499                     0.141***           0.066***          0.661***             0.174***
                                        (0.041)            (0.015)           (0.212)              (0.035)
         1500-1999                     0.115***           0.035***          0.367***             0.100***
                                        (0.031)            (0.009)           (0.130)              (0.024)
         2000-2499                       0.018             0.012**           0.132**              0.027**
                                        (0.015)            (0.005)           (0.061)              (0.013)
         2500-2999                     0.026***             0.006*          0.110***                0.011
                                        (0.010)            (0.003)           (0.035)              (0.007)
         3500-3999                       0.014              -0.002           0.066**               -0.008
                                        (0.008)            (0.002)           (0.030)              (0.005)
         4000-4499                       0.004             -0.007*            0.007                -0.011
                                        (0.014)            (0.004)           (0.043)              (0.008)
         4500-4999                       -0.005             -0.008            0.052                -0.033
                                        (0.039)            (0.010)           (0.098)              (0.022)
         500-999 * black                  0.014             -0.058            -0.240               -0.109
                                        (0.088)            (0.108)           (0.821)              (0.388)
         1000-1499 * black               -0.002             -0.062            -0.034               -0.100
                                        (0.057)            (0.068)           (0.289)              (0.160)
         1500-1999 * black               -0.020             0.043              0.121                0.194
                                        (0.041)            (0.041)           (0.201)              (0.152)
         2000-2499 * black                0.016              0.021             0.046                0.046
                                        (0.023)            (0.025)           (0.096)              (0.090)
         2500-2999 * black               -0.023             0.008            -0.099*                0.017
                                        (0.015)            (0.015)           (0.053)              (0.047)
         3500-3999 * black             -0.030**            0.034**            -0.068                0.073
                                        (0.014)            (0.015)           (0.050)              (0.053)
         4000-4499 * black               -0.004             -0.007             0.080               -0.042
                                        (0.027)            (0.029)           (0.088)              (0.087)
         4500-4999 * black               -0.036             0.043             -0.208                0.177
                                        (0.077)            (0.061)           (0.179)              (0.121)
         Individual/census vars             x                  x                 x                    x
         Hospital fixed eﬀects              x                  x                 x                    x
         Mother fixed eﬀects                x                  x                 x                    x
         Observations                   117,137           329,015            117,137              329,015
         R-squared                       0.045             0.018              0.039                0.016
         Mean dep. var.                  0.084             0.084              0.179                0.179
         Clusters                       101,568           270,630            101,568              270,630
         F-statistic                     0.261             0.829              0.176                0.695
         P-value                         0.903             0.506              0.951                0.595
      Notes: Other included controls: other race, mother smoked during pregnancy, mother’s education (in years:
      0-11, 12, 13-16, 16+), mother’s age (<20, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35+), mother married at birth, sex, birth
      order (1, 2, 3, 4+), multiple birth indicator, indicator for other race (non-white, non-black), indicator for
      child ever used public insurance, and dummy variables for child’s age at end of sample in quarters; zip code
      level variables: population, population density, median age, average household size, pct. with less than
      high school (25+), pct. with bachelor’s degree or more (25+), pct. in labor force (16+), pct. of house-
      holds making <20k, pct. of households making >200k, median year structure built, pct. of housing owner
      occupied, pct. of housing vacant, median value of owner occupied housing, pct. of families below poverty.
      F-statistic/P-value from a test that the coeﬃcients on the first 4 birthweight bins interacted with black are
      jointly equal to zero. Standard errors clustered at mother. The omitted categories are 3000-3499, black,
      and 3000-3499 * black.




                                                          42
Table A.3: Asthma and Low Birthweight: by Black Zip Code (32% Threshold)

                                  Ever Diagnosed with Asthma            No. Times Diagnosed with Asthma
                                     (1)              (2)                  (3)                (4)
                                  Black Zips      Other Zips            Black Zips        Other Zips
   500-999                         0.262***           0.136***           1.137***              0.319***
                                    (0.045)             (0.013)           (0.415)                (0.042)
   1000-1499                       0.121***            0.085***          0.579***               0.187***
                                    (0.027)             (0.008)           (0.141)                (0.022)
   1500-1999                       0.110***            0.050***          0.362***               0.123***
                                    (0.019)             (0.005)           (0.089)                (0.013)
   2000-2499                       0.036***            0.022***          0.154***               0.064***
                                    (0.010)             (0.002)           (0.039)                (0.008)
   2500-2999                       0.023***            0.008***          0.064***               0.020***
                                    (0.005)             (0.001)           (0.018)                (0.003)
   3500-3999                         -0.003           -0.003***             0.004                 -0.003
                                    (0.005)             (0.001)           (0.016)                (0.003)
   4000-4499                         -0.004           -0.007***           -0.038*              -0.012***
                                    (0.008)             (0.002)           (0.021)                (0.004)
   4500-4999                         0.010               -0.006            -0.016                -0.017*
                                    (0.024)             (0.004)           (0.057)                (0.009)
   Black                           0.039***           0.043***           0.112***              0.114***
                                    (0.005)             (0.003)           (0.016)                (0.009)
   500-999 * black                    0.002            0.088***            -0.153               0.462***
                                    (0.050)             (0.029)           (0.432)                (0.133)
   1000-1499 * black                  0.029            0.046**             -0.058               0.291***
                                    (0.033)             (0.021)           (0.164)                (0.095)
   1500-1999 * black                 -0.017              0.023              0.061              0.175***
                                    (0.024)             (0.015)           (0.114)                (0.068)
   2000-2499 * black                  0.004            0.020**              0.049                 0.047*
                                    (0.013)             (0.008)           (0.056)                (0.028)
   2500-2999 * black                 -0.011              0.007              0.009                  0.012
                                    (0.007)             (0.005)           (0.027)                (0.016)
   3500-3999 * black                 -0.010              0.002             -0.009                  0.001
                                    (0.007)             (0.005)           (0.025)                (0.016)
   4000-4499 * black                  0.001              -0.004            0.076*                 -0.008
                                    (0.012)             (0.008)           (0.046)                (0.026)
   4500-4999 * black                 -0.031             -0.034*            -0.045               -0.096**
                                    (0.034)             (0.020)           (0.099)                (0.043)
   Individual/census vars               x                   x                 x                      x
   Hospital fixed eﬀects                x                   x                 x                      x
   Observations                     69,177             376,975            69,177                376,975
   R-squared                         0.069              0.050              0.056                 0.042
   Mean dep. var.                    0.162              0.070             0.416                  0.136
   Clusters                         60,302             310,887            60,302                310,887
   F-statistic                      0.368               5.189              0.322                 7.486
   P-value                           0.832              0.000              0.863                 0.000
Notes: Other included controls: other race, mother smoked during pregnancy, mother’s education (in years:
0-11, 12, 13-16, 16+), mother’s age (<20, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35+), mother married at birth, sex, birth order
(1, 2, 3, 4+), multiple birth indicator, indicator for other race (non-white, non-black), indicator for child ever
used public insurance, and dummy variables for child’s age at end of sample in quarters; zip code level vari-
ables: population, population density, median age, average household size, pct. with less than high school
(25+), pct. with bachelor’s degree or more (25+), pct. in labor force (16+), pct. of households making
<20k, pct. of households making >200k, median year structure built, pct. of housing owner occupied, pct.
of housing vacant, median value of owner occupied housing, pct. of families below poverty. F-statistic/P-
value from a test that the coeﬃcients on the first 4 birthweight bins interacted with black are jointly equal
to zero. Standard errors clustered at mother. The omitted categories are 3000-3499 and 3000-3499 * black.




                                                       43
Table A.4: Asthma and Low Birth Weight: by Black Zip Codes, with Mother Fixed Eﬀects
(32% Threshold)

                                      Ever Diagnosed with Asthma           No. Times Diagnosed with Asthma
                                         (1)              (2)                 (3)                (4)
                                      Black Zips      Other Zips           Black Zips        Other Zips
         500-999                       0.356***           0.100***             3.288             0.386***
                                        (0.121)            (0.030)           (2.124)              (0.104)
         1000-1499                      0.123*            0.072***           0.887**             0.194***
                                        (0.067)            (0.015)           (0.405)              (0.036)
         1500-1999                     0.198***           0.033***          0.519***             0.104***
                                        (0.048)            (0.009)           (0.182)              (0.026)
         2000-2499                       0.023             0.012**           0.236**              0.029**
                                        (0.025)            (0.005)           (0.121)              (0.013)
         2500-2999                      0.029*            0.006**            0.150**              0.014**
                                        (0.016)            (0.003)           (0.065)              (0.007)
         3500-3999                       0.007              -0.001            0.071                -0.005
                                        (0.013)            (0.002)           (0.053)              (0.005)
         4000-4499                       0.009              -0.005            -0.021               -0.008
                                        (0.023)            (0.004)           (0.070)              (0.009)
         4500-4999                       -0.066             -0.007            -0.097               -0.024
                                        (0.075)            (0.010)           (0.194)              (0.022)
         500-999 * black                 -0.063              0.018            -1.772                0.182
                                        (0.132)            (0.075)           (2.136)              (0.279)
         1000-1499 * black                0.034             -0.040            -0.074               -0.111
                                        (0.080)            (0.054)           (0.470)              (0.142)
         1500-1999 * black               -0.089             0.038              0.011                0.193
                                        (0.058)            (0.033)           (0.263)              (0.139)
         2000-2499 * black                0.022              0.012            -0.038                0.066
                                        (0.033)            (0.020)           (0.156)              (0.068)
         2500-2999 * black               -0.014             -0.006            -0.121                0.003
                                        (0.021)            (0.012)           (0.082)              (0.040)
         3500-3999 * black               -0.019            0.024**            -0.059                0.031
                                        (0.020)            (0.012)           (0.071)              (0.041)
         4000-4499 * black                0.000             -0.002             0.171               -0.025
                                        (0.035)            (0.023)           (0.118)              (0.070)
         4500-4999 * black                0.046              0.032            -0.040                0.125
                                        (0.111)            (0.046)           (0.264)              (0.092)
         Individual/census vars             x                  x                 x                    x
         Hospital fixed eﬀects              x                  x                 x                    x
         Mother fixed eﬀects                x                  x                 x                    x
         Observations                   69,177            376,975            69,177               376,975
         R-squared                       0.056             0.018              0.052                0.017
         Mean dep. var.                  0.084             0.084             0.179                 0.179
         Clusters                       60,302            310,887            60,302               310,887
         F-statistic                    1.089              0.687              0.222                1.129
         P-value                         0.360             0.601              0.926                0.341
      Notes: Other included controls: other race, mother smoked during pregnancy, mother’s education (in years:
      0-11, 12, 13-16, 16+), mother’s age (<20, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35+), mother married at birth, sex, birth
      order (1, 2, 3, 4+), multiple birth indicator, indicator for other race (non-white, non-black), indicator for
      child ever used public insurance, and dummy variables for child’s age at end of sample in quarters; zip code
      level variables: population, population density, median age, average household size, pct. with less than
      high school (25+), pct. with bachelor’s degree or more (25+), pct. in labor force (16+), pct. of house-
      holds making <20k, pct. of households making >200k, median year structure built, pct. of housing owner
      occupied, pct. of housing vacant, median value of owner occupied housing, pct. of families below poverty.
      F-statistic/P-value from a test that the coeﬃcients on the first 4 birthweight bins interacted with black are
      jointly equal to zero. Standard errors clustered at mother. The omitted categories are 3000-3499, black,
      and 3000-3499 * black.




                                                          44
Table A.5: Total Number of Visits for Asthma and Low Birth Weight: Zero-Inflated Negative
Binomial Models

                                           (1)                (2)                (3)              (4)
                                         Baseline        With Controls        Black Zips       Other Zips
            500-999                      0.641***           0.957***           1.062***         1.031***
                                          (0.114)            (0.094)            (0.165)          (0.116)
            1000-1499                    0.372***           0.561***           0.706***         0.583***
                                          (0.107)            (0.075)            (0.164)          (0.089)
            1500-1999                    0.317***           0.356***           0.485***         0.355***
                                          (0.090)            (0.091)            (0.163)          (0.108)
            2000-2499                    0.316***           0.257***            0.231*          0.258***
                                          (0.068)            (0.067)            (0.127)          (0.077)
            2500-2999                    0.099**              0.071*             -0.018          0.115**
                                          (0.040)            (0.043)            (0.081)          (0.051)
            3500-3999                      0.024              -0.010             -0.009           -0.011
                                          (0.037)            (0.037)            (0.078)          (0.042)
            4000-4499                      -0.060             -0.010             -0.139            0.016
                                          (0.059)            (0.062)            (0.118)          (0.071)
            4500-4999                      -0.190              0.011             0.075            0.021
                                          (0.136)            (0.146)            (0.343)          (0.164)
            Black                        0.534***           0.155***             0.024          0.381***
                                          (0.036)            (0.040)            (0.062)          (0.064)
            500-999 * black              0.341***           0.365***              0.170            0.312
                                          (0.131)            (0.127)            (0.187)          (0.202)
            1000-1499 * black             0.270**            0.244**             -0.023           0.346*
                                          (0.132)            (0.109)            (0.187)          (0.186)
            1500-1999 * black               0.156            0.265**              0.194            0.164
                                          (0.127)            (0.119)            (0.198)          (0.173)
            2000-2499 * black              -0.070              0.027              0.088           -0.015
                                          (0.096)            (0.088)            (0.150)          (0.128)
            2500-2999 * black               0.024              0.058            0.230**           -0.078
                                          (0.060)            (0.065)            (0.100)          (0.094)
            3500-3999 * black               0.016              0.083              0.114            0.005
                                          (0.062)            (0.066)            (0.100)          (0.109)
            4000-4499 * black               0.132              0.163            0.346**            0.143
                                          (0.112)            (0.123)            (0.166)          (0.226)
            4500-4999 * black               0.020             -0.282             -0.222           -0.084
                                          (0.297)            (0.309)            (0.433)          (0.949)
            Individual/census vars            -                  x                  x                x
            Hospital fixed eﬀects             -                  x                  x                x
            Observations                  448,036           446,152             99,647           346,505
            Mean dep. var.                 0.179             0.179              0.179             0.179
            P-value                        0.011             0.004               0.751            0.188
         Notes: Other included controls: other race, mother smoked during pregnancy, mother’s education
         (in years: 0-11, 12, 13-16, 16+), mother’s age (<20, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35+), mother married at
         birth, sex, birth order (1, 2, 3, 4+), multiple birth indicator, indicator for other race (non-white,
         non-black), indicator for child ever used public insurance, and dummy variables for child’s age at
         end of sample in quarters; zip code level variables: population, population density, median age, av-
         erage household size, pct. with less than high school (25+), pct. with bachelor’s degree or more
         (25+), pct. in labor force (16+), pct. of households making <20k, pct. of households making
         >200k, median year structure built, pct. of housing owner occupied, pct. of housing vacant, me-
         dian value of owner occupied housing, pct. of families below poverty. Standard errors clustered at
         mother. Birth weight bins, an indicator for black, and their interaction are used in the first stage
         to predict whether or not the count is zero. F-statistic/P-value from a test that the coeﬃcients on
         the first 4 birthweight bins interacted with black are jointly equal to zero. The omitted categories
         are 3000-3499 and 3000-3499 * black.




                                                         45
    Table A.6: Asthma and Low Birthweight: Sequential Addition of Covariate Groups

                                     Ever Diagnosed with Asthma                      No. Times Diagnosed with Asthma
                             (1)           (2)         (3)             (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)
 500-999                  0.154***      0.153***    0.153***     0.148***       0.411***    0.415***    0.413***     0.398***
                            (0.013)       (0.012)     (0.012)      (0.012)       (0.058)     (0.057)     (0.057)      (0.057)
 1000-1499                0.091***      0.093***    0.091***     0.088***      0.225***     0.236***    0.232***     0.223***
                            (0.007)       (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.025)     (0.024)     (0.024)      (0.024)
 1500-1999                0.051***      0.059***    0.058***     0.056***      0.127***     0.153***    0.151***     0.145***
                            (0.004)       (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.004)       (0.014)     (0.015)     (0.015)      (0.015)
 2000-2499                0.020***      0.025***    0.024***     0.023***      0.062***     0.077***    0.076***     0.073***
                            (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.007)     (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.008)
 2500-2999                0.008***      0.010***    0.009***     0.009***      0.021***     0.025***    0.024***     0.024***
                            (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)
 3500-3999                 -0.002**     -0.003***   -0.003***    -0.003***        -0.003      -0.004      -0.004       -0.004
                            (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)
 4000-4499                -0.006***     -0.008***   -0.008***    -0.007***     -0.013***   -0.016***   -0.016***    -0.014***
                            (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)
 4500-4999                   -0.002        -0.006      -0.005       -0.005        -0.013    -0.020**    -0.019**      -0.018*
                            (0.004)       (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)      (0.010)
 Black                    0.091***      0.056***    0.046***     0.045***      0.250***    0.153***    0.122***     0.113***
                            (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.008)      (0.008)
 500-999 * black           0.086***      0.092***    0.092***     0.096***     0.471***     0.482***    0.483***     0.489***
                            (0.022)       (0.021)     (0.021)      (0.021)       (0.107)     (0.106)     (0.106)      (0.106)
 1000-1499 * black         0.057***      0.054***    0.053***     0.054***      0.309***    0.295***    0.281***     0.277***
                            (0.016)       (0.016)     (0.016)      (0.016)       (0.069)     (0.069)     (0.067)      (0.067)
 1500-1999 * black         0.036***      0.028**     0.029***     0.028***      0.253***    0.228***    0.228***     0.222***
                            (0.011)       (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.011)       (0.053)     (0.053)     (0.053)      (0.052)
 2000-2499 * black         0.024***      0.019***    0.019***     0.018***      0.112***    0.096***    0.093***     0.089***
                            (0.006)       (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.027)     (0.026)     (0.026)      (0.026)
 2500-2999 * black          0.008**        0.005        0.005        0.004      0.045***    0.037***     0.035**      0.029**
                            (0.004)       (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.013)      (0.013)
 3500-3999 * black         -0.008**        -0.005      -0.005       -0.004        -0.013      -0.005      -0.003       -0.001
                            (0.004)       (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.003)       (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.013)      (0.013)
 4000-4499 * black           -0.007        -0.001      -0.001       -0.001        -0.001       0.017       0.019        0.021
                            (0.006)       (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.024)     (0.024)     (0.024)      (0.024)
 4500-4999 * black         -0.035**       -0.029*     -0.028*      -0.027*      -0.099**     -0.079*     -0.078*       -0.074
                            (0.016)       (0.016)     (0.016)      (0.016)       (0.047)     (0.046)     (0.046)      (0.046)
 Individual vars                -             x           x            x             -           x           x            x
 Census vars                    -             -           x            x             -           -           x            x
 Hospital fixed eﬀects          -             -           -            x             -           -           -            x
 Observations              448,036       447,251     446,152         446,152   448,036     447,251      446,152      446,152
 R-squared                   0.026        0.055        0.058          0.066     0.024       0.045         0.047       0.056
 Mean dep. var.             0.084         0.084       0.084           0.084     0.179       0.179         0.179       0.179
 Clusters                  369,797       369,214     368,295         368,295   369,797     369,214      368,295      368,295
 F-statistic                11.958       10.204       10.392          10.714   18.506       16.399       16.005       15.718
 P-value                     0.000        0.000        0.000           0.000    0.000        0.000        0.000        0.000
Notes: All regressions include dummy variables for child’s age at end of sample in quarters. Other included controls: other
race, mother smoked during pregnancy, mother’s education (in years: 0-11, 12, 13-16, 16+), mother’s age (<20, 20-24, 25-29,
30-34, 35+), mother married at birth, sex, birth order (1, 2, 3, 4+), multiple birth indicator, indicator for other race (non-
white, non-black), and indicator for child ever used public insurance; zip code level variables: population, population density,
median age, average household size, pct. with less than high school (25+), pct. with bachelor’s degree or more (25+), pct.
in labor force (16+), pct. of households making <20k, pct. of households making >200k, median year structure built, pct.
of housing owner occupied, pct. of housing vacant, median value of owner occupied housing, pct. of families below poverty.
F-statistic/P-value from a test that the coeﬃcients on the first 4 birthweight bins interacted with black are jointly equal to
zero. Standard errors clustered at mother. The omitted categories are 3000-3499 and 3000-3499 * black.




                                                                46
   Table A.7: Asthma and Low Birthweight: Zip Code Fixed Eﬀects

                            Ever Diagnosed with Asthma        No. Times Diagnosed with Asthma
                                        (1)                                 (2)
 500-999                              0.148***                             0.402***
                                        (0.012)                              (0.057)
 1000-1499                            0.088***                             0.224***
                                        (0.007)                              (0.024)
 1500-1999                            0.056***                             0.146***
                                        (0.004)                              (0.015)
 2000-2499                            0.023***                             0.073***
                                        (0.002)                              (0.008)
 2500-2999                            0.009***                             0.024***
                                        (0.001)                              (0.003)
 3500-3999                            -0.003***                               -0.003
                                        (0.001)                              (0.003)
 4000-4499                            -0.007***                            -0.014***
                                        (0.002)                              (0.004)
 4500-4999                               -0.005                              -0.018*
                                        (0.004)                              (0.010)
 Black                                0.040***                             0.103***
                                        (0.002)                              (0.008)
 500-999 * black                       0.095***                             0.484***
                                        (0.021)                              (0.106)
 1000-1499 * black                     0.053***                             0.275***
                                        (0.016)                              (0.067)
 1500-1999 * black                     0.029***                             0.222***
                                        (0.011)                              (0.052)
 2000-2499 * black                     0.018***                             0.087***
                                        (0.006)                              (0.026)
 2500-2999 * black                        0.004                              0.029**
                                        (0.004)                              (0.013)
 3500-3999 * black                       -0.004                               -0.001
                                        (0.003)                              (0.013)
 4000-4499 * black                       -0.001                                0.023
                                        (0.006)                              (0.024)
 4500-4999 * black                       -0.026                               -0.069
                                        (0.016)                              (0.046)
 Individual/census vars                     x                                    x
 Hospital fixed eﬀects                      x                                    x
 Zip code fixed eﬀects                      x                                    x
 Observations                          446,152                              446,152
 R-squared                              0.070                                0.060
 Mean dep. var.                         0.084                                0.179
 Clusters                              368,295                              368,295
 F-statistic                           10.546                               15.410
 P-value                                0.000                                0.000
Notes: All regressions include dummy variables for child’s age at end of sample in quarters. Other
included controls: other race, mother smoked during pregnancy, mother’s education (in years: 0-
11, 12, 13-16, 16+), mother’s age (<20, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35+), mother married at birth, sex,
birth order (1, 2, 3, 4+), multiple birth indicator, indicator for other race (non-white, non-black),
and indicator for child ever used public insurance; zip code level variables: population, popula-
tion density, median age, average household size, pct. with less than high school (25+), pct. with
bachelor’s degree or more (25+), pct. in labor force (16+), pct. of households making <20k, pct.
of households making >200k, median year structure built, pct. of housing owner occupied, pct.
of housing vacant, median value of owner occupied housing, pct. of families below poverty. F-
statistic/P-value from a test that the coeﬃcients on the first 4 birthweight bins interacted with
black are jointly equal to zero. Standard errors clustered at mother. The omitted categories are
3000-3499 and 3000-3499 * black.




                                                  47
   Table A.8: Asthma and Low Birthweight: Reporting Coeﬃcients on Census Variables
                                                        Ever Diagnosed with Asthma          No. Times Diagnosed with Asthma
                                                           (1)             (2)                 (3)               (4)
   500-999                                               0.148***         0.127***           0.398***            0.599***
                                                          (0.012)           (0.029)           (0.057)             (0.179)
   1000-1499                                             0.088***         0.078***           0.223***            0.240***
                                                          (0.007)           (0.014)           (0.024)             (0.045)
   1500-1999                                             0.056***         0.043***           0.145***            0.133***
                                                          (0.004)           (0.009)           (0.015)             (0.028)
   2000-2499                                             0.023***         0.014***           0.073***            0.052***
                                                          (0.002)           (0.005)           (0.008)             (0.015)
   2500-2999                                             0.009***         0.009***           0.024***            0.027***
                                                          (0.001)           (0.003)           (0.003)             (0.008)
   3500-3999                                            -0.003***            -0.000            -0.004              -0.001
                                                          (0.001)           (0.002)           (0.003)             (0.006)
   4000-4499                                            -0.007***            -0.005         -0.014***              -0.007
                                                          (0.002)           (0.004)           (0.004)             (0.009)
   4500-4999                                               -0.005            -0.008           -0.018*              -0.026
                                                          (0.004)           (0.010)           (0.010)             (0.023)
   Black                                                 0.045***             0.000         0.113***                0.000
                                                          (0.002)              (.)            (0.008)                (.)
   500-999 * black                                       0.096***           0.091*           0.489***               0.419
                                                          (0.021)           (0.049)           (0.106)             (0.267)
   1000-1499 * black                                     0.054***             0.035          0.277***               0.234
                                                          (0.016)           (0.036)           (0.067)             (0.157)
   1500-1999 * black                                     0.028***          0.047**           0.222***            0.319***
                                                          (0.011)           (0.024)           (0.052)             (0.119)
   2000-2499 * black                                     0.018***          0.031**           0.089***             0.106*
                                                          (0.006)           (0.015)           (0.026)             (0.058)
   2500-2999 * black                                        0.004            -0.001           0.029**              -0.002
                                                          (0.004)           (0.009)           (0.013)             (0.031)
   3500-3999 * black                                       -0.004             0.005            -0.001               0.015
                                                          (0.003)           (0.009)           (0.013)             (0.031)
   4000-4499 * black                                       -0.001             0.004             0.021               0.043
                                                          (0.006)           (0.017)           (0.024)             (0.054)
   4500-4999 * black                                      -0.027*             0.017            -0.074               0.033
                                                          (0.016)           (0.045)           (0.046)             (0.096)
   Population density                                    0.000***             0.000           0.000*              0.000*
                                                          (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)             (0.000)
   Median age                                            0.001***            -0.001           0.001*                0.001
                                                          (0.000)           (0.001)           (0.001)             (0.003)
   Avg. household size                                   -0.007**            -0.016         -0.027***               0.045
                                                          (0.003)           (0.014)           (0.009)             (0.047)
   Pct. < high school                                     0.000**            -0.000            -0.001              -0.002
                                                          (0.000)           (0.001)           (0.000)             (0.002)
   Pct. college +                                       -0.000***         -0.001***          -0.000**              -0.002
                                                          (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)             (0.001)
   Pct. in labor force                                   0.001***            -0.000          0.003***              -0.002
                                                          (0.000)           (0.001)           (0.000)             (0.002)
   Pct. households < $20k                                0.002***            -0.000          0.006***              -0.004
                                                          (0.000)           (0.001)           (0.001)             (0.004)
   Pct. households > $200k                               0.001***          0.002**           0.003***               0.004
                                                          (0.000)           (0.001)           (0.001)             (0.003)
   Median year structure built                             0.000*             0.000          0.000***               0.001
                                                          (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)             (0.001)
   Pct. owner occupied                                     0.000*             0.000            0.000*              -0.001
                                                          (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)             (0.001)
   Pct. vacant                                           -0.000**            -0.000            -0.000               0.003
                                                          (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)             (0.002)
   Median value (owner occ.)                            -0.000***            -0.000          -0.000**              -0.000
                                                          (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)             (0.000)
   Pct. below poverty                                   -0.001***             0.000             0.000               0.001
                                                          (0.000)           (0.001)           (0.001)             (0.004)
   Avg. commute                                             0.000            -0.001            -0.000              -0.001
                                                          (0.000)           (0.001)           (0.000)             (0.002)
   Total population                                     -0.000***          -0.000**         -0.000***              -0.000
                                                          (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)             (0.000)
   Individual/census vars & hospital fixed eﬀects             x                 x                 x                   x
   Mother fixed eﬀects                                        -                 x                 -                   x
   Observations                                          446,152           446,152           446,152              446,152
   R-squared                                              0.066             0.023              0.056               0.022
   Mean dep. var.                                         0.084             0.084             0.179                0.179
   Clusters                                              368,295           368,295           368,295              368,295
   F-statistic                                           10.714             2.282             15.718               2.515
   P-value                                                0.000             0.058              0.000               0.039
Notes: All regressions include dummy variables for child’s age at end of sample in quarters. Other included controls: other race,
mother smoked during pregnancy, mother’s education (in years: 0-11, 12, 13-16, 16+), mother’s age (<20, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35+),
mother married at birth, sex, birth order (1, 2, 3, 4+), multiple birth indicator, indicator for other race (non-white, non-black),
and indicator for child ever used public insurance. F-statistic/P-value from a test that the coeﬃcients on the first 4 birthweight
                                                               48 clustered at mother. The omitted categories are 3000-3499 and
bins interacted with black are jointly equal to zero. Standard errors
3000-3499 * black.
Table A.9: Asthma and Low Birthweight: Only Nonhispanic Black and White Children

                                     Ever Diagnosed with Asthma                   No. Times Diagnosed with Asthma
                                   (1)           (2)          (3)                 (4)           (5)           (6)
   500-999                      0.112***        0.108***          0.083**       0.230***       0.227***         0.253**
                                 (0.015)          (0.015)         (0.034)        (0.046)         (0.046)        (0.125)
   1000-1499                    0.067***         0.066***        0.062***       0.147***        0.151***       0.155***
                                 (0.009)          (0.009)         (0.016)        (0.025)         (0.025)        (0.045)
   1500-1999                    0.042***         0.045***        0.023**        0.079***        0.095***        0.060**
                                 (0.005)          (0.005)         (0.010)        (0.013)         (0.014)        (0.026)
   2000-2499                    0.022***         0.023***        0.019***       0.049***        0.056***       0.055***
                                 (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.006)        (0.008)         (0.008)        (0.015)
   2500-2999                    0.007***         0.007***        0.007**        0.016***        0.016***        0.015*
                                 (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.003)        (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.008)
   3500-3999                     -0.002*        -0.003***          0.001          -0.002         -0.005*         -0.009
                                 (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.002)        (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.005)
   4000-4499                     -0.003*        -0.006***         -0.006*        -0.007*       -0.013***       -0.018**
                                 (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.009)
   4500-4999                      0.003            -0.002          -0.001         0.001           -0.010         -0.022
                                 (0.005)          (0.005)         (0.010)        (0.010)         (0.010)        (0.022)
   Black                        0.108***        0.052***           0.000        0.300***       0.126***          0.000
                                 (0.002)          (0.003)            (.)         (0.008)         (0.009)           (.)
   500-999 * black              0.118***         0.125***        0.129**        0.609***        0.618***       0.786***
                                 (0.024)          (0.024)         (0.054)        (0.104)         (0.103)        (0.252)
   1000-1499 * black            0.083***         0.077***           0.045       0.379***        0.349***         0.334*
                                 (0.017)          (0.017)         (0.039)        (0.071)         (0.070)        (0.172)
   1500-1999 * black            0.045***         0.038***         0.052**       0.314***        0.281***       0.401***
                                 (0.012)          (0.012)         (0.026)        (0.057)         (0.057)        (0.134)
   2000-2499 * black            0.018***          0.014**          0.023        0.112***        0.093***          0.093
                                 (0.007)          (0.007)         (0.016)        (0.029)         (0.028)        (0.064)
   2500-2999 * black             0.010**           0.006           -0.006       0.047***         0.031**         -0.014
                                 (0.004)          (0.004)         (0.010)        (0.015)         (0.015)        (0.035)
   3500-3999 * black            -0.009**           -0.005          -0.003         -0.011          0.003           0.019
                                 (0.004)          (0.004)         (0.010)        (0.015)         (0.015)        (0.037)
   4000-4499 * black             -0.013*           -0.003           0.008         -0.016          0.018           0.077
                                 (0.007)          (0.007)         (0.019)        (0.027)         (0.027)        (0.064)
   4500-4999 * black            -0.039**           -0.028           0.014       -0.123**         -0.089*          0.016
                                 (0.018)          (0.018)         (0.053)        (0.052)         (0.050)        (0.116)
   Individual/census vars            -                x               x              -               x              x
   Hospital fixed eﬀects             -                x               x              -               x              x
   Observations                  288,912         287,443         287,443        288,912         287,443         287,443
   R-squared                       0.041          0.076           0.023           0.037          0.067           0.023
   Mean dep. var.                 0.079           0.079           0.079          0.171            0.171          0.171
   Clusters                      233,047         231,881         231,881        233,047         231,881         231,881
   F-statistic                    15.470         14.402           2.368          24.920          22.077          4.495
   P-value                         0.000          0.000           0.050           0.000           0.000          0.001
Notes: All regressions include dummy variables for child’s age at end of sample in quarters. Other included controls: other
race, mother smoked during pregnancy, mother’s education (in years: 0-11, 12, 13-16, 16+), mother’s age (<20, 20-24, 25-
29, 30-34, 35+), mother married at birth, sex, birth order (1, 2, 3, 4+), multiple birth indicator, indicator for other race
(non-white, non-black), and indicator for child ever used public insurance; zip code level variables: population, population
density, median age, average household size, pct. with less than high school (25+), pct. with bachelor’s degree or more
(25+), pct. in labor force (16+), pct. of households making <20k, pct. of households making >200k, median year struc-
ture built, pct. of housing owner occupied, pct. of housing vacant, median value of owner occupied housing, pct. of families
below poverty. F-statistic/P-value from a test that the coeﬃcients on the first 4 birthweight bins interacted with black are
jointly equal to zero. Standard errors clustered at mother. The omitted categories are 3000-3499 and 3000-3499 * black.




                                                            49
                  Table A.10: Asthma and Low Birthweight: Triple Diﬀerence

                                                    Ever Diagnosed with Asthma       No. Times Diagnosed with Asthma
                                                                (1)                                (2)
 Black                                                          0.045***                           0.120***
                                                                 (0.002)                            (0.008)
 Low birth weight (< 2500g)                                     0.034***                           0.085***
                                                                 (0.002)                            (0.007)
 Black zip                                                      0.009***                           0.011**
                                                                 (0.002)                            (0.005)
 Black * Low birth weight (< 2500g)                             0.034***                           0.139***
                                                                 (0.008)                            (0.031)
 Black * Black zip                                                -0.002                             0.007
                                                                 (0.003)                            (0.011)
 Low birth weight (< 2500g) * Black zip                         0.029***                           0.142***
                                                                 (0.006)                            (0.028)
 Black * Low birth weight (< 2500g) * Black zip                   -0.016                             -0.040
                                                                 (0.011)                            (0.050)
 Individual/census vars                                              x                                  x
 Hospital fixed eﬀects                                               x                                  x
 Observations                                                   446,152                            446,152
 R-squared                                                       0.064                              0.054
 Mean dep. var.                                                  0.084                              0.179
 Clusters                                                       368,295                            368,295
 F-statistic                                                    20.223                             20.394
 P-value                                                         0.000                              0.000
Notes: All regressions include dummy variables for child’s age at end of sample in quarters. Other included controls:
other race, mother smoked during pregnancy, mother’s education (in years: 0-11, 12, 13-16, 16+), mother’s age (<20,
20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35+), mother married at birth, sex, birth order (1, 2, 3, 4+), multiple birth indicator, indicator for
other race (non-white, non-black), and indicator for child ever used public insurance; zip code level variables: popula-
tion, population density, median age, average household size, pct. with less than high school (25+), pct. with bachelor’s
degree or more (25+), pct. in labor force (16+), pct. of households making <20k, pct. of households making >200k,
median year structure built, pct. of housing owner occupied, pct. of housing vacant, median value of owner occupied
housing, pct. of families below poverty. F-statistic/P-value from a test that the coeﬃcients on the first 4 birthweight
bins interacted with black are jointly equal to zero. Standard errors clustered at mother.




                                                           50
                          Table A.11: Asthma and Low Birthweight: Movers

                                  Ever Diagnosed with Asthma                    No. Times Diagnosed with Asthma
                              (1)           (2)            (3)                 (4)           (5)            (6)
                          All Mothers Black Mothers Other Mothers          All Mothers Black Mothers Other Mothers
 500-999                    0.189**         0.239**            0.153           0.157           0.271           -0.024
                            (0.095)         (0.100)          (0.170)         (0.534)         (0.764)          (0.241)
 1000-1499                    0.071           0.108            0.039          -0.062           0.270           -0.709
                            (0.087)         (0.117)          (0.116)         (0.334)         (0.251)          (0.803)
 1500-1999                    0.029           0.100           -0.044           0.247           0.520           -0.031
                            (0.057)         (0.097)          (0.066)         (0.247)         (0.397)          (0.303)
 2000-2499                    0.021           0.053           -0.003           0.081          -0.034            0.218
                            (0.031)         (0.052)          (0.037)         (0.147)         (0.150)          (0.228)
 2500-2999                   -0.002          -0.007           -0.007           0.059           0.124            0.014
                            (0.019)         (0.033)          (0.023)         (0.057)         (0.106)          (0.065)
 3500-3999                    0.011           0.006            0.002          -0.007           0.009           -0.031
                            (0.016)         (0.031)          (0.019)         (0.067)         (0.178)          (0.057)
 4000-4499                   -0.008          -0.051            0.013           0.094          -0.131            0.173
                            (0.026)         (0.047)          (0.030)         (0.082)         (0.125)          (0.107)
 4500-4999                    0.072           0.456            0.037           0.185           0.366            0.179
                            (0.068)         (0.318)          (0.064)         (0.179)         (0.444)          (0.190)
 Black zip                   -0.016          -0.005           -0.024          -0.062          -0.059           -0.046
                            (0.016)         (0.029)          (0.019)         (0.052)         (0.104)          (0.059)
 500-999 * black zip         -0.138          -0.127           -0.171           0.008          -0.125            0.250
                            (0.127)         (0.143)          (0.229)         (0.590)         (0.829)          (0.380)
 1000-1499 * black zip        0.079           0.096            0.073           0.190          -0.210            0.833
                            (0.110)         (0.164)          (0.145)         (0.364)         (0.474)          (0.813)
 1500-1999 * black zip       -0.029          -0.058            0.014          -0.110          -0.176           -0.165
                            (0.069)         (0.118)          (0.075)         (0.321)         (0.497)          (0.379)
 2000-2499 * black zip        0.042           0.074            0.011           0.052           0.218           -0.133
                            (0.044)         (0.072)          (0.056)         (0.191)         (0.249)          (0.278)
 2500-2999 * black zip        0.023           0.034            0.034          -0.001          -0.114            0.115
                            (0.026)         (0.046)          (0.031)         (0.086)         (0.148)          (0.104)
 3500-3999 * black zip        0.005           0.043           -0.001           0.007          -0.062            0.046
                            (0.021)         (0.042)          (0.024)         (0.076)         (0.175)          (0.078)
 4000-4499 * black zip        0.041           0.094            0.013          -0.031           0.151           -0.131
                            (0.034)         (0.072)          (0.038)         (0.106)         (0.172)          (0.136)
 4500-4999 * black zip       -0.090         -0.553*           -0.074          -0.236          -0.689           -0.197
                            (0.103)         (0.324)          (0.115)         (0.229)         (0.486)          (0.256)
 Individual/census vars         x               x                x               x               x                x
 Hospital fixed eﬀects          x               x                x               x               x                x
 Mother fixed eﬀects            x               x                x               x               x                x
 Observations                8,003           2,913            5,090           8,003           2,913            5,090
 R-squared                   0.072           0.127            0.092           0.051           0.110            0.067
 Mean dep. var.              0.123           0.123            0.123           0.282           0.282            0.282
 Clusters                    3,568           1,279            2,289           3,568           1,279            2,289
 F-statistic                 0.713           0.673            0.205           0.135           0.287            0.393
 P-value                     0.583           0.611            0.936           0.970           0.887            0.814
Notes: Other included controls: other race, mother smoked during pregnancy, mother’s education (in years: 0-11, 12,
13-16, 16+), mother’s age (<20, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35+), mother married at birth, sex, birth order (1, 2, 3, 4+), mul-
tiple birth indicator, indicator for other race (non-white, non-black), indicator for child ever used public insurance, and
dummy variables for child’s age at end of sample in quarters; zip code level variables: population, population density, me-
dian age, average household size, pct. with less than high school (25+), pct. with bachelor’s degree or more (25+), pct.
in labor force (16+), pct. of households making <20k, pct. of households making >200k, median year structure built,
pct. of housing owner occupied, pct. of housing vacant, median value of owner occupied housing, pct. of families be-
low poverty. F-statistic/P-value from a test that the coeﬃcients on the first 4 birthweight bins interacted with black are
jointly equal to zero. Standard errors clustered at mother. The omitted categories are 3000-3499 and 3000-3499 * black.




                                                           51
                 Table A.12: Asthma and Low Birth Weight: by Poverty

                                   Ever Diagnosed with Asthma              No. Times Diagnosed with Asthma
                                       (1)                (2)                     (3)                (4)
                                High Poverty Zips      Other Zips          High Poverty Zips     Other Zips
   500-999                           0.251***             0.126***              0.616***              0.354***
                                      (0.034)               (0.013)              (0.119)               (0.064)
   1000-1499                         0.167***              0.071***             0.572***              0.147***
                                      (0.022)               (0.008)              (0.102)               (0.020)
   1500-1999                         0.109***              0.045***             0.383***              0.097***
                                      (0.015)               (0.005)              (0.068)               (0.012)
   2000-2499                         0.033***              0.020***             0.138***              0.057***
                                      (0.007)               (0.002)              (0.028)               (0.007)
   2500-2999                         0.018***              0.007***             0.051***              0.018***
                                      (0.003)               (0.001)              (0.011)               (0.003)
   3500-3999                           -0.003             -0.003***               -0.003                -0.003
                                      (0.003)               (0.001)              (0.009)               (0.003)
   4000-4499                           -0.005             -0.007***               -0.012             -0.013***
                                      (0.005)               (0.002)              (0.013)               (0.004)
   4500-4999                           0.010                 -0.006               -0.031                -0.013
                                      (0.014)               (0.005)              (0.028)               (0.010)
   Black                             0.040***             0.043***              0.108***             0.111***
                                      (0.004)               (0.003)              (0.015)               (0.009)
   500-999 * black                      0.018              0.094***              0.395**              0.418***
                                      (0.042)               (0.027)              (0.176)               (0.138)
   1000-1499 * black                   -0.022              0.067***               -0.000              0.275***
                                      (0.030)               (0.020)              (0.142)               (0.078)
   1500-1999 * black                   -0.010               0.025*                 0.095              0.163***
                                      (0.021)               (0.014)              (0.107)               (0.058)
   2000-2499 * black                    0.011               0.018**                0.060               0.065**
                                      (0.011)               (0.008)              (0.050)               (0.029)
   2500-2999 * black                   -0.005                 0.006                0.017                 0.021
                                      (0.006)               (0.005)              (0.024)               (0.016)
   3500-3999 * black                 -0.012**                 0.003               -0.033                0.027*
                                      (0.006)               (0.004)              (0.021)               (0.016)
   4000-4499 * black                   -0.001                -0.002                0.031                 0.014
                                      (0.011)               (0.008)              (0.041)               (0.030)
   4500-4999 * black                   -0.043                -0.021               -0.091                -0.045
                                      (0.027)               (0.021)              (0.074)               (0.059)
   Individual/census vars                 x                     x                    x                     x
   Hospital fixed eﬀects                  x                     x                    x                     x
   Observations                       97,995                348,157              97,995               348,157
   R-squared                           0.079                 0.052                0.060                0.045
   Mean dep. var.                      0.084                 0.084               0.179                 0.179
   Clusters                           81,568                289,877              81,568               289,877
   F-statistic                         0.508                 7.232                1.785                8.211
   P-value                             0.730                 0.000                0.129                0.000
Notes: Other included controls: other race, mother smoked during pregnancy, mother’s education (in years: 0-11,
12, 13-16, 16+), mother’s age (<20, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35+), mother married at birth, sex, birth-3499 order (1,
2, 3, 4+), multiple birth indicator, indicator for other race (non-white, non-black), indicator for child ever used
public insurance, and dummy variables for child’s age at end of sample in quarters; zip code level variables: pop-
ulation, population density, median age, average household size, pct. with less than high school (25+), pct. with
bachelor’s degree or more (25+), pct. in labor force (16+), pct. of households making <20k, pct. of households
making >200k, median year structure built, pct. of housing owner occupied, pct. of housing vacant, median value
of owner occupied housing, pct. of families below poverty. F-statistic/P-value from a test that the coeﬃcients on
the first 4 birthweight bins interacted with black are jointly equal to zero. Standard errors clustered at mother.
The omitted categories are 3000-3499 and 3000-3499 * black.




                                                       52
13     Data Appendix

Information on Coding Medicaid/NJ FamilyCare HMOs

We categorize the payer information into two groups based on the primary payer: Medicaid,
NJ FamilyCare, indigent, and other government (Medicaid, Medicaid HMOs, FamilyCare
HMOs, Title XIX Medicaid, other government, and indigent which comes from the “other”
category), and private (Commercial, Blue Cross, non Medicaid/FamilyCare HMOs, Cham-
pus, and New Jersey State Health Benefits).
   The HMO category is broken into Medicaid/FamilyCare and non-Medicaid/FamilyCare
HMOs based on information about product lines from New Jersey HMO contracts. Six
HMOs with Medicaid/NJ FamilyCare product lines were identified to be in operation during
the time period. Four of these HMOs had no commercial product lines, and were easily
classified as Medicaid/FamilyCare HMOs. The other two have both Medicaid/FamilyCare
and Commercial product lines, and in the data there is no way to distinguish which patients
are Medicaid/FamilyCare and which are not. All patients with these HMOs as primary
payers were coded as Medicaid/FamilyCare, though some are likely private. The results are
robust to whether these patients are coded as Medicaid/FamilyCare or private.

HMO Contracts with Medicaid Product Lines 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 Commercial
AmeriChoice of NJK/UnitedHealthcare                x x x x x x x
AMERIGROUP New Jersey/Americaid                    x x x x x x x
Healthfirst Health Plan of New Jersey, Inc               x x x x
Health Net of New Jersey, Inc.                     x x x x               x
Horizon Healthcare of New Jersey/HMO Blue x x x x x x x                  x
University Health Plans, Inc.                  x x x x
Commercial refers to a commercial product line. Information on HMO contracts and
product lines from the 2006-2012 New Jersey HMO Performance Reports (Report Cards)
http://www.state.nj.us/dobi/lifehealthactuarial/hmo2007/index.html




                                              53
Information on the String Matching Algorithm

The matching algorithm creates a patient identifier by finding records with the same date
of birth and the same or very similar first and last names. Specifically, the Levenshtein edit
distance is used to match names, because of problems with typos and misspellings (stata
command strgroup). While it is possible that we are picking up a few cases of diﬀerent
people with the same name and birthday, it does not seem to be a large problem.
   The main worry is that there may be many children with similar names and the same
birthday, who are being aggregated by the algorithm. In order to assess whether this was a
concern, we looked at people with the most common first and last name combinations. We
took first and last name combinations that the algorithm assigned to at least eight children,
and called this the sample of “common names”.
   In order to assess the match quality, we looked at the three-digit zip code of residence
reported for each visit. Of this sample of children with extremely common names, those
with more than ten visits reported all visits in the same three-digit zip code. This suggests
that the algorithm did not mistakenly aggregate people with common first and last name
combinations – otherwise we would expect the people with common name combinations and
many visits to report multiple zip codes. Of all people with these common names, 92.49%
reported just one three-digit zip, 6.94% reported two, and 0.58% reported three.
   Furthermore, we manually inspected all patients in the top 1% of number of visits. None
of these children had “common names”, as defined above, and almost all reported either just
one three-digit zip code, or a combination of neighboring three digit zip codes.




                                             54
