                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       SURPRISE! OUT-OF-NETWORK BILLING FOR EMERGENCY CARE IN THE
                             UNITED STATES

                                         Zack Cooper
                                      Fiona Scott Morton
                                        Nathan Shekita

                                      Working Paper 23623
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23623


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 2017, Revised January 2018




This project received financial support from the National Institute for Health Care Management
Foundation and the University of Toulouse. We received helpful comments from Amanda Starc,
Stuart Craig, Chima Ndumele, Kate Ho, and Leemore Dafny. We appreciate the excellent
research assistance provided by Eugene Larsen-Hallock and Charles Gray. All mistakes are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Zack Cooper, Fiona Scott Morton, and Nathan Shekita. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Surprise! Out-of-Network Billing for Emergency Care in the United States
Zack Cooper, Fiona Scott Morton, and Nathan Shekita
NBER Working Paper No. 23623
July 2017, Revised January 2018
JEL No. I11,I13,I18,L14

                                         ABSTRACT

Hospitals and physicians independently negotiate contracts with insurers. As a result, a privately
insured individual can attend an in-network hospital emergency department, but receive care and
potentially a large, unexpected bill from an out-of-network emergency physician working at that
hospital. Because patients do not choose their emergency physician, emergency physicians can
remain out-of-network and charge high prices without losing patient volume. As we illustrate,
this strong outside option improves emergency physicians’ bargaining power with insurers. We
then analyze a New York State law that introduced binding arbitration between emergency
physicians and insurers and therefore weakened physicians’ outside option in negotiations. We
observe that the New York law reduced out-of-network billing by 34 percent and lowered in-
network emergency physician payments by 9 percent.

Zack Cooper                                     Nathan Shekita
Yale School of Public Health                    Yale University
Department of Health Policy                     77 Prospect Street New
60 College Street                               Haven, CT 06511
New Haven, CT 06520                             nathan.shekita@yale.edu
zack.cooper@yale.edu

Fiona Scott Morton
Yale School of Management
Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
fiona.scottmorton@yale.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23623
1    Introduction
The prices of health care services delivered to privately insured individuals in the
US are set via bilateral negotiations between health care providers and health
insurers. Each year, there are 41.9 emergency department (ED) visits per 100
people in the United States (US) (Rui, Kang, and M 2013). When patients access
EDs, they are consuming an indivisible package of care that includes hospital and
physician services. However, what most privately insured patients do not realize
is that hospitals and physicians in the US independently negotiate contracts
with insurers. As a result, it is possible for a patient to choose a hospital ED
that is in-network with his insurer, but receive care and a subsequent large bill
from an unavoidable ED physician working at the hospital who is out-of-network
with her insurer. A fundamental problem in emergency medicine in the US,
which we describe, is that ED physicians face inelastic demand from patients
when they are practicing inside in-network hospital EDs. As a result, they need
not set their prices in response to market forces. Ultimately, the practice of
out-of-network billing from inside in-network hospitals undercuts the functioning
of health care labor markets, exposes patients to significant financial risk, and
reduces social welfare. In this paper, we describe where out-of-network billing
occurs, why it persists, and explore policy options to address the issue. Out-of-
network billing is both an immediate policy concern and provides an illuminating
demonstration of the economics of insurer physician bargaining. In particular,
this paper illustrates how shifting a physician’s outside option and disagreement
payoff changes the negotiated payments they receive from insurers.
    The financial harm patients face when they are treated by an out-of-network
physician can be substantial. When a physician is out-of-network, she bills for
and attempts to collect her “charges,” which are not competitively determined.
In many instances, when a patient is treated by an out-of-network physician,
insurers will only pay physicians a portion of their out-of-network charges. This
leaves the physician to attempt to collect the difference between her charges
and the insurer’s payment (the balance) from the patient (so-called balance or
surprise billing). These balance bills can be hundreds or thousands of dollars and
have been well documented in the popular press (see, for example, Rosenthal
2014a; Rosenthal 2014b; Sanger-Katz and Abelson 2016). Moreover, even in
instances when an insurer pays the entirety of a physician’s out-of-network
charges, those higher payments will be passed onto consumers through higher
premiums and cost sharing. Given that nearly half of individuals in the US do


                                         2
not have the liquidity to pay an unexpected $400 expense without taking on
debt, these out-of-network bills can be financially devastating to a large share of
the population and should be a major policy concern (Board of the Governors
of the Federal Reserve System 2016).
    ED physicians’ ability to bill out-of-network also has the potential to raise
the costs of in-network care. The incentives facing ED physicians to join
insurers’ networks differ markedly from the incentives facing most other non-ED
physicians. Traditionally, physicians (e.g. orthopedic surgeons and internists)
face a price-volume tradeoff when deciding whether to join an insurer’s network.
An orthopedic surgeon can, for example, refuse to join all insurers’ networks and
bill her patients for her charges. However, many patients will not seek treatment
from a physician who is out-of-network because of the additional cost they would
incur. Alternatively, the orthopedic surgeon could join insurers’ networks, which
will increase the physician’s demand, but in exchange for that demand, the
insurers will require a price concession. In this way, physicians in high demand
or with few substitutes are able to command higher prices, a characteristic of
functioning labor markets. By contrast, because they are part of a wider bundle
of hospital care and cannot be avoided once the hospital choice is made, ED
physicians (and other specialist physicians like radiologists, pathologists, and
radiologists) face inelastic demand from patients and will not see a reduction in
their patient volume if they fail to negotiate contracts with insurers.
    The ability to stay out-of-network and charge high prices with no impact on
quantity might suggest that we should observe zero in-network ED physicians.
However, as we discuss, physicians can incur significant costs when bill out-of-
network. Theory predicts that the availability of a lucrative outside option will
give ED physicians bargaining leverage that will allow them to obtain higher
in-network payment rates (which also allows all sides to avoid the transaction
costs of out-of-network billing, discussed further below).1 As a result, physicians
can use the threat of out-of-network billing to raise their in-network payments
and avoid the added costs of being out-of-network. These higher payment rates,
caused not by supply or demand, but rather by the ability to “ambush” the
patient represent a transfer from consumers to physicians and, because ED care
is so common, raise overall health spending.
    In this paper, we analyze data from a large insurer that covers tens of millions
of lives annually to study where and why out-of-network ED billing occurs. We
  1 For   a description of this result, see Osborne and Rubinstein (1990)




                                               3
also use our analysis of ED billing in the US to illustrate how a strong outside
option improves a party’s negotiating power. Finally, we explore policy options
for protecting consumers and restoring a competitively set price for ED physician
care. While doing so, we test empirically whether a policy pursued in New York
state that limits ED physicians’ ability to bill out-of-network (and hence lowers
their disagreement payoff) reduces the frequency of out-of-network billing and
lowers ED physicians’ average in-network payments.
    We begin by assessing the distribution of out-of-network billing for ED care
across hospitals in the US. Previous work has found that approximately a fifth
of privately insured patients treated at in-network hospital EDs were treated
by out-of-network ED physicians (Cooper and Scott Morton 2016; Garmon and
Chartock 2016). However, we illustrate that looking at national or regional
averages of out-of-network is uninformative because out-of-network billing is
concentrated in a small number of hospitals: 50 percent of hospitals have out-
of-network billing rates below two percent while 15 percent of hospitals have
out-of-network billing rates above 80 percent. Out-of-network physicians in
our data charge, on average, 637 percent of what the Medicare program would
pay for identical services, which is 2.4 times higher than in-network payment
rates. Consistent with predictions that a strong outside option should give ED
physicians stronger negotiating power over in-network rates, we find that ED
physicians in our data are paid in-network rates of 266 percent of Medicare
payments, which is higher than most other specialists (for reference, in our data,
in-network orthopedic surgeons are paid 178 percent of Medicare rates to perform
hip replacements).
    Approximately two-thirds of hospitals in the US outsource the staffing of their
EDs to physician management firms that hire and manage physicians, manage
ED operations, and take care of billing (Deutsche Bank 2013). We analyze the
behavior of the two largest ED outsourcing firms in the US – TeamHealth and
EmCare – to understand how each for-profit firm uses the strong outside option
ED physicians possess to influence their negotiations with insurers. We find that
both firms use the power of their outside option to raise revenues when they take
over new contracts with hospitals, albeit in very different ways. When EmCare
enters into a new contract to manage a hospital’s ED services, they immediately
exit networks, bill as out-of-network providers, and seek to collect their charges
(which they also raise by 96 percent relative to the charges billed by the prior
physician group in that hospital). By contrast, when TeamHealth receives a
new hospital contract, physicians working for the firm go out-of-network for

                                        4
several months and then rejoin networks while using the now credible threat
of out-of-network status to secure higher in-network payments. As we discuss,
differences in how the two firms use out-of-network billing to raise revenue are
interesting in their own right. In addition, their respective strategies offer insight
into the economics of bargaining between physicians and insurers.
    When physicians bill out-of-network for services they deliver while working
from inside in-network EDs, it exposes patients to financial risk and creates
reputational harm for the hospitals where they work. What hospitals would allow
physician groups working inside their facilities to engage in an out-of-network
billing strategy given that it exposes patients to financial risk and exposes
the hospital to reputational harm? Newhouse (1970) posited that hospitals
trade off patient and community benefit with profits. Since a hospital ultimately
controls which physician groups staff their EDs, hospitals that allow ED physician
practices that bill out-of-network to work from inside their facilities must put
more weight on profit relative to patient welfare than hospitals that do not.
Likewise, hospitals that allow ED practices that bill out-of-network to operate
from their facilities must also receive transfers of value from those ED physician
practices that offset the reputational costs the hospitals incur from out-of-network
billing occurring.
    Consistent with these predictions, we find that for-profit hospitals are sig-
nificantly more likely to contract with EmCare physicians. Moreover, we find
evidence that EmCare physicians compensate hospitals in kind for allowing them
to engage in an out-of-network strategy from inside their facilities. Recall that
physicians order hospital services (e.g. imaging studies) that are billed by and
paid to the hospital rather than the doctor. After EmCare physicians took over
EDs at the hospitals in our data, facility payments rise by 11 percent, which
were driven, in part, by increases in the rates patients received imaging studies
ordered by EmCare. We also observe that patients were 23 percent more likely to
be admitted to the hospital after EmCare took over ED staffing. This is notable
because hospitals earn significantly higher profits on emergency care when a
patient is admitted to the hospital rather than being discharged (Wilson and
Cutler 2014). These changes in hospital behavior are not a function of changes
in the case mix of patients after EmCare took over hospital EDs.
    Out-of-network bills are irksome for consumers (historically, they have were
the number one health insurance complaint to the New York Department of
Financial Services), expose patients to financial risk, and raise the total cost of
health care services (New York State Department of Financial Services 2012).

                                          5
We finish by exploring policy options for state and federal officials to address the
issue. Effective policy should aim to protect consumers from financial risk and
restore a competitively set price for ED physicians’ payments. At present, only
six states have meaningful laws to protect consumers from surprise bills (Lucia,
Hoadley, and A. Williams 2017). Of those six states, all include a hold harmless
provision to protect patients from financial risks (e.g., these laws stipulate that
patients cannot be charged more than their usual in-network cost sharing during
emergencies and cannot be balance billed). The harder problem for states is
determining how to fill the “missing” price when there is no contract between
physicians and insurers. Half of states with surprise billing laws and a recent
bi-partisan proposal from the Senate seek to fill the “missing” price via regulating
the payment insurers must make to providers (Lucia, Hoadley, and A. Williams
2017).2 However, as we describe, it is extremely unlikely that a regulated price
will approximate the true market price for any given insurer-physician pair in
a particular year. As a result, as soon as the regulated price set by states
or the federal government differs from the market price, either the insurer or
the physician will take advantage of a regulated price that favors them (e.g.,
insurers will cease to build networks or physicians will cease to join networks)
and insurance networks for ED care will be not develop.
    In lieu of regulating the ‘missing’ price, we explore two alternative strategies
states or the federal government could pursue to restore a competitively set
price for ED physicians. The first is a baseball rules arbitration process where
an arbitrator chooses between the original offer made by the insurer and the
original bill sent by the physician. The second is a policy that would require
hospitals to sell, and insurers to purchase, an “ED package” that includes both
physician and hospital services. As we describe, both policies would introduce
a competitively set ED physician price and curtail physicians’ outside option,
which should reduce physicians’ in-network payments. We then test the impact
of a 2014 law in New York that introduced baseball rules arbitration to settle
the out-of-network billing disputes between physicians and insurers. We show
that the New York state policy reduced out-of-network billing by 34 percent and
lowered in-network ED physician payments in the state by 9 percent via shifting
the disagreement payoff to ED physicians who bill out-of-network.
    Ultimately, this paper makes two contributions to the literature. First, we
   2 U.S. Congress.  Senate.  To Prohibit Surprise Medical Billing of Patients of
2018. TAM18B37. https://www.cassidy.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Discussion%20Draft-
%20Protecting%20Patients%20from%20Surprise%20Medical%20Bills%20Act.pdf



                                         6
analyze the drivers of out-of-network billing in the US, quantify the extent the
issue raises total health care costs and harms consumers, test one state’s efforts to
address the issue, and make economically grounded recommendations to restore
a competitively-set price for ED physician services. Second, we demonstrate how
the strength of a party’s outside options influences negotiations. We show three
pieces of evidence which illustrate that improving physicians’ outside options
and disagreement payoffs in their negotiations with insurers lead to higher
in-network payments. These results are therefore informative about broader
physician/insurer bargaining.
    Going forward, this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives background
on ED care in the US and describes the impact of surprise out-of-network billing
on patients. In Section 3, we outline the incentives of physicians and hospitals
to engage in out-of-network billing. We describe our data and analytic approach
in Section 4. In Section 5, we identify the factors associated with out-of-network
billing and analyze the impact of the entry of EmCare and TeamHealth on
out-of-network billing rates, physician prices, out-of-pocket costs, and hospital
behavior. We explore policy options to address out-of-network billing in Section
6 and conclude in Section 7.


2     Background

2.1    The Evolution of Emergency Medicine in the United States

From the 1970s through the 1990s, care in hospital-based EDs shifted from
being provided on an ad hoc basis by community physicians to being delivered,
round-the-clock, by doctors who often completed emergency medicine residencies
and obtained board-certification in the specialty (Institute of Medicine 2006).3
At present, there are more than 4,500 EDs in the US and approximately 40,000
physicians who staff them nationwide (Hsia, Kellermann, and Shen 2011; Mor-
ganti et al. 2013). The use of EDs has risen dramatically over time. From 1993
to 2003, the U.S. population grew by 12 percent, hospitalizations increased by
12 percent, and ED visits increased by 26 percent (Institute of Medicine 2006).
From 2001 through 2008, the use of EDs increased 1.9 percent each year—60
   3 Many EDs are not staffed by board-certified ED physicians. Approximately a third of

emergency care is provided by family physicians. In rural states, the share of family physicians
delivering emergency care is higher than 50% (Wadman et al. 2005; Groth et al. 2013; McGirr,
J. M. Williams, and Prescott 1998).




                                               7
percent faster than concurrent population growth (Hsia, Kellermann, and Shen
2011).
    Over the last several decades, EDs have become one of the main pathways
through which patients are admitted to the hospital (Morganti et al. 2013). From
1993 to 2006, the share of all inpatient stays in which patients were admitted to
the hospital via an ED increased from 33.5 percent to 48.3 percent (Schuur and
Venkatesh 2012). Over time, as the use of EDs has gone up, waiting times to be
treated in EDs have also increased (Hing and Bhuiya 2012). In response to rising
waiting times, EDs increasingly are competing on the length of time patients
have to wait before they are treated (Esposito 2015; Rice 2016). Because EDs
have become a major source of patients, hospitals now want to keep their EDs
open at all hours and run them efficiently (Institute of Medicine 2006; Morganti
et al. 2013). As a result, there has been a marked increase in the outsourcing
of management of hospital EDs. ED outsourcing companies hire and manage
physicians, manage ED operations, and take care of billing. At present, roughly
65 percent of the physician market is outsourced (Deutsche Bank 2013). Among
the hospitals that outsource their services, approximately a third contract with
a large, national outsourcing chain and the remainder are outsourced to smaller,
local firms (Dalavagas 2014).
    The national market for physician outsourcing is dominated by two firms,
EmCare and TeamHealth, that collectively account for approximately 30 percent
of the outsourced physician market (Deutsche Bank 2013). EmCare was publicly
traded until 2018 when it was bought by private equity firm KKR & Co. Inc.,
operates in 45 states, has 23,100 affiliated or employed physicians and health
care professionals, and according to their 2016 Form 10-K, delivers more than 18
million emergency episodes per year. More recently, EmCare has partnered with
a large, for-profit hospital chain and formed joint ventures where the firm and
its hospital partners share in profits from physician bills (Deutsche Bank 2013).
    The second firm, TeamHealth, is approximately the same size. According to
the firm’s 2015 Form 10-K, TeamHealth has more than 18,000 affiliated health
professionals and delivers approximately 10 million ED cases per year. After a
series of recent acquisitions, TeamHealth is likely to have the largest market share
in the physician outsourcing space. The firm was previously publicly traded but
was taken private in 2016 when it was purchased by the Blackstone Group.
    In the aggregate, ED care is profitable for hospitals. Wilson and Cutler
(2014) estimated that average ED profit margins are approximately 7.8 percent
per patient. However, the profit margins that hospitals face for ED care vary

                                         8
significantly depending on how a patient’s care is funded and based on whether
a patient is admitted to the hospital. Wilson and Cutler (2014) found that
hospitals had profit margins of 39.6 percent for privately insured patients treated
in EDs, whereas the profit margin for patients covered by Medicare and Medicaid
and those uninsured was −15.6 percent, −35.9 percent, and −54.4 percent,
respectively. They also found that patients who were admitted to the hospital
were significantly more profitable than those who were not. For Medicare patients,
the profit margin on ED care for patients who were discharged from the ED was
−53.6 percent whereas the profit margin for patients who were admitted to the
hospital was 18.4 percent (Wilson and Cutler 2014).


2.2   Out-of-Network Surprise Billing

There has been significant coverage of out-of-network billing in the popular press
(Rosenthal 2014a; Rosenthal 2014b; Sanger-Katz and Abelson 2016). However,
until recently, there has been no systematic evidence on the frequency that
out-of-network billing occurs. Recent survey work suggests that it is fairly
common for privately insured patients to be treated by out-of-network physicians.
A Consumers Union 2015 survey found that 30 percent of privately insured
individuals reported receiving a surprise medical bill within the previous year,
and Kyanko, Curry, and Busch (2013) found that most instances in which
privately insured individuals involuntarily saw out-of-network providers occurred
during medical emergencies. In many instances, when patients receive a surprise
bill, they simply pay the balance in full (Consumers Union 2015). Likewise,
among those who had trouble paying a medical bill, 32 percent reported that
their financial troubles stemmed from a bill from an out-of-network provider for
services that were not covered or were only partially covered by their insurer
(Hamel et al. 2016). In this Hamel et al. (2016) survey, the authors found that
bills from ED physicians made up the largest share of medical debt that patients
reported having problems paying.
    The results of these surveys have been confirmed by recent empirical evidence.
A 2014 report found that among the three largest insurers in Texas, 45 percent,
56 percent, and 21 percent of their in-network hospitals had zero in-network ED
physicians (Pogue and Randall 2014). Likewise, in the first national study of
out-of-network billing, Cooper and Scott Morton (2016) analyzed data from a
large commercial insurer and found that 22 percent of in-network ED hospital
visits included a primary physician claim from an out-of-network doctor. Using


                                        9
different data, Garmon and Chartock (2016) found that 20 percent of ED cases
in which care was delivered to privately insured patients at in-network hospitals
involved care form an out-of-network physician. However, as we will show below,
knowing the average propensity of receiving an out-of-network bill does not
help diagnose the policy problem, which lies in the tail of the distribution of
out-of-network billing rates across hospitals.
    There are broadly two types of out-of-network bills. The first form of
out-of-network billing results from contracting frictions between insurers and
physicians. In the US, there are approximately 54,000 ED physicians, 5,500
hospitals, and over 1000 insurers (Kaiser Family Foundation 2018; American
Hospital Association 2018). As a result, it is unlikely that every ED physician
could have a contract with every insurer that covers all the patients they treated.
As an example, an ED physician in a popular vacation destination could see
patients from across the country. Even if she wanted to, this ED physician would
struggle to enter into contracts with insurers from across the country. While
an out-of-state patient’s insurer might have a contract with the hospital in the
area the patient is visiting, it is possible they might not have a contract with the
patient’s ED physician. In these instances, if the physician were not engaging in
a deliberate out-of-network strategy, the physician might accept a payment rate
that is of the same magnitude as her usual in-network payments.
    A second form of out-of-network billing occurs when physicians deliberately
do not participate in insurers’ networks so that they can reap higher payments.
As the New York State Department of Financial Services noted, “a relatively small
but significant number of out-of-network specialists appear to take advantage of
the fact that emergency care must be delivered and [that] advanced disclosure is
not typically demanded or even expected by consumers. The fees charged by
these providers can, in some instances, be many times larger than what private
or public payers typically allow, and are another source of consumer complaints”
(New York State Department of Financial Services 2012). Indeed, a recent study
found that physicians who tend not to be chosen by patients (anesthesiologists,
radiologists, pathologists, and ED physicians) have the highest charges measured
as a percentage of their Medicare payments (Bai and Anderson 2016).
    When an insured patient sees an out-of-network physician, there are three
potential outcomes. First, the insurer may pay the physician’s out-of-network
bill in its entirety. This will protect the patient, but ultimately insurers will pass
the cost of these higher payment rates on to all beneficiaries in the form of higher
premiums. In addition, patients generally face higher co-insurance rates when

                                         10
they see an out-of-network provider. As a result, even if their insurer pays their
physician his charge, the patient may still face substantial cost-sharing. Second,
the insurer may pay the out-of-network physician his usual and customary rate,
which the insurer calculates based on average charges for the services provided.
This payment is generally lower than the total billed amount. When this occurs,
the physician may accept the usual and customary rate the insurer is offering
and move on. Alternatively, the physician may pursue the patient to pay the
difference between the charge and whatever the insurer paid. This is referred to
as “balance billing.” Third, the insurer may not cover the costs of out-of-network
care at all, leaving the patient to pay the entire physician bill herself. As we
show later from our data, these physician bills can be extremely large. While
there is no systematic evidence on the frequency that patients are balance billed
by physicians, from 2012 to 2015, data from the Texas Department of Insurance
showed that balance-billing complaints in the state increased 1000% (Gooch
2016).


3     Incentives for Insurers, Physicians, and Hos-
      pitals to Allow or Engage in Out-of-Network
      Billing
For a patient to receive a surprise bill, there are three parties that have to prefer
out-of-network billing to an in-network contract: the ED physician group, the
hospital, and the insurer. The physician group and insurer must be unable to
come to an agreement on an in-network contract. In addition, the hospital must
effectively allow physicians to bill out-of-network from inside their facilities.4 We
discuss each party’s incentives in turn. We more formally model these incentives
in Appendix A.


3.1    Insurers and Out-of-Network-Billing

The physician group and the insurer bargain over the price the insurer will pay
the physician for care delivered to policy holders. The insurer faces a tradeoff
   4 The hospital may not have legal authority to prevent a physician (or physician group)

from practicing in the ED just because that physician has failed to come to an agreement with
any given insurer or insurers. However, we assume there are so many interactions between
the hospital and an ED physician group that if the hospital disapproved of the group’s overall
strategy, it could make the relationship sufficiently onerous such that the physicians would
move in-network.



                                             11
between including more and better physicians in its network and the higher
in-network payments needed to make to retain those physicians in the network.
The decision about how broad and how highly reputable a network of providers
to create (and how to handle out-of-network bills) is a function of the preferences
of the purchasers of health insurance. Buyers of insurance might prefer a broad
network of physicians, have a distaste for out-of-network bills, and therefore be
willing to accept higher premiums. On the other hand, the buyers might prefer
lower premiums and be willing to accept an insurance plan with a narrower
network of providers and a higher probability of a policy-holder seeing an out-of-
network physician. In the extreme, the buyers of insurance could be willing to
accept a plan with out-of-network ED physician billing and believe it to function
as a very expensive form of patient cost-sharing for accessing ED services.
    When ED physicians are out-of-network, insurers can face higher payments,
higher transaction costs, and dissatisfied customers. If an ED group is pursuing
a deliberate strategy of remaining out-of-network, raising charges, and refusing
to negotiate over payments, the outside option for the insurer depends on laws in
state where their policy-holders are treated and the extent to which physicians are
sensitive to threats of litigation over their bills. In states without laws to address
out-of-network billing, physicians may seek to collect their charges. Physicians’
charges are not competitively set by hospital demand and physician labor supply,
but are constrained from infinity by the possibility of litigation over their bills.5
By contrast, as we discuss, some states, like Maryland, have laws regulating
the amounts out-of-network ED physicians can be paid (Lucia, Hoadley, and
A. Williams 2017). The laws in states with out-of-network laws in place therefore
dictate the outside option physicians face when the bill out-of-network. As a
result, the outside option for an insurer of formally disputing an out-of-network
charge will be differentially successful depending on state law. This outside
option will affect the payment rates an insurer is willing to pay ED physicians
who join its network.


3.2    Hospitals and Out-of-Network Billing

EDs serve as the front door to hospitals. The majority of patients in a hospital
at any given point in time were admitted via the ED. As a result, hospitals need
   5 See, for example, UnitedHealthcare Servs., Inc. v Asprinio (2015 NY Slip Op 25298) and

Children’s Hosp. Cent. Cal. v. Blue Cross of Cal., 172 Cal. Rptr. 3d 861, 872 (Ct. App.
2014) for examples of litigation over providers’ charges. Richman et al. (2017) provides further
examples of litigation over providers’ charges.


                                              12
to keep their EDs open at all hours in order to retain patients. To keep their EDs
running, hospitals must recruit staff to run their EDs and arrange with physicians
to provide care from inside their facilities. Alternatively, they can contract with
an ED staffing company to manage the whole of their ED, including recruiting,
managing, and paying physicians. Unfortunately, EDs deliver significant amounts
of uncompensated care and ED physicians regularly treat patients from whom
they receive little or no compensation (Garthwaite, Gross, and Notowigdo 2018).
Because of the Emergency Medical Treatment & Active Labor Act (EMTALA),
EDs must provide care to patients in an emergency (Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services 2018). As a result, hospitals must typically pay physicians a
fee to work from their facilities.
    Hospitals control which physicians or ED staffing firms they allow to work
from inside their facilities. We also assume that hospitals are aware of whether
or not physician staffing firms engage in a deliberate out-of-network billing
strategy. When ED physicians bill out-of-network, the ED physicians themselves
(or the staffing firms they work for) benefit from higher out-of-network payments.
However, the hospitals where they work do not receive direct benefits from
out-of-network ED physician billing. Indeed, when ED physicians remain out-
of-network and balance bill patients, it brings reputational harm to hospitals.6
Therefore, for hospitals to be willing to permit physicians to bill out-of-network
from inside their facility, they must receive a transfer from physicians or staffing
firms equal or greater to the cost of the reputational harm they incur.
    These transfers could take a myriad of forms. For example, ED staffing firms
often demand subsidies from hospitals to staff their EDs. Physician staffing firms
could waive these subsidies in exchange for being allowed to bill out-of-network.
Alternatively, ED physicians could deliver medical care in a manner that raises
revenue for the hospital. This could include increasing imaging and lab testing
rates (which raises hospital revenue) or increasing the rate that patients from
the ED are admitted to the hospital. Finally, ED staffing firms could raise the
quality of hospital EDs, such that they attract more patients and improve the
hospital’s reputation.
   6 Historically, most media stories of out-of-network billing have cited the hospital where the

patient who received an out-of-network bill was treated (See Rosenthal 2014a).




                                               13
3.3    Physicians and Out-of-Network Billing

A physician or physician group faces a choice of negotiating in-network rates
with insurers or going out-of-network, collecting higher out-of-network payments,
but incurring costs from engaging in the practice. A physician or physician
group must consider the incremental profit she or the group will obtain from
going out-of-network. In a standard market with downward-sloping demand, if
a physician went out-of-network, she would experience a decline in the number
of patients she treats due to her higher out-of-network price that most patients
would face. However, because we are examining ED physicians, we make the
more realistic assumption (for this setting) that demand for ED physicians is
inelastic.7 Therefore, in this setting, if the ED physician does not enter into an
insurance network and seeks to collect her charges, she still obtains the quantity
of patients equal to what she would receive were she in-network. As a result, her
increase in revenue (or revenue for the ED staffing firm) is the difference between
the in-network prices and out-of-network payments she collects multiplied by
the cases she performs per year.
    Physicians likely incur costs from engaging in an out-of-network strategy.
These could include fixed costs, such as physicians’ own intrinsic dislike of the
practice, potential peer pressure, unpleasant meetings with stakeholders, and
the cost of software necessary for billing and collection. Likewise, these could
include are also variable such as costlier communication with patients, hospitals,
and insurers, the costs of collecting on each bill, and defending against litigation.
Physicians will also have to compensate the hospital for allowing them to engage
in out-of-network billing from inside their facilities.
    As we described, physicians can compensate the hospital from their own
pockets via reducing the subsidies they require for managing a hospital’s ED
services. A less expensive but more legally risky option for the physician is
to deliver medical care in a style that benefits the hospital. However, changes
in their clinical activity that benefit the hospital (such as over testing) could
open the physician or physician groups to legal risk (e.g. claims of fraudulent
billing). As a result, the propensity to engage in these actions depend on the
risk-tolerance of these physicians.8
   7 We posit that demand is inelastic because ED physicians are not chosen by patients and

cannot be avoided. Previous studies have exploited the fact that patients do not choose ED
physicians as a source of plausibly exogenous variation in work assessing the impact of seeing
physicians with a greater or lower likelihood of prescribing opioids and seeing physicians at
the end of their shift (Barnett, Olenski, and Jena 2017; Chan 2015).
   8 See, for example, a 2017 settlement between the US Department of Justice and TeamHealth




                                             14
    In our setting, we think ED management firms may have greater awareness of
the intricacies of physician payment and better understand the benefits of setting
higher charges than individual physicians operating in small group practices. In
this sense the ED management firms engage in informational arbitrage (a la
Hayek). Previous work by Clemens, Gottlieb, and Molnár (2017) showed that
individual physicians and physicians in small groups tend to set commercial
prices that follow the Medicare payment rates. By contrast, physicians in large
group practices tend to have payment rates that are less strongly correlated
with Medicare payment rates. National professional physician management will
likely seek a profit-maximizing price that takes advantage of ED physicians’
strong outside option. One might imagine that in equilibrium, this superior fee
structure would have arrived at all hospitals. This is not the case in the US
for two reasons we can identify. First, outsourcing firms with an out-of-network
strategy will not be able to enter hospitals that, because of their utility function,
require compensation above what the physicians gain (e.g. some non-profit
hospitals may place a high premium on protecting patients from financial harm).
Second, if out-of-network billing were pervasive, there would be an extremely
high risk of regulatory backlash.9


4     Data and Descriptive Statistics on Out-of-Net-
      work Billing

4.1    Data

Our claims data come from a large commercial insurer that covers tens of millions
of lives annually. The data run from January 1, 2011, through December 31,
2015. The data are structured at the service-line level and include detailed
patient characteristics, a provider identifier, and the ability to link to a range of
third-party datasets. We define ED episodes as those with a physician service
line that includes a Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) code for emergency
services and a hospital revenue code associated with an emergency visit.10
over accusations the firm billed for higher and more expensive levels of medical service than were
actually performed (Department of Justice 2017). https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/healthcare-
service-provider-pay-60-million-settle-medicare-and-medicaid-false-claims-act.
   9 Indeed this occurred in our setting and remains ongoing.
  10 We identify ED claims for physicians as those that include a CPT code of 99281, 99282,

99283, 99284, 99285, or 99291 and a hospital service line as those with a revenue code of 0450,
0451, 0452, 0453, 0454, 0455, 0456, 0457, 0458, or 0459. We require episodes in our analysis to
have a physician service line with an ED code and a facility service line with an ED code.



                                               15
We limit our analysis to episodes that occurred at hospitals registered with
the American Hospital Association (AHA). Therefore, we do not include, for
example, treatment that was delivered at urgent care clinics.
    At baseline, our data include 13,444,445 episodes. We introduce several
sample restrictions to our data to produce an analytic dataset. First, we exclude
episodes that were missing an AHA hospital ID or did not come from an AHA-
identified hospital. Thus, the analysis is focused only on hospital-based ED care.
This restriction eliminates 1,908,710 episodes. Second, we exclude episodes for
which the same physician billed as in-network and out-of-network on separate
service lines on the same claim form. This restriction eliminates 264,636 episodes.
Third, we exclude episodes with duplicative insurer payments, episodes with
insurer payments that were negative, and episodes for which the insurer paid
$0 because the claims were denied. This restriction removes 217,267 episodes.
Fourth, we exclude episodes for which the start date of the episode occurs after
the end date of the episode. This restriction excludes 79 episodes. Fifth, we limit
our analysis to hospitals that delivered 10 or more episodes per year and appear
in all five years of the data. This restriction excludes 330,312 episodes. Sixth, we
limit our analysis to individuals who had six months of continuous enrollment
before their emergency episode. Having six-months of historical data is necessary
to create our Charlson comorbidity scores. This restriction excludes 1,810,245
episodes from our analysis. Finally, we winsorize the top and bottom 1 percent
of the prices in our data.11 We do this to limit the influence of idiosyncratically
high- and low-priced episodes.
    In our data, we observe physician and hospital charges, the amount that the
insurer paid, and patients’ co-insurance payments, co-payments, and spending
under their deductibles. We define the total amount an ED physician was paid
as the sum of the insurer payment, the patient co-insurance payment, the patient
co-payment, and the patient deductible on physician service lines that have a
CPT code for emergency services.12 We calculate facility payments as the sum
of the insurer payment, patient co-insurance, patient co-payment, and patient
spending under her deductible summed across all facilities claims. All prices are
put in 2015 dollars using the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price
Index.
    Unfortunately, we do not observe whether patients were balance billed by
  11 Our results are robust to not winsorizing prices, but there are extremely large hospital

and physician charges and payments.
  12 These are service lines with a CPT code of 99281, 99282, 99283, 99284, 99285, or 99291.




                                             16
physicians. Therefore, it is possible that the physician collects more in total
than we can measure. To our knowledge, there are no datasets with information
on the balance billing of patients. However, we construct a potential balanced
bill measure that is the difference between what the physician charged and the
sum of what the physician was paid by patients (in the form of cost-sharing)
and by the insurer. This difference reflects what the physician could balance bill
the patients in our sample. We also create a measure of patients’ potential total
cost exposure, which we calculate as the sum of the potential balanced bill and
their out-of-pocket costs.
    In addition, we construct an indicator for whether or not imaging occurred
during an episode based on whether or not there are facility claims with revenue
codes associated with imaging studies.13 Likewise, we identify episodes as
involving an admission to the hospital if the facility claim for the episode
includes a revenue code for room and board fees.14
    For each episode, we also observe the patient’s sex, age (measured in 10-
year age bins), and race (white, black, Hispanic, and other). We also use our
claims data to measure historical patient spending for six- and 12-month periods
preceding an episode. Because we do not want the emergency episodes we are
analyzing to feed into the historical spending measures, we measure spending
from two weeks before the admission date for an episode back six and 12 months.
In addition, we used six and 12 months of claims data to calculate Charlson
measures of comorbidity (Charlson et al. 1987).15


4.2    Identifying Where EmCare and TeamHealth Have Contracts

EmCare and TeamHealth bill using their contracted physicians’ National Provider
Identifier (NPI) numbers. As a result, our claims data do not indicate that a
particular claim is being billed by a physician employed by one of these firms.
To identify the hospitals where EmCare and TeamHealth have outsourcing
contracts, we use data from the firms’ own webpages and documents. We require
two independent sources of information to classify a hospital as a facility that
outsourced its ED services to EmCare or TeamHealth.
   We rely on maps with firm locations to provide the first source of information
  13 We identified episodes that included imaging studies based on whether or not the facility

claims had a service line with the revenue codes 350-352, 610-619, 400-404, or 409.
  14 We identified room and board fees based on the following revenue codes on facility claims:

100, 101, 103, 110-160, 164, 167, 169-176, 179, 190-194, 199-204, 206-214, 219, 658, or 1000-1005.
  15 We pooled individuals with a Charlson score of 6 and higher.




                                               17
on which hospitals are affiliated with EmCare and TeamHealth. Envision,
the parent company of EmCare, posted a map on the company webpage that
included (see Appendix Figure A.1a) embedded latitudes and longitudes within
the webpage’s underlying code, which we use to identify hospitals. Likewise,
we use a map from TeamHealth’s initial public offering in 2009 that shows the
locations where TeamHealth had contracts in 2009 (TeamHealth 2009) (see
Appendix Figure A.1b). To identify hospital locations on the TeamHealth map,
we scraped the map using mapping software from ArcGIS.16
    The second source of information we use to identify hospitals that contract
with EmCare and TeamHealth come from job advertisements posted by the
firms. Each firm posts job advertisements for physicians on their respective
webpages (see an example in Appendix Figure A.2). The job advertisements
include the name of the hospital where physicians are being recruited and the
specialty of the physicians the hospital is looking to hire. We scraped the names
of the hospitals and the specialty of the physicians being recruited from all job
postings that were available from the firms’ webpages and webpage histories.
    Ultimately, we identify a hospital as having a contract with EmCare or
TeamHealth if we are able to identify the hospital on a map of the outsourcing
firms’ locations and we found a job hiring post for the hospital. This strategy
exploits the fact that, in general, these firms wholly take over an ED and
participate in exclusive contracts with hospitals (Deutsche Bank 2013).
    Using this strategy, we find 194 hospitals affiliated with EmCare and 95
hospitals affiliated with TeamHealth. As a result, of the 3,345 hospitals in our
analysis that meet our sample criteria, 5.8 percent outsource their ED to EmCare
and 2.8 percent outsource their ED to TeamHealth. Based on investor reports on
EmCare and TeamHealth, our sample of hospitals with contracts with EmCare
and TeamHealth represents an undercount of the total population of hospitals
that have contracts with EmCare and TeamHealth.
    We also use the entrance of physician management companies into hospitals to
estimate the causal effect the entry of TeamHealth and EmCare had on physician
pricing and hospital behavior. To do so, we identify hospitals where these firms
entered into an outsourcing contract from 2011 to 2015. To identify the hospitals
where EmCare and TeamHealth entered into outsourcing contracts, we searched
  16 To obtain the latitudes and longitudes of the hospital locations displayed on the Morgan

Stanley Report map, we utilized georeferencing within ArcMap. This technique aligns a map
with a known coordinate system to the map of interest (which has no identified coordinate
system). After transforming and overlaying the two aligned maps, we then obtain coordinate
estimates of each marked hospital within a reasonable range of accuracy.



                                             18
both companies’ webpages for press releases announcing new contracts. Likewise,
we used LexusNexus and Google to search the popular press for news stories that
announced when either EmCare or TeamHealth entered into a contract with
a hospital. Using this strategy, we find evidence that during our time period
(2011 through 2015), EmCare entered into contracts with 16 hospitals that were
part of nine health systems while TeamHealth entered into contracts with 10
hospitals that were part of six systems (see Appendix Table A.1).


5     Out-of-Network Billing, Physician Prices, and
      Hospital Outsourcing

5.1    Descriptive statistics on ED Physician Payments and Out-of-
       Network Billing Rates

Our final dataset is composed of 8,913,196 ED episodes of emergency care that
occured between January 1, 2011 and December 31, 2015 (see Table 1).17 This
represents nearly $28 billion in emergency spending. The average in-network ED
physician payment across our sample period was $325.91 (266 percent of what
the Medicare fee-for-service program paid for the same services) (Table 1). The
amount ED physicians were paid increased as a percentage of Medicare over our
time period. During this period, patient out-of-pocket costs for emergency care
also steadily increased and the average total out-of-pocket cost for an emergency
episode (combining the physician and facility component) was $467.75. Over 99
percent of ED cases in our data occurred at an in-network hospital. Appendix
Table 2 includes descriptive statistics for our analytic sample of ED episodes.
    At the average in-network hospital in our data, 25.8 percent of patients
treated in the ED were treated by an out-of-network ED physician (Table 1).
The frequency that patients at in-network hospitals were treated by out-of-
network ED physicians has declined over time from 28.6 percent in 2011 to
21.9 percent in 2015. However, this average masks significant heterogeneity in
out-of-network billing rates across hospitals and is somewhat misleading. Figure 1
shows the distribution of out-of-network billing rates across hospitals in our data
in 2015 and summary statistics for that year. It illustrates that out-of-network
billing is highly concentrated in a small group of hospitals. As we illustrate, 50
  17 Seventy-seven percent of individuals with an ED episode had insurance from an adminis-

trative services only (ASO) insurance product and the balance had coverage from fully insured
plans.



                                            19
percent of hospitals have out-of-network billing rates below two percent. By
contrast, the out-of-network billing rate for hospitals in the 75th percentile of
the distribution of out-of-network billing rates was 28 percent and 15 percent
of hospitals have out-of-network rates of higher than 80 percent. This skewed
distribution is evident in 2011, 2013, and 2015 (see Appendix Figure A.3).


5.2   Cross-Sectional Analysis of Hospitals’ Out-of-Network Billing
      Rates

To assess the factors associated with the variation in hospitals’ out-of-network
billing rates, we follow the approach of Finkelstein, Gentzkow, and H. Williams
(2016) and run a least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (Lasso) regres-
sion on a range of hospital, local area, physician market, and hospital market
characteristics (a complete list and descriptions of the variables that we include
in our first-stage Lasso are available in Appendix B). We also include indicator
variables for whether or not EmCare and TeamHealth had contracts with hospi-
tals. The Lasso method applies a penalizing parameter to the coefficient of the
explanatory variables included in the regression. We use 10-fold cross-validation
to choose the penalizing parameter that minimizes the mean squared error. We
use this Lasso procedure to select a set of variables that we include in a second
stage where we determine their correlation with hospital out-of-network billing
rates.
    Figure 2 presents our conditional correlations between the variables selected
using the Lasso regression and the share of patients per hospital that saw
out-of-network physicians between 2011 and 2015 during an emergency. The
results are correlates of hospital-level out-of-network billing rates and should
not be interpreted causally. As Figure 2 shows, the presence of EmCare at a
hospital is positively correlated with the hospital’s out-of-network billing rate.
By contrast, outsourcing a hospital’s ED to TeamHealth is negatively correlated
with the hospital’s out-of-network billing rate. In addition, we find that non-
profit hospitals, teaching hospitals, and government-owned hospitals have lower
rates of out-of-network billing; for-profit hospitals have higher out-of-network
billing rates. Larger hospitals and hospitals with better technology have lower
rates of out-of-network billing. The share of total discharges funded by Medicare
is positively correlated with out-of-network billing rates. Finally, we find that
areas with a higher fraction of married adults and low inequality have low
out-of-network rates.


                                       20
5.3   Causal Estimates of the Effect of EmCare and TeamHealth on
      Hospital OON Rates

Our cross-sectional results suggest that out-of-network billing is significantly
higher at hospitals that outsource their ED to EmCare. In this section, we
estimate the causal effect that the entry of EmCare and TeamHealth had on
the likelihood patients were treated by out-of-network physicians working inside
in-network hospitals. To do so, we exploit evidence we collected from press
releases, news stories on the firms’ webpages, and articles in the popular press
announcing the timing of the entry of EmCare and TeamHealth into hospitals.
We then compare outcomes before and after EmCare and TeamHealth entered
hospitals. In total, we analyze the entry of EmCare into 16 hospitals between
2011 and 2015 and the entry of TeamHealth into 10 hospitals during the same
period. We begin by showing trends in the raw data of hospitals where EmCare
and TeamHealth entered into management contracts. We follow that up with a
regression-based analysis. Crucially, we observe no difference in the pre-trends of
key outcomes variables before either EmCare or TeamHealth entered a hospital.
    Because EmCare and TeamHealth appear to have different strategies, we
separately test the impact of their entries on billing practices and hospital and
physician behavior. To do so, we estimate a hospital fixed effects model with an
indicator variable (EmCare i,t or TeamHealth i,t ) that takes a value of 1 on and
after the date that EmCare (or, in separate regressions, TeamHealth) entered a
hospital and returns to zero on the dates that the firm exited hospitals if the
firm lost a contract.18 Our estimation takes the form:

                    Yi,j,t = β0 + β1 EmCare i,t + δj + θt + εi,j,t ,               (1a)

and
                  Yi,j,t = β0 + β1 TeamHealth i,t + δj + θt + εi,j,t ,             (1b)

where we estimate the outcomes for episode i that occurred at hospital j in
month t. We also include a vector of hospital fixed effects δj and a unique month
dummy, θt , for each month in the data. Our standard errors are clustered around
hospitals. We interpret a discontinuous change in hospital behavior immediately
following the entry of an outsourcing firm into a hospital as the causal impact of
entry.
 18 We can estimate the impact of EmCare and TeamHealth entry in the same estimator, and

we get nearly identical results.




                                          21
    We compare outcomes at hospitals where the two outsourcing firms entered
to outcomes at three sets of control hospitals: 1) all hospitals nationally that
did not have EDs managed by EmCare or TeamHealth, 2) hospitals drawn from
the same states where the hospitals that experienced entry were located but did
not outsource their ED services to EmCare or TeamHealth, and 3) hospitals
that were not managed by EmCare or TeamHealth that we matched to entry
hospitals using propensity scores.19 One obvious concern with our identification
strategy is that treated and untreated hospitals may have differences in their
trends in out-of-network billing rates, physician pricing, or hospital behavior
prior to the entry of EmCare or TeamHealth. However, as we illustrate, when
we plot the raw data from our treated hospitals, there do not appear to be any
changes in behavior prior to the entry of those firms.
    EmCare enters two types of hospitals (Appendix Figure A.4a). The first
group of hospitals has out-of-network rates over 97 percent. The second group
has out-of-network rates below 10.1 percent. In Figure 3, we present a smoothed
average using a local polynomial regression of the monthly hospital-level out-of-
network ED physician billing rates from one year before EmCare (Panel A) and
TeamHealth (Panel B) entered a hospital until one year after entry. In Panel A
of Figure 3, the raw data show a clear increase in out-of-network billing rates at
hospitals immediately after EmCare entered. For interested readers we present
the raw, quarterly average out-of-network rates by hospital at each of the 16
hospitals that EmCare entered in Appendix Figure A.5.20 None of these graphs
shows marked changes in out-of-network billing rates before EmCare entered a
hospital; nearly all show that out-of-network billing rates increase dramatically
in the months after EmCare takes over a staffing contract.
    We repeat this analysis using regression analysis Equation (1a) and report
the results in Table 2. The indicator variable on entry identifies the causal
   19 To calculate propensity scores, we ran a logistic regression separately for EmCare and

TeamHealth where the dependent variable was an indicator variable that took a value of 1
if one of the national ED staffing companies took over management of the hospital’s ED.
We regressed that against hospital beds, technology, the square and cubic forms of beds and
technology, and non-profit/for-profit status. The predicted values from this regression produce
a propensity score for a hospital. We then use a propensity score match to determine hospitals
most similar to those with entry, with the condition that matching hospitals must be in the
same state.
   20 For nearly all hospitals that had previously high out-of-network billing rates (Panels I,

J, K, L, M, N, O, and P of Appendix Figure A.5), when EmCare entered, out-of-network
billing rates remained high. In contrast, after EmCare entered hospitals that previously had
low out-of-network billing rates, the likelihood a patient was treated by an out-of-network
physician increased to nearly 100% immediately after EmCare entered the hospital (Panels A,
B, C, D, E, F, G, H, of Appendix Figure A.5).



                                             22
impact that the entry of EmCare had on the prevalence of out-of-network billing.
In Column (1) of Table 2, we focus on changes in out-of-network billing rates at
hospitals that EmCare entered that previously had high out-of-network billing
rates. After EmCare entered, there is no statistically significant change in the
likelihood a patient was treated by an out-of-network physician. In Column (2),
we estimate the impact of the entry of EmCare into hospitals with previously
low out-of-network rates (the half of hospitals where the firm entered with OON
rates below 10.1 percent). These results mirror what we observe in the raw data.
We observe that the entry of EmCare into these hospitals raised out-of-network
rates by 81.5 percentage points.21 In Appendix Table A.3, we show that these
results are robust to using alternative control groups.
     TeamHealth appears to pursue a different out-of-network strategy. The raw
data from Panel B of Figure 3 shows that out-of-network billing rates increased
immediately after the firm took over management of hospital EDs. However,
four months after entry and the spike in out-of-network billing, there was a
noticeable drop in out-of-network billing rates. These changes are visible in the
raw data, presented hospital by hospital in Appendix Figure A.6. In Column
(3) of Table 2, we again use an entry regression (Equation (1b)) to identify the
effect of TeamHealth entry on hospitals’ out-of-network billing. We find that
after TeamHealth entered a hospital, there was an increase in out-of-network
billing of 32.6 percentage points. This is a qualitatively large increase, although
it is still approximately half the size of the out-of-network entry effect that we
observed for EmCare. As we illustrate in Appendix Table A.3, this estimate is
robust to using alternative control groups.


5.4    The Impact of Out-of-Network Strategies on Payment Rates

These results suggest that EmCare does not negotiate with insurers and instead
utilizes its outside option and seeks to collect its charges. In Panel A of Figure 4,
we show that immediately after entry, EmCare raised its charges significantly. In
Column (1) of Table 3, we quantify these changes and show that after EmCare
entered, it increased its physician charges, on average, by $556.84 (96 percent).
This increase in charges was driven, in part, by a 14.8 percentage point (43
percent) increase in the rate that physicians working for the firm billed patients
for ED services using the highest-intensity CPT code (Column (7) in Table 3).
  21 This   result is robust to estimating Equation (1a) using logistic regression




                                                23
This increase in the use of high severity coding occurred immediately after the
firm entered (Panel G of Figure 4). It is unlikely that hospitals would have
experienced a sharp and immediate change in their mix of patients immediately
after EmCare entered that would have precipitated such a large change in coding
practice.22 Indeed, as we discuss and illustrate in Panels A and B of Appendix
Figure A.7, there were no immediate and observable changes in the case mix of
patients at hospitals after EmCare entered. We have further discussion of the
impact of the entry of physician management companies on hospitals’ case mix
in Section 5.7.
    This increase in out-of-network billing and physician charges generated large
increases in revenue for EmCare physicians. Likewise, it also exposed patients
to increased cost sharing and financial risk. Our data contributor paid most of
physicians’ out-of-network bills. As a result, after EmCare entered, we observe
that the insurer payments to ED physicians increased by $402.67 (122 percent).
Because patients typically have out-of-pocket costs that are set via co-insurance
that pays a fixed percentage of the total cost of care, patient payments (e.g.
cost-sharing payments) to ED physicians increased by $45.23 (83 percent).
Collectively, we observe that the total payments to ED physicians increased by
$447.90 after EmCare entered a hospital. This is a 117 percent increase in ED
physician payments. Notably, these changes occurred in the month immediately
after EmCare entered a hospital and then persisted (Figure 4).
    While our data contributor covered most of physicians’ out-of-network charges,
we still observe a difference between EmCare physicians’ charges and the total
payments the firm received from the insurer and patients. We classify the
difference between physician charges and their total payments as the potential
balanced bill patients could face. In our data, we observe that patients’ potential
balanced bills were, on average, $195.30. We estimate that after EmCare entered
a hospital, the potential balanced bill patients faced increased by $108.94 (56
percent). Note that these are lower-bound estimates of the impact of EmCare
entry on patients’ out-of-pocket costs. In many instances, patients who are
treated by out-of-network physicians are liable for the entirety of their physicians’
charges, since insurers will not cover out-of-network care. As we described,
average physician charges were $578.95 across our sample and they nearly
doubled, increasing by $556.84 after EmCare entered a hospital. As a result, a
patient whose insurer did not cover out-of-network physician care would face
  22 As we illustrate in Appendix Table A.4 and A.5, these results are robust when we use

alternative control groups.



                                           24
a bill from EmCare physicians of, on average, $1, 135.79(= $556.84 + $578.95).
Bills of this magnitude would be financially devastating to a large share of the
population (Board of the Governors of the Federal Reserve System 2016).
    That TeamHealth exits networks and then rejoins them suggests that the
firm exercises the threat of exit to credibly negotiate higher in-network payment
rates. Consistent with theory, in Panels B and C of Figure 5, we observe an
increase in the in-network and out-of-network payments to TeamHealth from
insurers after the firm enters a hospital. In Table 4, we observe that insurer
payments for in-network physician care increased by $236.56 (90 percent) after
the firm entered. We also observe a $21.85 (39 percent) increase in patient
cost-sharing paid to physicians after TeamHealth entered. While this is a large
increase in physician payments, the increase is approximately 60 percent of the
size of the gain in physician payments experienced by physicians after EmCare
entered a hospital.23
    We argued that having the ability to go out-of-network without seeing a
reduction in the number of patients they treat gave ED physicians a stronger
outside option in negotiations with insurers. We argued that this stronger outside
option would allow them to negotiate higher in-network payments. In Table 5,
we show the average in-network payments in our data made to internists for
performing standard office visits and orthopedists for performing hip replacement.
We observe that, on average, internists are paid 158 percent of Medicare rates
(Column (1)) and orthopedists are paid 178 percent of Medicare rates (Column
(2)). By contrast, the average in-network ED physician in our data is paid
266 percent of Medicare rates (Column (3)). We posited that firms that could
credibly threaten to go out-of-network could negotiate higher payments. Indeed,
we observe that in the cross-section, TeamHealth, who appears to go out-of-
network and then rejoin the insurer’s network, earn on average, 364 percent of
Medicare rates (Column (4)). Likewise, we observe that the average payment in
our data to EmCare ED physicians (who, for the most part, do not participate
in networks) is 536 percent of Medicare rates (Column (5)).24
  23 As we illustrate in Appendix Tables A.6 and A.7, these results are robust to using other

control groups.
  24 Appendix Table A.8 provides detailed summary statistics of ED physicians’ prices and

charges.




                                             25
5.5    Transfers to Hospitals To Permit Out-of-Network Billing

When physicians bill out-of-network, it creates costs for the hospital where
they work. We hypothesized that physician management firms that used out-of-
network billing as a strategy would have to offer transfers to hospitals to offset
these costs. These costs could take the form of direct payments or reductions
in subsidies (which we cannot observe) or changes in physician behavior that
benefits hospitals (which we can observe). Our results presented in Table 6 are
consistent with our predictions. We estimate Equation (1a) and find that after
EmCare entered a hospital and began billing out-of-network for ED services,
facility charges at the hospitals where they worked increased by $1,683.63 (27
percent) and facilities’ total payments increased by $294.58 (11 percent). As
we illustrate in Table 6, this increase in facility payments was driven, in part,
by a 1.4 percentage point (5 percent) increase in the probability that a patient
received an imaging procedure (Column (5)) and a 2.1 percentage point (23
percent) increase in the likelihood that a patient was admitted to the hospital.25
As we illustrate in Panel F of Figure 6, this increase in admissions is visible in
the raw data and occurred immediately after EmCare entered a hospital. It is
notable that physicians both order patients to be admitted from the ED and
order imaging studies, so these are outcomes that EmCare physicians can alter.
    Because TeamHealth does not remain out-of-network, the hospitals they
serve do not bear reputation costs. Therefore, we would not expect TeamHealth
to make transfers to the hospitals where they work. Consistent with these
predictions, as we illustrate in Table 7, unlike what we observed following
the entry of EmCare, after TeamHealth enters hospitals, we do not observe
an increase in facility charges (Column (1)) or total payments (Column (4)).
Likewise, we observe that patients treated by TeamHealth physicians after the
firm entered a hospital were slightly less likely to have an imaging study and
be admitted to the hospital (Columns (5) and (6)). Although facility payments
do not increase, as we illustrate in Column (7), we observe a 515.4 person (30
percent) increase in the number of patients treated in the ED after the firm
entered a hospital.26 Notably, these changes in admissions rates and activity
are evident immediately after TeamHealth enters a hospital (Panels F and G of
Figure 7).
  25 As we illustrate in Appendix Tables A.9 and A.10, these results are robust against other

control groups.
  26 As we illustrate in Appendix Tables A.11 and A.12, these results are robust against other

control groups.



                                             26
5.6    Contracting with EmCare and TeamHealth

Hospitals that knowingly allow an ED staffing company like EmCare to bill
out-of-network from their facility in exchange for a transfer (e.g. higher admission
rates or a reduction in subsidies to physician groups) are explicitly weighing
profits over patient and community benefits. As a result, we would expect that
for-profit hospitals to be more likely to contract with EmCare. In Table 8, we
present the characteristics of hospitals in our sample that did and did not contract
with EmCare and TeamHealth. We find that across all hospitals that meet our
sample restrictions, 66 percent are non-profit, 19 percent are for-profit, and 15
percent are government owned. Consistent with our predictions, 56 percent
of hospitals where EmCare has a contract are for-profit facilities. Hospitals
in areas with lower numbers of physicians per capita are also more likely to
contract with EmCare. By contrast, whereas TeamHealth has a higher share of
for-profit hospitals than we observe across the universe of hospitals in our data,
the majority of TeamHealth contracts occur at non-profit facilities.27


5.7    Robustness Checks

It is possible that the entry of EmCare and TeamHealth led to subsequent changes
in the case mix of patients that the hospitals treat. Indeed, both EmCare and
TeamHealth advertise that a benefit of their service is to shorten ED waiting times
(Cantlupe 2013). With shorter waiting times, hospitals could potentially attract
healthier patients who would have otherwise received treatment at urgent care
centers. Likewise, on EmCare’s webpage, EmCare has highlighted its excellence
in improving the treatment of complex cases, such as stroke care (EmCare
2014). To the extent that this improves a hospital’s reputation, advertising
and improvements in quality could allow that hospital to attract more complex
patients. Any changes in the case mix of hospitals EmCare entered could explain
why, after the firm entered hospitals, the rates of hospital admissions, the rates
of imaging tests, and the rates at which physicians coded for the most intensive
services increased.
     In Appendix Table A.15, we analyze the impact that the entry of EmCare
and TeamHealth had on the case mix of patients that hospitals treat. We find
  27 In Appendix Table A.13, we present conditional correlates of whether a hospital is managed

by either EmCare or TeamHealth using logistic regression. These results are qualitatively
similar to the above. As we show in Appendix Table A.14, hospitals that contract with EmCare
or TeamHealth before 2011 have similar characteristics to hospitals where we observe the entry
of EmCare or TeamHealth between 2011 and 2014.


                                              27
evidence that after EmCare entered a hospital, the hospital attracted a sicker
mix of patients. In Columns 1 and 2, we show that after EmCare entered a
hospital, the six-month historical spending of the hospital’s patients increased by
$916.02 (15 percent) and the 12-month historical spending increased by $1,306.16
(11 percent). We also find that after the entry of EmCare into a hospital, the
patients who attend the ED were 3.3 percentage points more likely to have
a non-zero Charlson comorbidity score measured using six months of patient
history and 3.6 percent more likely to have a non-zero Charlson comorbidity
score measured using 12 months of patient history. In contrast, following the
entry of TeamHealth, hospitals attracted seemingly healthier patients who spent
$336.35 (5.4 percent) less in the six months preceding an episode and $783.08 (6.8
percent) less in the 12 months preceding an episode. In Appendix Figure A.7, we
show the average Charlson co-morbidity score and six-month historical spending
levels of patients, by month, at hospitals where EmCare and TeamHealth entered.
There is no evidence of immediate changes in these outcomes after a change in
management.
    Crucially, however, we find the same changes in physician behavior and
hospital activity at EmCare facilities appearing across all health severity groups
of patients, including patients in the least severe group. Thus, even holding
patient severity constant, we still see an increase in quantity of care delivered
after EmCare enters a hospital. In Appendix Table A.16, we estimate Equation
(1a) using several different sample restrictions and sets of controls for the health
of the patients. We focus on the impact that the entry of EmCare had on
the frequency that physicians code using the CPT code for the most intensive
emergency. We find that even among patients with low historical spending and
no comorbidities, there was a substantial increase in the rate they had episodes
that included physician claims coded using the highest intensity CPT code. In
Column 1, we estimate Equation (1a) with no patient controls; in Column 2,
we re-estimate Equation (1a) controlling for patients’ age, sex, and race; and in
Column 3, we control for patients’ age, sex, race, and their Charlson comorbidity
score. Across all three estimates, the point estimate on the impact of entry
on the rate of using the highest-intensity CPT code for emergency physician
visits is consistent and ranges from 0.148 to 0.151. In Column 4, we estimate
Equation (1a) and limit our analysis to patients throughout our sample who have
a Charlson comorbidity score of 0 (e.g., patients who have no comorbidities).
In Column 5, we estimate Equation (1a) and limit our analysis to patients
throughout our data who have a non-zero Charlson score. The point estimates in

                                        28
Columns 4 and 5 illustrate that whether or not they had comorbidities, patients
were almost equally more likely to have physician visits coded using the CPT
code for the most intensive emergency after EmCare entered a hospital. Likewise,
in Columns 6, 7, and 8, we estimate Equation (1a) on the samples of patients in
the lower third ($0 to $279.67), the middle-third ($279.68 to $2,033.59), and the
top-third ($2,033.60 to $115,499.30) of the distribution of historical six-month
patient health spending. Across all three sub-samples, the entry of EmCare led
to an increase in the rate patients had physician claims coded using the CPT
code for the most severe emergency.
    In Appendix Table A.17, we repeat this analysis and examine the impact of
the entry of EmCare on facility spending across different samples of the data. We
see that there was increased facility spending across patients with and without
comorbidities and with high and low historical spending. Likewise, controlling
for patients’ comorbidities does little to alter the impact of the entry of EmCare
on facility spending. In Appendix Table A.18, we see similarly robust findings
for imaging studies. After the entry of EmCare into a hospital, patients with no
comorbidities are 4.9 percent more likely to receive an imaging study.
    Finally, in Appendix Table A.19, we analyze whether we observe higher
hospital admission rates for patients with low historical spending and no co-
morbidities following the entry of EmCare. In Column 4, we find that after
EmCare entered a hospital, patients with no comorbidities were 20 percent more
likely to be admitted to the hospital. In Column 6, we find patients with low
historical spending (e.g., less than $279.67 in the previous six months) were 17
percent more likely to be admitted to the hospital after EmCare took over the
management of the hospital ED.


6     Policies to Address Out-of-Network Billing

6.1   Policy Goals and Scaling the Effect of Policies to Address Out-
      of-Network Billing

A successful out-of-network policy should achieve two aims. First, a policy
should protect consumers from large, unexpected bills from out-of-network ED
physicians whom the consumers could not reasonably avoid. Second, a successful
policy should establish an environment in which the price that out-of-network
ED physicians are paid for their services is either competitively determined
or is as close to the competitively determined price as possible. Addressing


                                       29
this currently “missing” price will both settle disputes between physicians and
insurers over their bills and influence in-network payments by determining ED
physicians’ outside option in negotiations with private insurers.
    The effect of curtailing ED physicians’ outside option could have a significant
effect on total health spending. To produce a back of the envelope estimate of
the potential savings from addressing out-of-network ED billing, consider the
nation-wide average in-network payment rates orthopedic surgeons negotiate
with the insurer that supplied our data. Orthopedic surgeons form an interesting
comparison group because, according to a recent survey, they have the highest
salaries among physicians in the US (Grisham 2017). However, whereas the
average in-network ED physician payment in our data was 266 percent of the
Medicare payment rates (and the average out-of-network payment was 637
percent of the Medicare payment rates), the average in-network payments to
orthopedic surgeons for performing hip replacements during our sample period
was 178 percent of the Medicare payment rates. If we assumed our policy proposal
would generate competition that lowered ED physicians’ in-network payment
levels to approximate the in-network payment rate of orthopedic surgeons in
our data (178 percent of the Medicare payment rates), this would lower total
ED physician spending by 46 percent. If we assume that private spending is
one-third of total health spending in the US and that ED physicians account
for approximately 1 percent of total private spending, a reasonable back of the
envelope calculation would suggest that addressing this issue would produce
savings in the range of $5 billion annually.28


6.2   Existing State and Federal Policies to Address Out-of-Network
      Billing

At present, the majority of states have no laws to protect consumers from
out-of-network billing, 21 states have some legal protections, and 6 of those 21
have comprehensive policies that both protect consumers and include a process
determine payments from insurers to out-of-network providers (Lucia, Hoadley,
and A. Williams 2017). Unfortunately, state policies only apply to the 40 percent
of commercially insured individuals in the US that are enrolled in fully-insured,
employer-sponsored health plans (Kaiser Family Foundation 2017). Sixty percent
of the individuals in the US with commercial insurance are enrolled in plans
offered by firms that self-insure. Because of the Employee Retirement Income
 28 These   numbers are from Morganti et al. (2013) and Hartman et al. (2017).


                                             30
Security Act of 1974, state-based protections for out-of-network policies do
not apply to these enrollees. Notably, however, two recent bi-partisan policy
proposals from the Senate, if passed, would offer federal protections that applied
to individuals enrolled in fully- and self-insured insurance plans.
    Most states’ surprise billing laws include a hold harmless provision to protect
patients from financial risks (Lucia, Hoadley, and A. Williams 2017). These laws
stipulate that patients cannot be charged more than their usual in-network cost
sharing during emergencies if they see an out-of-network provider that is working
at an in-network facility. However, only 9 of the 21 states with hold-harmless
provisions restrict providers from balance-billing patients. So, while patients
that saw an out-of-network provider would not be subject to higher cost-sharing
rates, they could still be exposed to significant financial risk if physicians acted
to collect the balance of their bill from them directly.
    The harder policy problem for the states is choosing the “missing” price when
there is no contract between physicians and insurers. By 2017, only 6 states
(California, Connecticut, Florida, Illinois, Maryland, and New York) introduced
state-specific methods for determining how insurers should pay out-of-network ED
physicians who treat patients at in-network hospitals. In California, Connecticut,
and Maryland, the “missing” price is determined via regulation. In California,
insurers are required to pay providers the greater of 125 percent of Medicare’s
rate or the average in-network rate paid by the insurer in the region; Connecticut
sets insurer payments to out-of-network providers at the 80th percentile of
providers’ charges; and in Maryland, insurers must pay providers 140 percent of
in-network payments. A recent Senate proposal has proposed similar regulated
payments where the insurer is required to pay providers the average in-network
prices in the region (Cassidy 2018). However, it is extremely unlikely that a
regulated price of this sort will match the market price for any given transaction.
As soon as the regulated price set by states differs from the market price, either
the insurer or the physician will take advantage of a regulated price that favors
them. If the regulated payment for providers’ out-of-network bills is greater than
the expected in-network price, ED physicians will be reluctant to join networks.
Likewise, if the regulated payment is below expected in-network rates, insurers
will not want to form networks.
    In Florida, Illinois, and New York, laws prohibit consumers from being
balanced bills. In addition, policy-makers in these states introduced an arbitration
process to determine insurer payments in the event that insurers and providers
cannot reach a resolution on payments in cases when an ED physician is out-of-

                                        31
network. Likewise, a recent bill sponsored by Senator Maggie Hassan of New
Hampshire also introduces an arbitration process (Hassan 2018). New York
State’s law, passed on April 1, 2014, is the most ambitious in the nation to
date. The law has two components. The first is a hold harmless provision
that prohibits balance billing and requires patients who are treated by an out-
of-network physician to pay no more than what they would have paid in cost
sharing should the physician have been in-network. The second component is
an arbitration process to determine what providers are paid when they treat a
patient and do not participate in the patient’s insurer’s network. The also law
stipulates that insurers must develop reasonable payment rates for out-of-network
care, illustrate how their out-of-network payments were calculated, and show how
they compare to usual and customary rates (Hoadley, Ahn, and Lucia 2015).29
    In practice, under this law in New York, when a patient is seen out-of-network,
the insurer makes its payment to the provider. If the out-of-network provider
does not accept the payer’s offer, the provider can initiate an independent
dispute resolution process. The independent dispute resolution process is judged
by practicing physicians who use baseball rules arbitration: the arbitrator
can stipulate that the provider will be paid the insurer’s original payment or
alternatively the provider’s original charge. Ultimately, this policy disadvantages
providers that bill for unreasonably high charges and punishes insurers that
offer unreasonably low initial payments. The law also encourages physicians and
payers to negotiate independently and avoid arbitration. Technically, the law
applies only to fully insured insurance products, as states cannot regulate ASO
plans (which account for the majority of privately insured products in the US)
(Kaiser Family Foundation 2017). However, because most providers are unaware
of a patient’s plan funding, their billed amount is likely chosen to reflect the
possibility of arbitration.
    This type of arbitration process shifts the outside option for physicians when
they negotiate their in-network payments. Under the New York law, physicians
cannot balance bill patients or collect their inflated charges from insurers. As a
result, the 2014 New York law should both reduce the incidence of out-of-network
billing (since it is no longer as profitable a strategy) and impact in-network
payments (via lowering ED physicians disagreement payoff). We take these
propositions to the data by testing the impact of New York State’s 2014 surprise
  29 Usual and customary rates are defined in the New York State law as the 80th percentile of

charges based on the Fair Health database, which captures physician charges in the states for
most medical procedures.



                                             32
billing on out-of-network billing rates and the level of physicians’ in-network
payments.


6.3   Analyzing the Impact of New York State’s Law

As Appendix Table A.20 shows, our data include 323,936 ED episodes delivered
at New York hospitals between 2011 and 2015, which captures approximately
$1 billion in emergency health care spending. In addition, 90.2 percent of the
patients in our data in New York are in ASO products. To test the impact of the
New York State laws, we run a difference-in-difference regression and compare
New York hospitals’ out-of-network rates, physician in-network payment rates,
and facility payment rates before and after the passage of the out-of-network
legislation to outcomes in hospitals in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Connecticut,
Vermont, and Massachusetts. To do so, we estimate:

      Yi,h,t = β0 + β1 N Yh + β2 Post t + β3 N Yh ∗ Post t + γh + µt + εi,h,t ,   (2)

where the dependent variable is our outcome of interest for patient i, treated
at hospital h, in quarter t. We include an indicator for whether a hospital is
located in New York. This is our treatment variable and it takes a value of 1
for all time periods if a hospital is located in New York (e.g. is in our treated
group). Post t takes value of 1 for all periods from April 1, 2014, onward, after
New York State passed its out-of-network billing laws. Our β3 coefficient is
the coefficient of interest and captures the interaction between our treatment
variable (that a hospital is located in New York) and our post variable, which is
turned on after the out-of-network billing law was passed. All standard errors
are clustered around hospitals.30 In addition, we introduce a non-parametric
specification of Equation (2) where our treatment variable is interacted with
dummy variables for each quarter. This allows us to illustrate graphically the
parallel trends between New York and other the control states before the passage
of the New York State law.


6.4   The Impact of New York State’s Out-of-Network Billing Laws

Table 9 presents least-squares estimates of Equation (2) and shows the impact
of the New York State law on hospitals’ out-of-network rates, physician charges
 30 Our   results are also robust to clustering around HRRs.



                                             33
and payments, and hospital charges and payments. As Column 1 illustrates,
the New York State law reduced the frequency of out-of-network billing by 6.8
percentage points relative to changes observed in other New England states.
Figure 8 presents non-parametric estimates of Equation (2) graphically. The
out-of-network rates in New York and the other New England states followed
similar trends before the introduction of the New York State out-of-network
protection law in 2014. However, almost immediately after the law was passed
(and before the required implementation date), there was a marked reduction
in out-of-network billing in the state. Figure 9 shows the distribution of out-of-
network rates across hospitals in 2013 and 2015. The out-of-network rate in New
York in 2013 was 20.1 percent. Two years later, the rate was 6.4 percent, and
the reduction in out-of-network rates was driven by reductions in out-of-network
rates across nearly all hospitals, including those that previously had high rates of
out-of-network billing. Columns 6 and 7 in Table 9 show that although the law
applied only to fully insured insurance products, the reduction in out-of-network
rates occurred for patients with fully insured insurance plans and those covered
by ASO policies. If physicians cannot infer whether a patient has an ASO or
fully insured insurance product before sending a bill, they will want to charge a
moderate amount in order to win in any arbitration.
    Perhaps more notably, as we illustrate in Column (3), the New York state
law lowered in-network payments to physicians by $43 (8.8 percent). This
reduction in payments is consistent with predictions that the law would lower
ED physicians’ disagreement payoff in negotiations with insurers over in-network
payments, which should lower the prices reached in the negotiations. It is
also notable that this effect was observable in New York where, in addition to
engaging in arbitration, insurers have to identify how their proposed out-of-
network payments are scaled relative to usual and customary payments (average
physician charges).


6.5   An Alternative Policy To Protect Consumers from Out-of-Net-
      work Bills and Restore a Competitive Price for ED Physician
      Services

Evidence from New York state suggests that introducing a hold-harmless pro-
vision and arbitration over insurers’ payments to out-of-network physicians
can lower the frequency of out-of-network billing and the level of physicians’
in-network payments. This result shows how changing physicians’ outside option


                                        34
in negotiations alters their ultimate negotiated payment. Nevertheless, the New
York State law is administratively complex and potentially costly. If patients
receive a surprise out-of-network bill and are charged out-of-network rates, they
must be aware that the protections exist and fill out the form included in Ap-
pendix C. Likewise, the state has to fund and administer the arbitration process
in perpetuity. Moreover, because states cannot regulate ASO products, the New
York protections only offer formal protection to individuals covered by fully
insured insurance products.
    In our view, the best option for addressing out-of-network billing is not for
the state to try to regulate the missing price, but instead to regulate the form
of the contract between hospitals, physicians, and insurers, so that the resulting
physician payment is generated by market forces. When patients choose an ED,
they are choosing a package of emergency services that includes the services of
the hospital and physicians. Under our preferred policy, states or the federal
government could require hospitals to sell and insurers to contract for an ED
service package that includes physician and facility services. Hospitals would
purchase the inputs for ED services the way they purchase other labor inputs,
such as nursing care and non-labor inputs, such as bandages and needles. All
care provided in the ED would be included when the hospital contracted to be
“in-network” with an insurer. This type of policy would require the hospital to
buy ED physician services in a local labor market, which would expose hospitals
and physicians to competitive forces and produce a market price for ED physician
services. Hospitals would then submit a single bill to insurers.
    With this type of policy in place, patients consuming emergency services
would be protected from surprise bills as long as the patients chose in-network
facilities. This policy is also likely to lower the equilibrium prices for in-network
ED physicians. This policy also solves the inability of states to regulate ASO
products. Rather than regulating insurance, this would be a form of hospital
regulation. As a result, it would apply to all patients in a state regardless of the
type of insurance they have.


7    Conclusion
Out-of-network physician ED billing from in-network EDs in the US is a function
of an idiosyncrasy in the US health system: physicians working in a hospital
may not participate in the same insurance networks as the hospital itself. For
inseparable services, like emergency care, where the patient must consume a


                                         35
package care that includes hospital and physician services, this means that ED
physicians face inelastic demand. When a physician is out-of-network, depending
on a patient’s insurance plan, the patient can be hit with a large and unexpected
bill. These out-of-network bills can expose patients to significant financial
risk. Moreover, when physicians and physician groups can bill out-of-network
without seeing a reduction in the number of patients they treat, it undercuts
the functioning of health care markets by insulating physician from competition
and changing the outside option physicians face when negotiating with insurers
over their prices.
    Consistent with their strong outside option, we observe that ED physicians
were paid more, as a percentage of Medicare payments, than other physician
specialties. Moreover, we observe that two leading ED physician outsourcing
firms - EmCare and TeamHealth - use out-of-network billing to significantly
raise the amounts they are paid, although each utilize a distinct strategy. These
two examples are instructive in their differences and provide a nice illustration
of the economics of bargaining that underlies the rate-setting carried out by all
physicians.
    We find that after EmCare takes over the management of ED services at
a hospital, it raises out-of-network billing rates by over 80 percentage points.
This allows the firm to collect higher payments from insurers and from patients.
We calculate that the payments they received from insurers increased by 122
percent and patient cost sharing increased by 83 percent. Crucially, this increase
in patient costs represents a lower bound of the cost exposure patients could
face when they are treated by an out-of-network ED physician. The insurer
supplying our data, in most instances, pays out-of-network physicians their
charges. However, in practice, many insurers either do not pay out-of-network
physicians anything (leaving the patient to pay their physicians themselves) or
they only pay standard in-network rates (leaving patients to pay the difference
between the physician’s charges and the insurer’s payments). Hospitals with ED
services that are outsourced to EmCare form a significant percentage of the 15
percent of hospitals in the US with extremely high out-of-network billing levels.
    TeamHealth pursues a different strategy. When TeamHealth enters a hospital,
they also increase out-of-network rates significantly. However, after several
months, TeamHealth returns in-network. Notably, when TeamHealth goes back
in-network, the in-network payments their physicians receive are 68 percent
higher than they were before the firm entered the hospital. We posit that
TeamHealth uses its stronger outside option to negotiate higher in-network

                                       36
payments. Interestingly, the number of patients seen in the TeamHealth ED
increases, which may be a sign of efficiencies.
    When ED physicians bill out-of-network, it likely creates reputational harm
for the in-network hospitals where they work. We find evidence that EmCare
offsets the costs of harm for hospitals by providing transfers. The transfers we
observe include EmCare-affiliated physicians ordering treatments that lead to
increased hospital billing, such as ordering more imaging studies and increasing
rates that patients are admitted to the hospital. Both changes generate additional
revenue for the hospitals. We do not find similar transfers at hospitals that
outsourced their ED care to TeamHealth.
    What is the appropriate policy response to surprise out-of-network billing?
A variety of states have implemented policies to protect consumers. One of the
most innovative policies was introduced in New York. In 2014, the state passed
a law that banned balanced billing and required insurers and physicians to enter
into binding arbitration to settle disputed bills. This strategy aims to restore a
competitively set price for out-of-network ED services and dramatically changes
ED physicians outside option in negotiations with insurers. We assessed the
impact of this law and found that it reduced out-of-network billing by 34%. Of
note, after it was introduced, the policy also reduced the level of in-network ED
physician payments in the state by 9%. An alternative policy approach would
be for states to require that hospitals to sell an “ED package” to insurers that
includes both physician and hospital services. Here, regulating the structure
of the contract rather than the level of the payment would also generate out-
of-network payments that were competitively set and therefore generate higher
social welfare.


References
American Hospital Association (2018). Fast facts on U.S. hospitals. American
   Hospital Association. Accessed 11/29/2018. url: https://www.aha.org/
   statistics/fast-facts-us-hospitals.
Bai, Ge and Gerard F Anderson (2016). “Variation in the Ratio of Physician
   Charges to Medicare Payments by Specialty and Region”. In: JAMA 317.3,
   pp. 315–318.
Baker, Laurence C et al. (2014). “Physician Practice Competition and Prices
   Paid by Private Insurers for Office Visits”. In: JAMA 312.16, pp. 1653–1662.



                                       37
Barnett, Michael L, Andrew R Olenski, and Anupam B Jena (2017). “Opioid-
   Prescribing Patterns of Emergency Physicians and Risk of Long-Term Use”.
   In: New England Journal of Medicine 376.7, pp. 663–673.
Board of the Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). Report on the
   Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2015. Federal Reserve Board,
   Washington. Accessed February 2018. url: https://www.federalreserve.gov/
   2015-report-economic-well-being-us-households-201605.pdf.
Cantlupe, Joe (2013). Keys to Better Flow, Better Care in EDs. HealthLead-
   ers. Accessed February 2018. url: http://www.healthleadersmedia.com/
   community-rural/4-keys-better-emergency-department.
Cassidy, Bill (2018). Cassidy, Bipartisan Colleagues Relsease Draft Legislation
   to End Surprise Medical Bills. Office of Senator Bill Cassidy. url: https:
   //www.cassidy.senate.gov/newsroom/press- releases/cassidy- bipartisan-
   colleagues-release-draft-legislation-to-end-surprise-medical-bills.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2018). Emergency Medical Treatment
   & Labor Act (EMTALA). url: https://www.cms.gov/Regulations- and-
   Guidance/Legislation/EMTALA/.
Chan, David C. Jr. (2015). The Efficiency of Slacking Off: Evidence from the
   Emergency Department. Working Paper 21002. National Bureau of Economic
   Research.
Charlson, Mary E et al. (1987). “A New Method of Classifying Prognostic Co-
   morbidity in Longitudinal Studies: Development and Validation”. In: Journal
   of Chronic Diseases 40.5, pp. 373–383.
Clemens, Jeffrey, Joshua D Gottlieb, and Tímea Laura Molnár (2017). “Do Health
   Insurers Innovate? Evidence from the Anatomy of Physician Payments”. In:
   Journal of health economics 55, pp. 153–167.
Consumers Union (2015). Surprise Medical Bills Survey: 2015 Nationally-Rep-
   resentative Online Survey. Consumer Reports National Research Center.
   Accessed February 2018. Washington DC. url: http://consumersunion.org/
   wp- content/uploads/2015/05/CY- 2015- SURPRISE- MEDICAL- BILLS-
   SURVEY-REPORT-PUBLIC.pdf.
Cooper, Zack and Fiona Scott Morton (2016). “Out-of-Network Emergency-
   Physician Bills–An Unwelcome Surprise”. In: New England Journal of Medicine
   375.20, pp. 1915–1918.
Dalavagas, Jason (2014). Coverage Initiation: Envision Healthcare Holdings.
   Educational Articles. Accessed February 2018. url: http://www.valueline.



                                      38
   com / Stocks / Highlights / Coverage _ Initiation _ _Envision _ Healthcare _
   Holdings.aspx#.WRyVe_nyuUk.
Department of Regulatory Agencies (2010). Report of the Commissioner of
   Insurance to the Colorado General Assembly on § 10-17-704(3), C.R.S.
   Consumer Protections Against Balance Billing. Colorado Department of
   Regulatory Agencies, Denver, CO. Accessed February 2018. url: http://
   hermes.cde.state.co.us/drupal/islandora/object/co%3A8599/datastream/
   OBJ/view.
DeRoma, Tris (2012). ER Transition Expected to be Smooth at LAMC. The Los
   Alamos Monitor. Accessed February 2018. url: http://www.lamonitor.com/
   content/er-transition-expected-be-smooth-lamc.
Deutsche Bank (2013). Markets Research - Envision Healthcare.
EmCare (2014). Cross-Departmental Initiative Leads to Nationally Recognized
   Stroke Treatment Program. Accessed February 2018. url: https://www.
   emcare.com/resources/case-studies/pdf/emcare6_casestudyholyoke.pdf.
Esposito, Lisa (2015). Enduring Really Long Waits at the Emergency Room:
   What Can You Do When You’re Last on the List? U.S. News and World
   Report. url: https : / / health . usnews . com / health - news / patient - advice /
   articles/2015/05/08/enduring-really-long-waits-at-the-emergency-room.
Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams (2016). “Sources of
   Geographic Variation in Health Care: Evidence From Patient Migration”. In:
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 131.4, pp. 1681–1726.
Garmon, Christopher and Benjamin Chartock (2016). “One in Five Inpatient
   Emergency Department Cases May Lead to Surprise Bills”. In: Health Affairs
   36.1, pp. 177–181.
Garthwaite, Craig, Tal Gross, and Matthew Notowigdo (2018). “Hospitals as
   Insurers of Last Resort”. In: American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
   10.1, pp. 1–39.
Gooch, Kelly (2016). Texas Sees Dramatic Rise in Balanced Billing Complaints:
   3 Things to Know. Becker’s Hospital Review. Accessed February 2018. url:
   https://www.beckershospitalreview.com/finance/texas-sees-dramatic-rise-
   in-balanced-billing-complaints-3-things-to-know.html.
Grisham, Sarah (2017). Medscape Physician Compensation Report. Medscape
   Medical News. Accessed February 2018. url: https://www.medscape.com/
   slideshow/compensation-2017-overview-6008547#4.




                                         39
Groth, Heather et al. (2013). “Board-Certified Emergency Physicians Comprise
   a Minority of the Emergency Department Workforce in Iowa”. In: Western
   Journal of Emergency Medicine 14.2, pp. 186–90.
Hamel, Liz et al. (2016). The Burden of Medical Debt: Results from the Kaiser
   Family Foundation/New York Times Medical Bills Survey. The Henry J.
   Kaiser Family Foundation. Accessed February 2018. url: https://kaiserfa
   milyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2016/01/8806-the-burden-of-medical-
   debt-results-from-the-kaiser-family-foundation-new-york-times-medical-
   bills-survey.pdf.
Hartman, Micah et al. (2017). “National Health Care Spending in 2016: Spending
   and Enrollment Growth Slow After Initial Coverage Expansions”. In: Health
   Affairs 37.1, pp. 150–160.
Hassan, Maggie (2018). Shaheen & Hassan to Each Introduce Legislation to
   Combat Escalating Out-of-Pocket Health Care Costs, Stabilize Health Care
   Marketplace & End Surprise Medical Bills. Office of Senator Maggie Hassan.
   url: https://www.hassan.senate.gov/news/press- releases/shaheen- and-
   hassan-to-each-introduce-legislation-to-combat-escalating-out-of-pocket-
   health-care-costs-stabilize-health-care-marketplace_end-surprise-medical-
   bills.
Hing, Esther and Farida Bhuiya (2012). Wait Time for Treatment in Hospital
   Emergency Departments: 2009. National Center for Health Statistics. Accessed
   February 2018. Hyattsville, MD. url: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/
   databriefs/db102.pdf.
Hoadley, Jack, Sandy Ahn, and Kevin Lucia (2015). Balance Billing: How
   Are States Protecting Consumers from Unexpected Charges? The Center on
   Health Insurance Reforms. Georgetown Univerity Health Policy Institute,
   Washington, DC. Accessed February 2018. url: https://www.rwjf.org/
   content/dam/farm/reports/issue_briefs/2015/rwjf420966.
Hsia, Renee Y, Arthur L Kellermann, and Yu-Chu Shen (2011). “Factors Asso-
   ciated with Closures of Emergency Departments in the United States”. In:
   JAMA 305.19, pp. 1978–1985.
Institute of Medicine (2006). Hospital-Based Emergency Care: At the Breaking
   Point. Washington DC: The National Academic Press.
Kaiser Family Foundation (2017). Employer Health Benefits Annual Survey:
   2017. The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, Menlo Park, CA. Accessed
   February 2018. url: http://files.kff.org/attachment/Report- Employer-
   Health-Benefits-Annual-Survey-2017.

                                      40
Kaiser Family Foundation (2018). Professionally Active Specialist Physicians
   by Field. Kaiser Family Foundation. url: https : / / www . kff . org / other /
   state-indicator/physicians-by-specialty-area/?currentTimeframe=0%5C&
   sortModel=%7B%22colId%22:%22Location%22,%22sort%22:%22asc%22%
   7D.
Kyanko, Kelly A, Leslie A Curry, and Susan H Busch (2013). “Out-of-Network
   Physicians: How Prevalent Are Involuntary Use and Cost Transparency?” In:
   Health Services Research 48.3, pp. 1154–1172.
Lucia, Kevin, Jack Hoadley, and Ashley Williams (2017). “Balance Billing by
   Health Care Providers: Assessing Consumer Protections Across States”. In:
   Commonwealth Fund Issue brief 16, pp. 1–10.
McGirr, Joseph, Janet M Williams, and John E Prescott (1998). “Physicians in
   Rural West Virginia Emergency Departments: Residency Training and Board
   Certification Status”. In: Academic Emergency Medicine 5.4, pp. 333–336.
Morganti, Kristy G et al. (2013). The Evolving Role of Emergeny Departments
   in the United States. RAND Health. RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA.
   Accessed February 2018. url: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/
   RR280.html.
New York State Department of Financial Services (2012). An Unwelcome Sur-
   prise: How New Yorkers are Getting Stuck with Unexpected Medical Bills
   from Out-of-Network Providers. New York Department of Financial Services.
   Albany, NY.
Newhouse, Joseph P (1970). “Toward a Theory of Nonprofit Institutions: An
   Economic Model of a Hospital”. In: American Economic Review 60.1, pp. 64–
   74.
Osborne, Martin J and Ariel Rubinstein (1990). Bargaining and Markets. San
   Diego, CA: Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Pogue, Stacey and Megan Randall (2014). Surprise Medical Bills Take Advantage
   of Texans. Center for Public Policy Priorities, Austin, TX. Accessed February
   2018. url: https : / / forabettertexas . org / images / HC _ 2014 _ 09 _ PP _
   BalanceBilling.pdf.
Rice, Sabriya (2016). Cutting Emergency Department Wait Times as Patient
   Volumes Rise. Modern Healthcare. Accessed February 2018. url: http://
   www.modernhealthcare.com/article/20160213/MAGAZINE/302139996.
Richman, Barak D et al. (2017). “Battling the Chargemaster: A Simple Remedy
   to Balance Billing for Unavoidable Out-of-Network Care”. In: American
   Journal of Managed Care 23.4, pp. 100–105.

                                       41
Rosenthal, Elisabeth (2014a). After Surgery, $117,000 Bill for Doctor He Didn’t
   Know. New York Times. Accessed February 2018. url: https://www.nytimes.
   com/2014/09/29/us/costs-can-go-up-fast-when-er-is-in-network-but-the-
   doctors-are-not.html.
— (2014b). Costs Can Go Up Fast When E.R. Is in Network But the Doctors
   Are Not. New York Times. Accessed February 2018. url: https://www.
   nytimes.com/2014/09/29/us/costs-can-go-up-fast-when-er-is-in-network-
   but-the-doctors-are-not.html.
Rui, P, K Kang, and Albert M (2013). National Hospital Ambulatory Medical
   Care Survey: 2013 Emergency Department Summary Tables. Centers for
   Disease Control and Prevention, Washington, DC. Accessed February 2018.
   url: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/ahcd/nhamcs_emergency/2013_ed_
   web_tables.pdf.
Sanger-Katz, Margot and Reed Abelson (2016). Surprise! Insurance Paid the
   E.R. but Not the Doctor. New York Times. Accessed February 2018. url:
   https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/17/upshot/first-comes-the-emergency-
   then-comes-the-surprise-out-of-network-bill.html.
Schuur, Jeremiah D and Arjun K Venkatesh (2012). “The Growing Role of
   Emergency Departments in Hospital Admissions”. In: New England Journal
   of Medicine 367.5, pp. 391–393.
TeamHealth (2009). TeamHealth Holdings, Inc. - Initial Public Offering.
Wadman, Michael C et al. (2005). “Qualification Discrepancies Between Urban
   and Rural Emergency Department Physicians”. In: Journal of Emergency
   Medicine 28.3, pp. 273–276.
Wilson, Michael and David Cutler (2014). “Emergency Department Profits are
   Likely to Continue as the Affordable Care Act Expands Coverage”. In: Health
   Affairs 33.5, pp. 792–799.




                                      42
                                                           Table 1: ED Episodes Per Year

                                                                             Mean
                                  Total Facility     Total Facility        Physician             Pat.                Pat.           Hospital Out-
                Emergency
                                    Spending           Spending           In-Network         Cost-Sharing        Cost-Sharing        of-Network
                 Episodes
                                   (millions)         (millions)          Payment (%         on Physicians        Hospitals          Frequency
                                                                           Medicare)
     2011        1,699,451            $4,291              $572               $278.70              $43.58            $347.41              28.6%
                                                                             (228%)
     2012        1,899,513            $4,856              $696               $293.62              $49.85            $368.17              28.0%
                                                                             (245%)
43




     2013        1,820,059            $5,010              $741               $324.91              $59.17            $416.61              26.1%
                                                                             (269%)
     2014        1,745,100            $5,037              $751               $348.98              $67.60            $451.80              24.2%
                                                                             (284%)
     2015        1,749,073            $5,262              $779               $383.33              $70.40            $464.16              21.9%
                                                                             (303%)
     Total       8,913,196           $24,458             $3,538              $325.91              $58.12            $409.63              25.8%
                                                                             (266%)
     Notes: The table shows episodes per year, facility spending per year, physician spending per year, the mean payment to an in-network ED
     physician (and the mean expressed as a percentage of Medicare payments), patient payments for physician fees, patient payments for hospital fees,
     and yearly out-of-network rates. The physician payment is the sum of the insurer and patient contribution. All dollar amounts are in 2015 dollars.
     We observe that over 99% of ED care occurred at in-network hospitals.
Table 2: The Impact of EmCare and TeamHealth Entry on Hospitals’ Out-of-
Network Rates

                                 (1)                         (2)                       (3)
                      Hospitals with OON           Hospitals with OON
                       Rates above 97%              Rates Below 97%              All Hospitals
                        Prior to Entry               Prior to Entry
                                                                                 TeamHealth
                                        EmCare Entry
                                                                                    Entry
                                        OON Indicator                          OON Indicator
Management                    −0.030                      0.815∗∗∗                 0.326∗∗∗
Company Entry                 (0.044)                      (0.061)                  (0.030)

Hospital FE                     Yes                         Yes                       Yes
Month FE                        Yes                         Yes                       Yes
Mean                           0.209                       0.204                     0.226
SD                             0.407                       0.403                     0.419
Observations                 8,401,884                   8,351,799                 8,661,796

                          All Non-Entry               All Non-Entry             All Non-Entry
Control
                            Hospitals                   Hospitals                 Hospitals
Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table presents least-squares estimates of Equa-
tions (1a) and (1b). In Column (1), we focus on hospitals that EmCare entered that had out-of-
network rates prior to entry that were above 97%. In Column (2), we focus on hospitals that had
out-of-network rates prior to entry below 97% (in practice, all hospitals with out-of-network rates
below 97% had out-of-network rates below 11%). In Column (3), we focus on the sample of all
hospitals where TeamHealth entered. The dependent variable in all regressions is a binary indica-
tor for whether a patient at an in-network hospital was treated by an out-of-network physician.
Our analysis is run at the patient-level. The control groups are all hospitals in the US that did
not outsource their ED management to EmCare or TeamHealth. Each regression includes controls
for patient age, gender, race, and Charlson score. Standard errors are clustered around hospitals.
Mean and standard deviation are drawn from the analytic sample population underlying the
regression. In Appendix Table A.3, we show these estimates using alternative control groups.




                                              44
                  Table 3: The Impact of the Entry of EmCare on Physician Charges, Payments, and Coding

                              (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)               (7)
                                                             Patient                          Potential         Total
                          Physician          Insurer                          Total                                                CPT
                                                              Cost                            Balanced       Patient Cost
                           Charge           Payment                          Payment                                              Severity
                                                             Sharing                            Bill          Exposure
     EmCare Entry          556.84∗∗∗       402.67∗∗∗         45.23∗∗∗        447.90∗∗∗        108.94∗∗∗        154.17∗∗∗         0.148∗∗∗
                            (62.12)         (54.52)           (4.38)          (55.16)          (38.71)          (35.12)           (0.030)

     Hospital FE              Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes
     Month FE                 Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes
45




     Mean                    578.95          329.17            54.47           383.64           195.32           249.79            0.347
     SD                      364.61          290.13           108.72           297.99           225.12           243.57            0.476
     Observations          8,418,226       8,418,226        8,418,226        8,418,226        8,418,226        8,418,226         8,418,226

                             All             All              All              All              All              All               All
     Control
                           Hospitals       Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals         Hospitals
     Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table presents least-squares estimates of Equation (1a). Each observation is a patient
     episode. The control group in all regressions is all hospitals in the US exclusive of those that outsourced their ED services to EmCare.
     We windsorized the top and bottom percentile of hospital and physician payments. Each regression includes controls for patient age,
     gender, race, and Charlson score. Standard errors are clustered around hospitals. Means and standard deviation are drawn from the
     analytic sample population underlying the regression. All dollar amounts are inflation adjusted into 2015 dollars. In Appendix Table A.4
     and Appendix Table A.5, we show these estimates using alternative control groups.
            Table 4: The Impact of the Entry of TeamHealth on Physician Charges, Payments, and Coding

                                    (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)              (5)               (6)
                                                                         Insurer
                                                    Insurer                                Patient
                                Physician                               Payment                              Total             CPT
                                                   Payment                                  Cost
                                 Charge                                 (Out-of                             Payment           Severity
                                                 (In-network)                              Sharing
                                                                       -network)
     TeamHealth Entry              52.49           236.56∗∗∗           203.09∗∗∗           21.85∗∗∗        269.01∗∗∗           0.016
                                  (35.90)           (12.87)             (73.66)             (3.43)          (19.06)           (0.015)

     Hospital FE                   Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes
46




     Month FE                      Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes
     Mean                        589.58             263.95              597.44              55.92            395.38            0.346
     SD                          374.63             226.87              371.14             110.54           310.46             0.476
     Observations               8,661,796          6,700,621           1,961,175          8,661,796        8,661,796         8,661,796

                                  All               All                 All                 All              All               All
     Control
                                Hospitals         Hospitals           Hospitals           Hospitals        Hospitals         Hospitals
     Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table presents least-squares estimates of Equation (1b). Each observation is a
     patient episode. The control group in all regressions is all hospitals in the US exclusive of those that outsourced their ED services
     to TeamHealth. We windsorized the top and bottom percentile of hospital and physician payments. Each regression includes
     controls for patient age, gender, race, and Charlson score. Standard errors are clustered around hospitals. Means and standard
     deviation are drawn from the analytic sample population underlying the regression. All dollar amounts are inflation adjusted into
     2015 dollars. In Appendix Table A.6 and Appendix Table A.7, we show these estimates using alternative control groups.
     Table 5: Comparison of Physician Payments as a Percent of Medicare

       (1)                 (2)                    (3)                (4)                  (5)
 Orthopedist                             ED Physician          TeamHealth           EmCare ED
                    Internist Office
     Hip                                 Standard Visit       ED Physician           Physician
                    Visit Payment
 Replacement                                  Rate            Standard Visit       Standard Visit
                         Rate
Payment Rate                              (In-network)            Rate                 Rate
                                        (% of Medicare)
     178%                 158%                 266%                 364%                536%
Notes: This table shows physician payments as a percentage of Medicare based on speciality. Columns
(3,4,5) are derived from our analytic sample of ED episodes. Columns (4,5) include all physician pay-
ments to physicians working in Emcare and TeamHealth hospitals identified in our data. Columns (1)
and (2) are based on claims from the same period as the ED claims and were paid by the same payer.




                                             47
                  Table 6: The Impact of the Entry of EmCare on Hospital Charges, Payments, and Activity

                               (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)
                                                              Patient
                            Facility         Insurer                           Total                           Admission         Episode
                                                               Cost                            Imaging
                            Charge          Payment                           Payment                          to Hospital        Count
                                                              Sharing
     EmCare Entry         1683.63∗∗∗        240.70∗∗         53.88∗∗∗         294.58∗∗∗        0.014∗∗∗         0.021∗∗∗          −104.0
                           (401.04)          (98.68)          (17.91)          (113.64)         (0.005)          (0.006)          (218.1)

     Hospital FE              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
     Month FE                 Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
48




     Mean                  6,304.63          2,350.46          393.81          2,744.27          0.278            0.090           1,695.5
     SD                    12,415.53         4,885.15          561.89          5,034.47          0.448            0.286           1,566.5
     Observations          8,418,226        8,418,226        8,418,226        8,418,226        8,418,226        8,418,226        8,418,226

                             All              All              All              All              All              All              All
     Control
                           Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals
     Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table presents least-squares estimates of Equation (1a). Each observation is a patient
     episode. The control group in all regressions is all hospitals in the US exclusive of those that outsourced their ED services to EmCare.
     We windsorized the top and bottom percentile of hospital and physician payments. Imaging is an indicator variable capturing whether a
     patient had an imaging study performed during an ED visit. Admissions to hospital is an indicator variable that captures whether a
     patient was admitted to the hospital after an ED visit. Each regression includes controls for patient age, gender, race, and Charlson
     score. Standard errors are clustered around hospitals. Means and standard deviation are drawn from the analytic sample population
     underlying the regression. All dollar amounts are inflation adjusted into 2015 dollars. In Appendix Table A.9 and Appendix Table A.10,
     we show these estimates using alternative control groups.
                  Table 7: The Impact of the Entry of TeamHealth on Hospital Charges, Payments, and Activity

                                   (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)
                                                                  Patient
                                Facility         Insurer                           Total                          Admission          Episode
                                                                   Cost                            Imaging
                                Charge          Payment                           Payment                         to Hospital         Count
                                                                  Sharing
     TeamHealth Entry            170.17          −76.61           24.42∗∗          −52.19         −0.008∗∗         −0.006∗∗         515.4∗∗∗
                                (174.03)         (76.82)          (12.41)          (82.70)         (0.003)          (0.002)          (182.8)

     Hospital FE                  Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
     Month FE                     Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
49




     Mean                      6,400.68          2,355.70          394.19          2,749.89         0.279            0.091           1,692.1
     SD                        12,555.33         4,891.99          561.51          5,041.25         0.448            0.287           1,557.4
     Observations              8,661,796        8,661,796        8,661,796        8,661,796       8,661,796        8,661,796        8,661,796

                                 All              All              All              All             All              All              All
     Control
                               Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals       Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals
     Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table presents least-squares estimates of Equation (1b). Each observation is a patient
     episode. The control group in all regressions is all hospitals in the US exclusive of those that outsourced their ED services to TeamHealth.
     We windsorized the top and bottom percentile of hospital and physician payments. Imaging is an indicator variable capturing whether
     a patient had an imaging study performed during an ED visit. Admissions to hospital is an indicator variable that captures whether a
     patient was admitted to the hospital after an ED visit. Each regression includes controls for patient age, gender, race, and Charlson score.
     Standard errors are clustered around hospitals. Means and standard deviation are drawn from the analytic sample population underlying the
     regression. All dollar amounts are inflation adjusted into 2015 dollars. In Appendix Table A.11 and Appendix Table A.12, we show these
     estimates using alternative control groups.
                                   Table 8: Comparison EmCare and TeamHealth Hospital Characteristics

                                                                                        P-value                                            P-value
                                                         All           EmCare                              All          TeamHealth
                                                                                         from                                               from
     Hospital Characteristics                         Hospitals        Hospitals                        Hospitals        Hospitals
                                                                                       two-sided                                          two-sided
                                                       (3,056)          (194)                            (3,056)           (95)
                                                                                         t-test                                             t-test
     For-profit                                         0.19             0.56              0.00            0.21             0.29             0.09
     Non-profit                                         0.66             0.26              0.00            0.63             0.57             0.28
     Government                                         0.15             0.17              0.50            0.15             0.13             0.63
     Teaching                                           0.09             0.05              0.06            0.09             0.04             0.09
     Hospital Beds                                     227.32           185.43             0.01          225.74           197.63             0.21
     Technologies                                       55.26            44.38             0.00           54.84            47.79             0.04
50




     Hospital HHI                                       0.55             0.57              0.57            0.55             0.59             0.35
     Proportion Medicare                                47.45            48.04             0.56           47.36            51.42             0.00
     Proportion Medicaid                                19.88            19.14             0.39           19.83            20.15             0.78
     ED Physicians per Capita (per 10,000)              0.77             0.66              0.00            0.77             0.70             0.04
     Physicians per Capita (per 10,000)                 22.11            21.21             0.01           22.04            22.66             0.23
     Physician HHI                                      0.43             0.41              0.37            0.43             0.41             0.39
     Insurer HHI                                        0.38             0.36              0.32            0.38             0.36             0.23
     Household Income ($)                             36,862.23        37,277.03           0.41         36,904.38        36,287.42           0.38
     Gini Coefficient                                   0.32             0.33              0.00            0.32             0.33             0.04
     Notes: The table compares characteristics of identified EmCare and Teamhealth hospitals to the entire sample of hospitals. The number of hospitals
     in each column is shown in parenthesis. Hospitals where Emcare and TeamHealth have contracts are excluded from all hospitals. The p-value is
     reported from a two-sided t-test comparing the difference in means between all hospitals and identified EmCare and Teamhealth hospitals.
                             Table 9: Estimating the Impact of the New York State Surprise Billing Law

                                  (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)
                                                                                                                 Out-of-          Out-of-
                               Out-of-                        In-Network
                                               Physician                         Facility       Facility         Network         Network
                               Network                         Physician
                                                Charge                           Charge         Payment           Rate          Rate (Full
                                Rate                           Payment
                                                                                                                 (ASO)          Insurance)
     NY ∗ Post dummy          −0.068∗∗           21.46         −43.74∗∗∗         −98.73           −1.21          −0.069∗∗        −0.062∗∗
                               (0.030)          (20.74)         (11.51)         (148.39)         (81.85)          (0.031)         (0.031)

     Hospital FE                  Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
51




     Quarterly FE                 Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
     Mean                        0.202          499.17           335.86          6,100.52        2,571.28          0.198           0.227
     SD                          0.401          313.11           251.95         12,693.62        5,122.37          0.399           0.419

     Observations              905,441          905,441         905,441          905,441         905,441          787,005         116,642
     R-Square                   0.636            0.435           0.488            0.113           0.114            0.629           0.687
     Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table presents least-squares estimates of Equation (2). All regressions are run at the
     patient level. Each regression includes an indicator variable for whether the episode occurred in New York. The post dummy turns on
     in 2014 Q1 (when the NY vote was passed). Hospital and physician payments are winsorized at the top and bottom one percentile. The
     control states included are NJ, PA, CT, VT, and PA. Each regression includes controls for patient age, gender, race, and Charlson score.
     Standard errors are clustered around hospitals. Means and standard deviation are drawn from the analytic sample population underlying
     the regression. All dollar amounts are inflation adjusted into 2015 dollars.
Figure 1: The Distribution of Hospital Out-of-Network Billing Rates in 2015




                                         10th    25th    50th     75th    90th
  Out-of-Network Rate                       0     0     0.011    0.278    0.990
  Notes: The figure shows the distribution of ED physicians out-of-network rates
  across hospitals in 2015.




                                       52
      Figure 2: Conditional Correlates of Hospital Out-of-Network Billing




Notes: The figure shows the point estimates from a least-squared regression of hospital
out-of-network rates on variables chosen from our Lasso. We used data from 2011 through 2015.
Each observation is a hospital-year rate of out-of-network billing. The regression includes year
fixed-effects. For continuous variables, the point estimates can be interpreted as the percentage
point change in out-of-network rate for a one standard deviation increase in the explanatory
variable. For binary variables, the point estimate illustrates the impact of having the variable
take a value of one. To obtain these results, we first run a Lasso with all possible variables
(90 in total). We then square and cube continuous variables chosen from the Lasso and run a
second Lasso that includes all variables in addition to those that are now squared and cubed.
We then run an OLS regression of hospital out-of-network rates on variables chosen from the
Lasso. We also included measures of physician, hospital and insurer market concentration and
physician group indicators.




                                               53
Figure 3: Discontinuity Analysis of Out-of-Network Rates at Hospitals Where
EmCare and TeamHealth Took Over Management of ED Services




Notes: The panels plot the monthly average by hospital from 12 months before to 12 months
after EmCare or TeamHealth entered the hospital. For Panel A, we limit our analysis to
hospitals with out-of-network rates below 97% in 2011.




                                            54
Figure 4: Discontinuity Analysis of Physician Billing at Hospitals Where EmCare
Took Over Management of ED Services




Notes: The panels plot the monthly average by hospital from 12 months before to 12 months
after EmCare entered the hospital.




                                           55
Figure 5: Discontinuity Analysis of Physician Billing at Hospitals Where
TeamHealth Took Over Management of ED Services




Notes: The panels plot the monthly average by hospital from 12 months before to 12 months
after TeamHealth entered the hospital.




                                           56
Figure 6: Discontinuity Analysis of Hospital Activity at Hospitals Where EmCare
Took Over Management of ED Services




Notes: The panels plot the monthly average by hospital from 12 months before to 12 months
after EmCare entered the hospital.




                                           57
Figure 7: Discontinuity Analysis of Hospital Activity at Hospitals Where
TeamHealth Took Over Management of ED Services




Notes: The panels plot the monthly average by hospital from 12 months before to 12 months
after TeamHealth entered the hospital.




                                           58
Figure 8: Out-of-Network Billing Rates in New York Versus Surrounding States




Notes: The figure presents least-squares estimates of an episode-level regression where the
dependent variable is whether or not a patient at an in-network ED received a bill from
an out-of-network physician. We regress that against an indicator for whether the episode
occurred in the state of New York, a vector of quarterly fixed effects, and the interaction of the
New York indicator and the quarterly fixed effects. Patient age, gender, race, and Charlson
scores are included as controls. The omitted category is Q1 2013. We include a vector of
hospital fixed effects. The control group is composed of ED episodes that occurred in New
Jersey, Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Vermont, and Massachusetts. Standard errors are clustered
around hospitals. The red dotted line denotes when the NY vote passed, and the green dotted
line denotes when the NY law was enacted.




                                               59
Figure 9: The Distribution of Out-of-Network Billing in New York in 2013 and
2015




Notes: The figure shows the kernel density distribution of hospital out-of-network rates in
New York in 2013 and 2015




                                            60
Appendix – For Online Publication




               61
Appendix A                 Modelling Surprise Out-of-Network
                           Billing
For it to occur, there are three parties that have to prefer out-of-network billing
to an in-network contract: the physician group, the hospital, and the insurer.
The physician group and insurer must be unable to come to an agreement on an
in-network contract. In addition, the hospital must effectively allow physicians
to bill out-of-network from inside their facilities.31 We discuss each party’s
incentives in turn.


Out-of-Network Prices

The physician group and the insurer bargain over the price the insurer will
pay the physicians. The revenue component of the disagreement payoff of the
physician group should it end up out-of-network is a price limited only by the
laws of a state, s. Since state laws differ, this net price will vary by state,
and we could think of the price as being a function of that state’s institutional
environment, e.g. p = f (law s ).32 However, the model below will focus on agents
all in one state and describe the average out-of-network price the group can
collect, pL , as coming from the legal environment, not the market environment in
that state. A crucial feature of emergency medicine (that our model exploits) is
that the quantity of patients seen by the emergency physician group is invariant
to its network status.33
  31 The hospital may not have legal authority to prevent a physician (or physician group)

from practicing in the ED just because that physician has failed to come to an agreement with
any given insurer or insurers. However, we assume there are so many interactions between
the hospital and an ED physician group that if the hospital disapproved of the group’s overall
strategy, it could make the relationship sufficiently onerous such that the physicians would
move in-network.
  32 In Maryland and California, for example, out-of-network physicians cannot bill more than

the greatest of either their in-network payments, a fixed percentage of Medicare payments, or
physicians’ usual and customary charges.
  33 When patients attend a hospital ED, they have no choice over the physician that treats

them. As a result, once a patient decides to attend a hospital ED, the patient cannot avoid
out-of-network physicians working in that ED. Previous researchers have used this feature of
emergency medicine as a source of random variation in physician assignment (see Barnett,
Olenski, and Jena 2017).




                                             62
Insurers

We denote the equilibrium negotiated price as p∗ . We abstract from all other
revenue and costs of the insurer and simply define r to be the insurer’s net
revenue per patient without any ED physician cost. Thus, the net benefit of a
representative enrollee to the plan is r less the cost of the ED physician. If the
physician group and the insurer agree to a contract at p∗ , the insurer gets:

                                      Ui,IN = r − p∗ .                                    (3)

If the two parties do not agree, then the physician group begins billing its charges,
which are higher than negotiated network rates. The insurer may take advantage
of any state law to reduce those physician charges, but the laws result in an
effective price received by the physicians of pL . We assume that the insurer
ends up paying some fraction γ, less than one of the new out-of-network price
pL . We will treat γ as exogenous in our model.34 The net insurer payoff under
disagreement is thus:
                                 Ui,OUT = r − γpL .                              (4)

A second difference under disagreement is that now the physicians also collect
the balance of the payment from the patient, who earns a disutility payoff
W ((1 − γ)pL ) < 0. The patient blames the hospital for the balance bill so the
hospital suffers harm to its reputation of kh . Throughout the model, when we
use the term “out-of-network billing” we are referring to physicians using the
deliberate strategy of raising charges by a significant amount in order to earn
higher payments. It is perfectly possible for an ED physician group to not have
a contract with a patient’s insurer (perhaps due to transaction costs) and to
charge that patient a typical in-network price. We assume, as is the case in
our data, that in this situation the patient and the insurer will share costs in
the usual way and there are no disputes. We further assume that in that case
there is no reputational cost to the hospital. While this setting is technically
also “out-of-network billing,” we exclude it from the definition in our discussion
below in order to focus on the deliberate strategy of raising prices.
  34 It could be that γ is determined by state laws and norms as well as by competition in the

insurer market. We assume that frictions in the physician ED market are too small to create
any feedback to insurance competition.




                                             63
Hospitals

We assume that hospitals understand when their outsourcing firm will be taking
advantage of patients and insurers with an out-of-network billing strategy. Hos-
pitals appreciate that the management company cannot carry out its strategy
without access to the ED, and therefore the hospital will be able to bargain to
keep a share of the increased profits generated by the outsourcing firm. These
profits could take the form of physicians allowing the hospitals to share in
the physicians’ profits (e.g., with a joint venture), through a reduction in any
management fees that a hospital would have to pay a firm to staff their ED. The
payment could alternatively be generated by increases in facility fees that result
from increased testing rates, imaging rates, or admissions to the hospital. Recall
that, ultimately, physicians control patient utilization and what gets billed by
the hospitals. As a result, ED physicians have significant influence over hospitals’
revenue.
    Because the hospital can block an out-of-network billing strategy, it must
be compensated for the reputational loss it incurs from having this practice
occur inside its facility. We assume that an outsourcing firm can pay a fixed
amount c > kh to satisfy the hospital.35 Physicians also have the ability to
generate payment c to the hospital without it coming from the physician’s own
pocket. This could occur via potentially unnecessary activities A such as ordering
additional lab testing, imaging studies, or raising the rates that patients are
admitted to the hospital. Increasing these activities does not generate revenue
for the physician, but it does generate revenues to the hospital. Engaging in
activity A carries with it some legal risk indicated by R(A), (with R0 (A) > 0,
R(0) = 0), since it potentially involves giving care to patients who don’t need
it which could be found to violate laws or regulations. A more complex model
could make c endogenous and allow outsourcing firms to compete by increasing
it, but we do not take on that topic in this paper.
    We also assume the hospital does not face any cost of higher-priced in-network
billing. We think this is a reasonable assumption because it is hard for patients
to observe counterfactual prices and patients perceive they are ‘covered’ in
these circumstances. That is, the level of p∗ paid to ED physicians when they
  35 We recognize a possible role for asymmetric information. A hospital may not realize the

strategy of the outsourcing firm ex ante. An uniformed hospital may sign a contract that is
later terminated when the hospital realizes its patients are receiving balance bills and the
reputational cost is high. For example, the Los Alamos Medical Center began contracting with
EmCare in 2012 (DeRoma 2012). Several years later, the hospital ended their contract with
the hospital over concerns about out-of-network billing and coding practices.



                                            64
participate in an insurer’s network does not affect the hospital’s payoff. Hospitals
value consumer welfare and also profits with weight αh . If a hospital hires an
out-of-network group to staff its ED, hospital utility changes by:

                       ∆Uh = (c − kh ) + αh W ((1 − γ)pL ),                     (5)

which represents its incremental financial earnings less the dollar value of the
disutility of patients. The hospital will only agree to out-of-network billing if
its weight αh on patients is sufficiently low. Recall that W < 0 and c > kh , so
αh will be positive but smaller, all else equal, for hospital willing to engage in
out-of-network billing:

                         αh < (c − kh )/(−W ((1 − γ)pL ).                       (6)

If a hospital experiences a very high reputational or other cost to hosting a
physician group engaged in an out-of-network billing strategy, physician groups
will find it expensive to locate their strategy in that hospital and will tend
to locate elsewhere. In the empirical section of the paper we will identify the
characteristics of hospitals that have high out-of-network rates and contract with
firms that engage in an out-of-network billing strategy.


Physicians

A physician group faces a tradeoff between exercising its threat of going out-
of-network and collecting pL while compensating the hospital c (or engaging
in A) and having a disutility from financially harming patients, or joining the
network for p∗ . Consumer welfare, W , is constant at zero across in-network
prices because we assume the impact of out-of-network billing on premiums
takes place slowly over time and is not perceived by consumers within our game.
Out-of-network billing from a patient’s doctor results in disutility to that patient
of W ((1 − γ)pL ) which the physicians also take into account with a weight αp .
    Physicians value profits, consumer welfare, and legal risk with weights as
noted below. Profit is the negotiated price times a fixed quantity of patients less
any financial costs due to the physician group’s choice. If out-of-network status
is chosen, the group must either pay the hospital the financial cost c or bear risk
R(A), which is a decrement to the physicians’ utility weighted by βp . Physician




                                        65
per patient utility (the number of patients is fixed) when bargaining fails is:

          Up,OUT (π, W, A) = pL + αp W ((1 − γ)pL ) − min{c, βp R(A)}.                  (7)

We assume that everywhere physicians’ gain from an additional dollar increase
in pL is larger than their utility loss from the harm to consumers. Physicians’
increased utility from income can be offset by harm to consumers, but not
reversed. This is particularly plausible when γ is large, which is the case in our
setting.36 We therefore assume |αp W 0 | < 1.
    When bargaining succeeds and the physician group is in-network at the
hospital, its utility is:
                               Up,IN (π, W, A) = p∗ .                          (8)

We assume equal bargaining power for the two parties. The Nash bargaining
expression is therefore the product of the gains from agreement for both parties:

                        [Up,OUT − Up,IN ] ∗ [Ui,IN − Ui,OUT ].                          (9)

Which can equivalently be written:

           [p∗ − pL + αp W ((1 − γ)pL ) − min{c, βp R(A)}] ∗ [γpL − p∗ ].              (10)

We assume bargaining strengths are equal and therefore p∗ will split any difference
between the two outside options. If the following holds:

    Up,OUT (π, W, A) = pL + αp W ((1 − γ)pL ) − min{c, βp R(A)} ≥ γpL ,                (11)

then there are no gains from a contract and the physician group will stay
out-of-network. On the other hand, if:

    Up,OUT (π, W, A) = pL + αp W ((1 − γ)pL ) − min{c, βp R(A)} < γpL ,                (12)

then we expect an equilibrium p∗ :

             p∗ = [pL + αp W ((1 − γ)pL ) − min{c, βp R(A)} − γpL ]/2                  (13)

   The intuition for the case where an in-network price is possible is graphed
  36 Few consumers have savings to pay a large medical bill and therefore the fraction of it

that can be actually collected by physicians is relatively small.




                                            66
below. The key is that the physician’s net utility for being out-of-network
is low, either because of concern for patient welfare or because the hospital’s
reputational cost, and therefore transfer, is high. Alternatively, if Up,OUT
(measured in dollars) lies above γpL on the line below, either because physicians
are not concerned about putting patients in a bad situation or hospital reputation
costs are low, then there is no scope for agreement.

                Up,OUT           p∗             γpL             pL


The insurer’s outside option (γpL ) is not specific to an insurer but is constant
across all insurers due to state law. Equilibrium p∗ will fall in between the two
outside options when Up,OUT is low enough. In the case when there is possibility
of an agreement, if the law or other forces raise the insurer’s out-of-network
payment, the equilibrium negotiated price will increase. We can check if an
increase in pL will raise the equilibrium negotiated rate by taking the derivative
of the expression for p∗ with respect to pL and asking if it is positive.

                             1 − γ + (1 − γ)αp W 0 > 0                          (14)

We know W 0 is negative (a higher payment paid by consumers makes their utility
more negative) and we also know |αp W 0 | < 1 by our assumption above. Since
(1 − γ) is positive, the derivative is therefore positive.
    Take the case where physicians put no weight on legal risk or patient disutility.
In that case the physician payoff is pL (they choose activity A and do not pay
c) and there is nothing the insurer can offer as an in-network price that will be
attractive. The physicians will stay out of the network, insurers will pay γpL
and patients will pay the balance. As physicians’ disutility for risk, c, and weight
on patients all rise, the outside option for the physician group becomes worse
and eventually will fall below γpL whereupon there is scope for an in-network
rate that benefits both sides.
    Out-of-network physician groups will choose between paying c or engaging in
activity A according to whichever is cheaper, which will depend on their risk
tolerance βp . Physician groups with low αp and high βp want to choose the
out-of-network strategy but do not want the risk of activity A and therefore
must pay the hospital directly. Physician groups with low αp and low will βp
choose the out-of-network billing strategy for the additional profit, and pay the
hospital through activity A which they find relatively cheap compared to giving
up profit.

                                         67
     Appendix B       Variables Used in Lasso

                              Description                                         Source
      aha_mapp2               Cancer program approved by ACS                      AHA
      aha_mapp20              Sole Community Provider                             AHA
      aha_mapp21              DNV                                                 AHA
      aha_mapp3               Residency training approval                         AHA
      aha_mapp5               Medical school affiliation                          AHA
      aha_mapp6               Hospital-controlled professional nursing school     AHA
      aha_mapp7               Accreditation by CARF                               AHA
68




      aha_mapp8               Teaching hospital                                   AHA
      aha_mapp9               Blue Cross contracting or participating             AHA
      aha_mcddc               Total facility Medicaid discharges                  AHA
      aha_mcdipd              Total facility Medicaid days                        AHA
      aha_mcrdc               Total facility Medicare discharges                  AHA
      aha_npayben             Total facility employee benefits                    AHA
      aha_paytot              Facility payroll expenses                           AHA
      aha_prop_caid           Proportion medicaid                                 AHA
      aha_prop_care           Proportion medicare                                 AHA
      aha_ptlab               Part-time laboratory technicians                    AHA
      aha_ptlpntf             Part-time licensed practical or vocational nurses   AHA
                                                                                           Continued on next page
                                Description                                          Source
     aha_ptmdtf                 Part-time physicians and dentists                    AHA
     aha_ptphr                  Part-time pharmacists, licensed                      AHA
     aha_ptpht                  Part-time pharmacy technicians                       AHA
     aha_ptrad                  Part-time radiology technicians                      AHA
     aha_ptres                  Part-time medical and dental residents and interns   AHA
     aha_ptresp                 Part-time respiratory therapists                     AHA
     aha_pttoth                 Total part-time hospital unit personnel              AHA
     aha_pttotlt                Total part-time nursing home personnel               AHA
     aha_pttran84               Part-time other trainees                             AHA
     aha_sunits                 Separate nursing home                                AHA
69




     aha_suropip                Inpatient surgical operations                        AHA
     aha_suroptot               Total surgical operations                            AHA
     aha_syshhi_15m             Hospital 15m HHI                                     AHA
     aha_techtotal              Technology (put into quintiles)                      AHA
     aha_vem                    Emergency room visits                                AHA
     aha_vtot                   Total outpatient visits                              AHA
     eop_cs00_seg_inc           Income segregation                                   Equality   of   Opportunity   Project
     eop_cs_divorced            fraction of divorced adults                          Equality   of   Opportunity   Project
     eop_cs_elf_ind_man         manufacturing employment share                       Equality   of   Opportunity   Project
     eop_cs_fam_wkidsinglemom   Fraction of children with single mothers             Equality   of   Opportunity   Project
                                                                                                     Continued on next page
                                Description                                  Source
     eop_cs_labforce            Labor participation rate                     Equality of Opportunity Project
     eop_cs_married             Fraction of adults married                   Equality of Opportunity Project
     eop_cs_race_bla            Fraction black                               Equality of Opportunity Project
     eop_cs_race_theil_2000     Theil Index of racial segregation            Equality of Opportunity Project
     eop_frac_traveltime_lt15   Fraction with commute less than 15 minutes   Equality of Opportunity Project
     eop_gini                   Gini (includes top 1%)                       Equality of Opportunity Project
     eop_hhinc00                Household Income (put into quintiles)        Equality of Opportunity Project
     eop_inc_share_1perc        Top 1% income share                          Equality of Opportunity Project
     eop_incgrowth0010          income growth, 2000-2006/10                  Equality of Opportunity Project
     eop_intersects_msa         Urban indicator                              Equality of Opportunity Project
70




     eop_mig_inflow             Migration inflow rate                        Equality of Opportunity Project
     eop_mig_outflow            migration outflow rate                       Equality of Opportunity Project
     eop_rel_tot                Fraction religious                           Equality of Opportunity Project
     eop_subcty_expend          Local government expenditures/capita         Equality of Opportunity Project
     eop_taxrate                local tax rate                               Equality of Opportunity Project
     baker_hhi                  Physician HHI                                Baker et. al
     hli_hhi_all                Insurer HHI                                  Health Leader Interstudy
     hli_share                  Insurer share of market                      Health Leader Interstudy
     cen_countypop              County population                            US Census Bureau
     ska_ed_phys_per_capita     ED Physicians/capita                         SKA
                                                                                        Continued on next page
                                           Description                                                    Source
     ska_phys_per_capita                   Physicians/capita                                              SKA
     EmCare                                Indicator for EmCare hospitals                                 Internal
     TeamHealth                            Indicator for TeamHealth hospitals                             Internal
     Notes: AHA: American Hospital Association Annual Survey. Equality of Opportunity Project: Selected variables from (http://www.equality-
     of-opportunity.org/data/). Baker et. al: Physician HHI constructed by Laurence Baker, Kate Bundorf, and Anne Royalty. Health Leader
     Interstudy: Data from US Managed Market Solutions, formerly Health Leader Interstudy. SK&A: Healthcare database with list of physicians
     for marketing purposes. Internal: See Appendix Figure A.1a and A.1b. These are all variables that may be selected from the Lasso. Hospitals
     missing any of these variables or not appearing in all 5 years of the data are not included. A total of 1,602 unique hospitals are included.
71
Appendix C     Surprise Billing Forms from New York
               State

      New York State Out-of-Network Surprise Medical Bill




                              72
 New York State Out-of-Network Surprise Medical Bill Assignment of Benefits
                                  Form

Use this form if you receive a surprise bill for health care services and want the services to be
treated as in network. To use this form, you must: (1) fill it out and sign it; (2) send a copy
to your health care provider (include a copy of the bill or bills); and (3) send a copy to your
insurer (include a copy of the bill or bills). If you don’t know if it is a surprise bill, contact the
Department of Financial Services at 1-800-342-3736.
A surprise bill is when:

   1. You received services from a nonparticipating physician at a participating hospital or
      ambulatory surgical center, where a participating physician was not available; or a
      nonparticipating physician provided services without your knowledge; or unforeseen
      medical circumstances arose at the time the services were provided. You did not
      choose to receive services from a nonparticipating physician instead of from an available
      participating physician; OR
   2. You were referred by a participating physician to a nonparticipating provider, but you
      did not sign a written consent that you knew the services would be out-of-network
      and would result in costs not covered by your insurer. A referral occurs: (1) during a
      visit with your participating physician, a nonparticipating provider treats you; or (2)
      your participating physician takes a specimen from you in the office and sends it to a
      nonparticipating laboratory pathologist; or (3) for any other health care services when
      referrals are required under your plan.

I assign my rights to payment to my provider and I certify to the best of my knowledge that:
I (or my dependent/s) received a surprise bill from a health care provider. I want the provider
to seek payment for this bill from my insurance company (this is an “assignment”). I want my
health insurer to pay the provider for any health care services I or my dependent/s received
that are covered under my health insurance. With my assignment, the provider cannot seek
payment from me, except for any copayment, coinsurance or deductible that would be owed if
I or my dependent/s used a participating provider. If my insurer paid me for the services, I
agree to send the payment to the provider.

Your name:

Your Address:

Insurer Name:

Your Insurance ID No:

Provider Name:                                          Provider Phone Number:

Provider Address:

Date of Service:
Any person who knowingly and with intent to defraud any insurance company or other
person files and application for insurance or statement of claim containing any materially
false information, or conceals for the purpose of misleading, information concerning any fact
thereto, commits a fraudulent insurance act, which is a crime, and shall also be subject to a
civil penalty not to exceed five thousand dollars and the stated value of the claim for each
such violation.


           (Signature of patient)                                  (Date of signature)




                                                 73
           Table A.1: Hospital Entry from EmCare and TeamHealth

                       EmCare                                TeamHealth
2012               3 Hospitals                              1 Hospital
2013     1 System (8 hospitals); 1Hospital                  2 Hospitals
2014               4 Hospitals                              1 Hospital
2015                    0                        1 System (5 hospitals); 1 Hospital

Total         9 Entries (16 hospitals)                 5 Entries (10 hospitals)
Notes: We identified hospitals that entered into an outsourcing contract with EmCare and
TeamHealth between 2011 and 2015 based on press releases and news stories.




                                          74
                                               Table A.2: ED Episode Descriptives

                                  Mean         SD        Min      P10       P25        P50        P75        P90         Max
     Physician Payment            412.09      320.02     49.15   106.43    182.40     314.33     543.82      872.11     1,642.45
     Physician Charge             614.92      385.70    107.10   224.64    332.80     519.18     787.52    1,136.10     2,146.42
     Physician Insurer Payment    354.02      310.78     0.00    45.01     135.23     271.20     483.00      789.36     1,642.45
     Physician Patient Payment     58.07      114.61      0.00    0.00       0.00      0.00       65.31      185.17      679.45
     Potential Balance Bill       202.90      237.04      0.00    0.00      41.68     135.66     274.96      484.55     2,067.52
     Patient Cost Exposure        260.94      256.20     0.00     0.00      87.40     190.90     352.26      592.98    2,146.42
     Facility Payment            2,850.62    5,218.31   119.22   400.40    689.52    1,139.04   2,418.20    6,379.46   36,286.11
     Facility Charge             6,642.39   13,011.33   172.38   552.70   1,065.90   2,325.69   5,802.44   15,300.48   90,184.31
75




     Facility Insurer Payment    2,441.31    5,063.87     0.00    0.00     367.69     862.51    2,001.42   5,629.37    36,286.11
     Facility Patient Payment     409.31      581.84     0.00     0.00     104.00     200.96     444.60    1,081.61     3,352.42
     Admissions                    0.09        0.29        0       0          0         0           0          0            1
     Imaging                       0.28        0.45        0       0          0         0           1          1            1
     Length of Stay                0.58        1.97        0       0          0         0           0           1          30
     CPT 99281                     0.05        0.21        0       0          0         0           0          0            1
     CPT 99282                     0.13        0.34        0       0          0         0           0          1            1
     CPT 99283                     0.48        0.50        0       0          0         0           1          1            1
     CPT 99284                     0.50        0.50        0       0          0         0           1          1            1
     CPT 99285                     0.35        0.48        0       0          0         0           1          1            1
                                                                                                           Continued on next page
                                                 Table A.2. ED Episode Descriptives (continued)

                                         Mean           SD         Min        P10         P25         P50          P75          P90           Max
     Hispanic                             0.08         0.28         0          0           0            0           0             0             1
     Black                                0.10         0.30         0          0           0            0           0             1             1
     White                                0.48         0.50         0          0           0            0           1             1             1
     Ages 57-65                          0.17          0.38         0          0           0            0           0             1             1
     Ages 47-56                          0.18          0.38         0          0           0            0           0             1             1
     Ages 37-46                          0.17          0.37         0          0           0            0           0             1             1
     Ages 27-36                          0.16          0.36         0          0           0            0           0             1             1
     Ages 20-26                          0.13          0.33         0          0           0            0           0             1             1
76




     Ages 0-19                           0.20          0.40         0          0           0            0           0             1             1
     Charlson Scores                     0.34          0.99         0          0           0            0           0             1            17
     6-month Spending                    6,248        17,195        0          0          149          757        3,548        14,254       115,499
     Episodes per hospital               2,665         3,821        60        190         442         1,177       3,279         6,964        47,599
     Notes: These are the descriptive statistics for all ED episodes in our data. These are limited to episodes that occurred at in-network hospitals.
     Payment and charges are winsorized at the top and bottom one percentiles. Payments and charges are also inflation adjusted into 2015 dollars using
     the BLS All Consumer Price Index.
                    Table A.3: The Impact of the Entry of EmCare and TeamHealth on Hospital Out-of-Network Rates

                                              (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)             (9)
                                          Hospitals with Out-of-Network Rates              Hospitals with Out-of-Network Rates               All Hospitals Where TeamHealth
                                               Above 97% Prior to Entry                         Below 97% Prior to Entry                                  Entered
                                                       OON Indicator                                    OON Indicator                                   OON Indicator
                                                                                                 ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗
     Management Company Entry               −0.030           0.035          −0.032          0.815           0.846           0.896           0.326           0.376∗∗∗        0.261∗∗∗
                                            (0.044)         (0.048)         (0.060)          (0.061)          0.073          (0.156)         (0.03)          (0.034)          0.082

     Hospital FE                              Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes
     Month FE                                 Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes
     Mean                                    0.209           0.392          0.896            0.204           0.372            0.549          0.226            0.305           0.232
77




     SD                                      0.407           0.488          0.306            0.403           0.483            0.498          0.419            0.460           0.422
     Observations                          8,401,884       1,704,541        85,741         8,351,799       1,654,456         34,876        8,661,796        2,118,144        132,549

                                             All           Hospitals      Propensity         All           Hospitals      Propensity          All           Hospitals      Propensity
     Control                              Non-Entry        in Same          Score         Non-Entry        in Same          Score          Non-Entry        in Same          Score
                                          Hospitals          State          Match         Hospitals          State          Match          Hospitals          State          Match
     Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table presents least-squares estimates of Equation (1a) separately on hospitals with out-of-network (OON) rates below 11%
     (Columns 1-3) and above 97% (Columns 4-6). We also estimate Equation (1b) for hospitals with TeamHealth entry in Columns (7-9). The dependent variable in all regressions
     is a binary indicator for whether a patient at an in-network hospital was treated by an out-of-network physician. Our analysis is run at the patient-level. The control groups
     for Columns (1,4,7) are all hospitals in the US that did not outsource their ED management to EmCare or TeamHealth. The control groups for Columns (2,5,8) are all
     hospitals in same states as the treated hospitals, excluding hospitals that outsourced their ED services to EmCare or TeamHealth. The control groups in Columns (3,6,9) are
     hospitals matched to treated hospitals using propensity scores calculated using entry as predicted by a treated hospital’s beds, technology, and non-profit/for-profit status. Each
     regression includes controls for patient age, gender, race, and Charlson score. Standard errors are clustered around hospitals. Mean and standard deviation are drawn from the
     analytic sample population underlying the regression.
     Table A.4: The Impact of the Entry of EmCare on Physician Charges, Payments, and Coding Same-State Hospitals Control
     Group

                                    (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)              (7)
                                                                                                                       Total
                                                                   Patient                          Potential
                                Physician         Insurer                           Total                             Patient          CPT
                                                                    Cost                            Balanced
                                 Charge          Payment                           Payment                             Cost           Severity
                                                                   Sharing                            Bill
                                                                                                                     Exposure
          EmCare Entry          548.40∗∗∗        396.98∗∗∗        46.23∗∗∗         443.22∗∗∗        105.18∗∗∗        151.42∗∗∗        0.148∗∗∗
                                 (62.97)          (55.28)          (4.53)           (56.13)          (38.86)          (35.28)          (0.030)

          Hospital FE              Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
78




          Month FE                 Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
          Mean                    615.73           409.62            61.68           471.30           144.42          206.11            0.357
          SD                      386.33           327.27           111.05           340.41           215.56          236.11            0.479
          Observations          1,720,883        1,720,883        1,720,883        1,720,883        1,720,883        1,720,883        1,720,883

                                Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals
          Control               in Same          in Same          in Same          in Same          in Same          in Same          in Same
                                  State            State            State            State            State            State            State
          Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table presents least-squares estimates of Equation (1a). Each observation is a patient
          episode. The control group includes hospitals in the same states as the treated hospitals. We windsorized the top and bottom percentile
          of hospital and physician payments. Each regression includes controls for patient age, gender, race, and Charlson score. Standard errors
          are clustered around hospitals. Means and standard deviation are drawn from the analytic sample population underlying the regression.
          All dollars amounts are adjusted into 2015 dollars.
     Table A.5: The Impact of the Entry of EmCare on Physician Charges, Payments, and Coding Propensity Score Control Group

          (1)                       (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)
                                                                                                                       Total
                                                                   Patient                          Potential
                                Physician         Insurer                           Total                             Patient          CPT
                                                                    Cost                            Balanced
                                 Charge          Payment                           Payment                             Cost           Severity
                                                                   Sharing                            Bill
                                                                                                                     Exposure
          EmCare Entry          478.19∗∗∗        390.28∗∗∗        42.21∗∗∗         432.50∗∗∗          45.69           87.90∗∗         0.144∗∗∗
                                 (77.87)          (62.71)          (5.51)           (64.73)          (38.02)          (38.39)          (0.034)

          Hospital FE              Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
          Month FE                 Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
79




          Mean                   817.20            578.37            83.43           661.80          155.40            238.83           0.357
          SD                     485.98            427.60           130.57           452.12          313.02            325.70           0.479
          Observations           130,263          130,263          130,263          130,263          130,263          130,263          130,263

                               Propensity       Propensity       Propensity       Propensity       Propensity       Propensity       Propensity
          Control                Score            Score            Score            Score            Score            Score            Score
                                 Match            Match            Match            Match            Match            Match            Match
          Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table presents least-squares estimates of Equation (1a). Each observation is a patient
          episode. The control groups are composed of hospitals matched to treated hospitals using propensity scores calculated using entry as
          predicted by a treated hospital’s beds, technology, and non-profit/for-profit status.We windsorized the top and bottom percentile of
          hospital and physician payments. Each regression includes controls for patient age, gender, race, and Charlson score. Standard errors
          are clustered around hospitals. Means and standard deviation are drawn from the analytic sample population underlying the regression.
          All dollars amounts are adjusted into 2015 dollars.
     Table A.6: The Impact of the Entry of TeamHealth on Physician Charges, Payments, and Coding Same-State Hospitals Control
     Group

                                             (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
                                                            Insurer         Insurer
                                                                                             Patient
                                         Physician         Payment         Payment                            Total             CPT
                                                                                              Cost
                                          Charge              (In-         (Out-of-                          Payment           Severity
                                                                                             Sharing
                                                           network)        network)
               TeamHealth Entry             13.63         220.79∗∗∗         163.09∗∗         18.45∗∗∗        249.08∗∗∗         0.0225
                                           (37.39)         (14.84)           (73.60)          (3.71)          (20.91)          (0.015)

               Hospital FE                  Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes
80




               Month FE                     Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes
               Mean                       635.76            279.73          639.79             62.21          451.66            0.362
               SD                         397.92            234.97          369.83            112.14          342.54            0.481
               Observations              2,118,144        1,472,630         645,514         2,118,144        2,118,144        2,118,144

                                         Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals
               Control                   in Same          in Same          in Same          in Same          in Same          in Same
                                           State            State            State            State            State            State
               Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table presents least-squares estimates of Equation (1b). Each observation
               is a patient episode. The control group includes hospitals in the same states as the treated hospitals. We windsorized the
               top and bottom percentile of hospital and physician payments. Each regression includes controls for patient age, gender,
               race, and Charlson score. Standard errors are clustered around hospitals. Means and standard deviation are drawn from the
               analytic sample population underlying the regression. All dollar amounts are inflation adjusted into 2015 dollars.
     Table A.7: The Impact of the Entry of TeamHealth on Physician Charges, Payments, and Coding Same-State Hospitals Control
     Group

                                              (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
                                                            Insurer          Insurer
                                                                                              Patient
                                          Physician        Payment          Payment                             Total            CPT
                                                                                               Cost
                                           Charge             (In-          (Out-of-                           Payment          Severity
                                                                                              Sharing
                                                           network)         network)
               TeamHealth Entry            −28.41          183.56∗∗∗         174.12∗∗         18.82∗∗∗        234.04∗∗∗          0.0267
                                           (44.01)          (57.74)           (80.06)          (6.53)          (27.91)           (0.024)

               Hospital FE                   Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes
81




               Month FE                      Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes
               Mean                        705.85            375.18           664.77            61.54           503.96            0.387
               SD                          372.52            240.15           351.89           108.89           304.59            0.487
               Observations                132,549          101,776           30,773          132,549           132,549          132,549

                                         Propensity       Propensity       Propensity       Propensity        Propensity       Propensity
               Control                     Score            Score            Score            Score             Score            Score
                                           Match            Match            Match            Match             Match            Match
               Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table presents least-squares estimates of Equation (1b). Each observation
               is a patient episode. The control groups are composed of hospitals matched to treated hospitals using propensity scores
               calculated using entry as predicted by a treated hospital’s beds, technology, and non-profit/for-profit status. We windsorized
               the top and bottom percentile of hospital and physician payments. Each regression includes controls for patient age, gender,
               race, and Charlson score. Standard errors are clustered around hospitals. Means and standard deviation are drawn from the
               analytic sample population underlying the regression. All dollar amounts are inflation adjusted into 2015 dollars.
                Table A.8: Physician Payment Rates for ED Visits

                            Mean        S.D.        P25         P50          P75          Max
In-Network ED
                          $326.70     $238.99     $156.55     $267.14      $422.12     $1,642.45
Physician Payment
(Percent Medicare)         (266%)
Out-of-Network ED
                          $785.91     $443.86     $440.64     $680.34     $1,013.29    $2,146.42
Physician Charge
(Percent Medicare)         (637%)
Notes: We limit our data to hospitals with more than 10 episodes per year from 2011 to 2015. Physi-
cian charges and payments are winsorized at the top and bottom percentile. Prices are inflation
adjusted using the BLS All Consumer Price Index.




                                            82
     Table A.9: The Impact of the Entry of EmCare on Hospital Charges, Payments, and Activity Same-State Control Group

                                  (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)
                                                                 Patient
                               Facility         Insurer                           Total                           Admission          Episode
                                                                  Cost                             Imaging
                               Charge          Payment                           Payment                          to Hospital         Count
                                                                 Sharing
        EmCare Entry         1522.14∗∗∗         191.94∗          45.47∗∗         237.41∗∗          0.012∗∗∗        0.0176∗∗∗         −188.98
                              (395.07)          (98.48)          (17.79)         (112.91)           (0.005)          0.0062          (219.4)

        Hospital FE              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
        Month FE                 Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
83




        Mean                  6,304.63          2,350.46          393.81         2,744.271          0.278            0.090           1,695.5
        SD                    12,415.53         4,885.15          561.89         5,034.470          0.448            0.286           1,566.5
        Observations          8,418,226        8,418,226        8,418,226        8,418,226        8,418,226        8,418,226        8,418,226

                              Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals
        Control               in Same          in Same          in Same          in Same          in Same          in Same          in Same
                                State            State            State            State            State            State            State
        Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table presents least-squares estimates of Equation (1a). Each observation is a patient
        episode. The control group includes hospitals in the same states as the treated hospitals. We windsorized the top and bottom percentile
        of hospital and physician payments. Imaging is an indicator variable capturing whether a patient had an imaging study performed
        during an ED visit. Admissions to hospital is an indicator variable that captures whether a patient was admitted to the hospital after
        an ED visit. Each regression includes controls for patient age, gender, race, and Charlson score. Standard errors are clustered around
        hospitals. Means and standard deviation are drawn from the analytic sample population underlying the regression. All dollar amounts
        are inflation adjusted into 2015 dollars.
     Table A.10: The Impact of the Entry of EmCare on Hospital Charges, Payments, and Activity Propensity Score Match Control
     Group

                                    (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)
                                                                   Patient
                                 Facility         Insurer                           Total                           Admission          Episode
                                                                    Cost                             Imaging
                                 Charge          Payment                           Payment                          to Hospital         Count
                                                                   Sharing
          EmCare Entry         1238.37∗∗∗         88.38             32.52            120.90           0.018            0.011           −58.62
                                (412.95)         (114.20)          (19.32)          (129.20)         (0.010)           0.0103          (211.7)

          Hospital FE              Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
          Month FE                 Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
84




          Mean                  8,396.29         2,614.88           483.73         3,098.618          0.304            0.095            1797.0
          SD                    14,579.69        4,781.73           609.50         4,938.139          0.460            0.294           1,021.8
          Observations           130,263         130,263           130,263          130,263          130,263          130,263          130,263

                               Propensity       Propensity       Propensity       Propensity       Propensity       Propensity       Propensity
          Control                Score            Score            Score            Score            Score            Score            Score
                                 Match            Match            Match            Match            Match            Match            Match
          Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table presents least-squares estimates of Equation (1a). Each observation is a patient
          episode. The control groups are composed of hospitals matched to treated hospitals using propensity scores calculated using entry as
          predicted by a treated hospital’s beds, technology, and non-profit/for-profit status. We windsorized the top and bottom percentile of
          hospital and physician payments. Imaging is an indicator variable capturing whether a patient had an imaging study performed during
          an ED visit. Admissions to hospital is an indicator variable that captures whether a patient was admitted to the hospital after an
          ED visit. Each regression includes controls for patient age, gender, race, and Charlson score. Standard errors are clustered around
          hospitals. Means and standard deviation are drawn from the analytic sample population underlying the regression. All dollar amounts
          are inflation adjusted into 2015 dollars.
               Table A.11: The Impact of the Entry of TeamHealth on Hospital Charges, Payments, and Activity

                                  (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)
                                                                 Patient
                                Facility         Insurer                          Total                         Admission          Episode
                                                                  Cost                            Imaging
                                Charge          Payment                          Payment                        to Hospital         Count
                                                                 Sharing
     TeamHealth Entry           112.10          −109.47           13.23           −96.24         −0.008∗∗        −0.008∗∗∗         507.3∗∗∗
                               (179.33)         (78.38)          (12.81)          (84.41)         (0.004)         0.0026            (188.0)

     Hospital FE                  Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
     Month FE                     Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
85




     Mean                       6248.05         2435.69          426.91          2862.60           0.280           0.082           1984.0
     SD                        12156.69         4832.48          573.76          4983.91           0.449           0.274           1563.2
     Observations              2,118,144       2,118,144        2,118,144       2,118,144        2,118,144       2,118,144        2,118,144

                               Hospitals       Hospitals        Hospitals       Hospitals        Hospitals       Hospitals        Hospitals
     Control                   in Same         in Same          in Same         in Same          in Same         in Same          in Same
                                 State           State            State           State            State           State            State
     Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table presents least-squares estimates of Equation (1b). Each observation is a patient
     episode. The control group includes hospitals in the same states as the treated hospitals. We windsorized the top and bottom percentile of
     hospital and physician payments. Imaging is an indicator variable capturing whether a patient had an imaging study performed during an
     ED visit. Admissions to hospital is an indicator variable that captures whether a patient was admitted to the hospital after an ED visit.
     Each regression includes controls for patient age, gender, race, and Charlson score. Standard errors are clustered around hospitals. Means
     and standard deviation are drawn from the analytic sample population underlying the regression. All dollar amounts are inflation adjusted
     into 2015 dollars.
     Table A.12: The Impact of the Entry of TeamHealth on Hospital Charges, Payments, and Activity Propensity Score Match
     Control Group

                                       (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)
                                                                      Patient
                                    Facility         Insurer                           Total                           Admission          Episode
                                                                       Cost                             Imaging
                                    Charge          Payment                           Payment                          to Hospital         Count
                                                                      Sharing
        TeamHealth Entry           −153.30         −276.64∗∗           −8.50          −285.14∗∗          −0.008           −0.010           340.8∗
                                   (270.94)         (109.79)          (32.65)          (132.72)          (0.010)          0.0068           (181.8)

        Hospital FE                   Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes
        Month FE                      Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes
86




        Mean                       7,396.29          2,546.26          425.88         2,972.141          0.304            0.083            2,587.3
        SD                         12,920.69         4,871.93          558.87         5,045.284          0.460            0.275             1458.9
        Observations                132,549          132,549          132,549          132,549          132,549          132,549           132,549

                                  Propensity       Propensity       Propensity       Propensity       Propensity        Propensity       Propensity
        Control                     Score            Score            Score            Score            Score             Score            Score
                                    Match            Match            Match            Match            Match             Match            Match
        Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table presents least-squares estimates of Equation (1b). Each observation is a patient
        episode. The control groups are composed of hospitals matched to treated hospitals using propensity scores calculated using entry as
        predicted by a treated hospital’s beds, technology, and non-profit/for-profit status. We windsorized the top and bottom percentile of hospital
        and physician payments. Imaging is an indicator variable capturing whether a patient had an imaging study performed during an ED visit.
        Admissions to hospital is an indicator variable that captures whether a patient was admitted to the hospital after an ED visit. Each regression
        includes controls for patient age, gender, race, and Charlson score. Standard errors are clustered around hospitals. Means and standard
        deviation are drawn from the analytic sample population underlying the regression. All dollar amounts are inflation adjusted into 2015 dollars.
Table A.13: Hospital Characteristics Associated with EmCare and TeamHealth

                                      (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)
                                   EmCare           EmCare        TeamHealth       TeamHealth
                                            ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗
For-profit                        0.1063            0.1206            0.011            0.011
                                    (0.013)          (0.012)         (0.010)          (0.009)
Government                        0.0464∗∗∗         0.0440∗∗∗         0.005            0.002
                                    (0.015)          (0.014)         (0.011)          (0.010)
Teaching Hospital                   −0.007           −0.008          −0.017           −0.016
                                    (0.019)          (0.019)         (0.014)          (0.014)
Hospital Beds                        0.003            0.000           0.004          0.0108∗
                                    (0.009)          (0.008)         (0.007)          (0.006)
Technologies                         0.006           −0.001          −0.008           −0.011
                                    (0.019)          (0.018)         (0.013)          (0.013)
Hospital HHI                       0.0187∗          0.0184∗∗          0.001          0.0138∗∗
                                    (0.011)          (0.008)         (0.008)          (0.006)
Proportion Medicare                  0.014            0.001           0.014          0.0245∗∗
                                    (0.017)          (0.016)         (0.012)          (0.012)
Proportion Medicaid                  0.004           −0.003           0.005            0.007
                                    (0.008)          (0.008)         (0.006)          (0.006)
ED Physicians per Capita            11.510         −0.0433∗∗∗     −22.9726∗∗∗       −0.0197∗∗
                                    (9.167)          (0.011)         (6.637)          (0.008)
Physicians per Capita              −14.979           −0.004        29.3776∗∗∗       0.0506∗∗∗
                                   (13.582)          (0.023)         (9.833)          (0.017)
Physician HHI                        0.016            0.011          −0.008           −0.003
                                    (0.020)          (0.016)         (0.014)          (0.012)
Insurer HHI                          0.021           −0.008           0.002         −0.0148∗
                                    (0.019)          (0.011)         (0.014)          (0.008)
Household Income                   0.0893∗∗         0.0951∗∗∗       0.0517∗           −0.025
                                    (0.042)          (0.030)         (0.030)          (0.021)
Gini Coefficient                  −0.1182∗∗         0.0697∗∗∗         0.026            0.028
                                    (0.052)          (0.026)         (0.038)          (0.019)

HRR FE                               Yes               No            Yes                No
Mean                                0.0581           0.0581         0.0285            0.0285
SD                                  0.2340           0.2340         0.1663            0.1663
Observations                        3,345            3,345          3,345             3,345
Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. Each observation is a hospital. The table presents a
logit regression of an indicator for EmCare or TeamHealth hospitals on the hospital characteris-
tics in the table. Means and standard deviation are drawn from the analytic sample population
underlying the regression.




                                              87
                                   Table A.14: Comparison of Entry Hospital Characteristics

                                                   EmCare         P-value from                       TeamHealth      P-value from
     Hospital                      EmCare                                            TeamHealth
                                                    Entry          two-sided                           Entry          two-sided
     Characteristics               Hospitals                                          Hospitals
                                                   Hospitals         t-test                           Hospitals         t-test
     For-profit                        0.55            0.57            0.87               0.29            0.30            0.96
     Non-profit                       0.27            0.21             0.65              0.57            0.70             0.45
     Government                       0.18             0.21            0.76              0.13             0.00            0.22
     Teaching                         0.04             0.00            0.44              0.04             0.00            0.54
     Hospital Beds                   173.97          266.50            0.03             197.63          227.40            0.50
     Technologies                     43.10           57.79            0.06              47.79           54.80            0.45
     Hospital HHI                     0.57             0.58            0.98              0.59             0.66            0.48
88




     Proportion Medicare              48.31           43.58            0.12              51.42           44.43            0.03
     Proportion Medicaid              18.97           24.18            0.15              20.15           18.14            0.48
     ED Physicians per
                                      0.65            0.61             0.58              0.70            1.06             0.00
     Capita (per 10,000)
     Physicians per Capita
                                     21.64           19.01             0.06             22.82           25.52             0.09
     (per 10,000)
     Physician HHI                   0.41            0.59              0.02              0.41           0.65              0.13
     Insurer HHI                     0.36             0.35             0.75              0.35           0.40              0.31
     Household Income              38,146.20       35,404.44           0.22           36,849.58       38,080.67           0.59
     Gini Coefficient                0.34            0.34              0.61             0.33            0.31              0.19
     Notes: The table compares characteristics of identified EmCare and TeamHealth hospitals to characteristics of hospitals where we
     have entry. Hospitals with entry are excluded from identified TeamHealth and EmCare hospitals. The p-value is reported from a
     two-sided t-test comparing the difference in means between hospitals and hospitals with entry.
                            Table A.15: The Impact of Entry on Historical Patient Spending and Charlson Scores

                                                                     EmCare                                                         TeamHealth
                                              (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)
                                          12 month                                                            6 month         12 month
                                                           6 month          12 month                                                           6 month          12 month
     6 month historical spending          historical                                                          historical      historical
                                                           Charlson         Charlson                                                           Charlson         Charlson
                                          spending                                                            spending        spending
     Firm Entry                           916.02∗∗∗       1306.16∗∗∗         0.033∗∗∗        0.036∗∗∗        −336.35∗∗        −783.08∗∗           0.004            0.006
                                           (253.83)        (425.64)           (0.010)         (0.012)         (166.74)         (305.09)          (0.005)          (0.005)
89




     Hospital FE                             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
     Month FE                                Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
     Mean                                 6,247.15         11,476.89          0.326            0.449           6,266.03       11,512.46          0.326            0.450
     SD                                   1,7201.02        27,910.51          0.919            1.056          17,236.61       27,971.30          0.919            1.056
     Observations                         8,418,226        7,056,427        8,418,226        7,056,427        8,661,796       7,256,251        8,661,796        7,256,251

                                            All              All              All              All              All             All              All              All
     Control
                                          Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals       Hospitals        Hospitals        Hospitals
     Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table presents least-squares estimates of Equations (1a) and (1b). Each observation is a patient episode. The control
     group in all regressions is all hospitals in the US exclusive of those that outsourced their ED services to EmCare or TeamHealth. We windsorized the top percentile of 6
     and 12 month historical spending. Standard errors are clustered around hospitals.
             Table A.16: The Impact of the Entry of EmCare on Coding Severity from Physician Visits, Robustness Checks

                               (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)                (6)                 (7)                (8)
                             CPT              CPT              CPT              CPT              CPT
                                                                                                               CPT Severity        CPT Severity        CPT Severity
                            Severity         Severity         Severity         Severity         Severity
     EmCare Entry           0.151∗∗∗         0.149∗∗∗         0.148∗∗∗         0.148∗∗∗         0.156∗∗∗           0.142∗∗∗           0.152∗∗∗            0.153∗∗∗
                             (0.031)          (0.030)          (0.030)          (0.030)          (0.033)            (0.030)            (0.030)             (0.031)

     Hospital FE              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes
     Month FE                 Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes
     Mean                    0.347            0.347            0.347            0.326            0.445              0.297               0.319               0.424
90




     SD                      0.476            0.476            0.476            0.469            0.497              0.457               0.466               0.494
     Observations          8,418,226        8,418,226        8,418,226        6,960,514        1,457,712          2,806,097           2,806,055           2,806,074

                                                                                                                Lowest third        Middle third        Upper third
                                            Patient                                             Non-zero           of the              of the              of the
                             No                             Patient and       Charlson
     Controls                              Character-                                           Charlson         historical          historical          historical
                           Controls                          Charlson         Score of 0
                                             istics                                              Score           spending            spending            spending
                                                                                                                distribution        distribution        distribution
     Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table presents least-squares estimates of Equation (1a). Each observation is a patient episode. The control
     group in all regressions is all hospitals in the US exclusive of those that outsourced their ED services to EmCare. We windsorized the top and bottom percentile
     of facility payments. Standard errors are clustered around hospitals. In columns 6,7, and 8 historical spending is split into thirds where each column contains the
     sample of patients from the bottom, middle, and upper third of spending.
                         Table A.17: The Impact of the Entry of EmCare on Facility Payments, Robustness Checks

                               (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)                (6)                 (7)                (8)
                           Facility         Facility         Facility          Facility         Facility          Facility            Facility            Facility
                           Payment          Payment          Payment           Payment          Payment           Payment             Payment             Payment
     EmCare Entry          316.63∗∗         309.57∗∗∗        294.58∗∗∗         204.95∗∗         742.32∗∗          215.426∗∗           228.37∗∗            428.78∗∗∗
                           (124.89)          (115.77)         (113.64)          (82.50)         (356.38)           (106.80)           (109.11)             (160.14)

     Hospital FE              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes
     Month FE                 Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes
     Mean                  2,744.27          2,744.27         2,744.27         2,417.80         4,303.16           2,353.30            2,355.26           3,524.26
91




     SD                    5,034.47          5,034.47         5,034.47         4,418.88         7,084.79           4,492.45            4,350.98           6,001.00
     Observations          8,418,226        8,418,226        8,418,226        6,960,514        1,457,712          2,806,097           2,806,055           2,806,074

                                                                                                                Lowest third        Middle third        Upper third
                                            Patient                                             Non-zero           of the              of the              of the
                             No                             Patient and       Charlson
     Controls                              Character-                                           Charlson         historical          historical          historical
                           Controls                          Charlson         Score of 0
                                             istics                                              Score           spending            spending            spending
                                                                                                                distribution        distribution        distribution
     Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table presents least-squares estimates of Equation (1a). Each observation is a patient episode. The control
     group in all regressions is all hospitals in the US exclusive of those that outsourced their ED services to EmCare. We windsorized the top and bottom percentile
     of facility payments. Standard errors are clustered around hospitals. In columns 6,7, and 8 historical spending is split into thirds where each column contains the
     sample of patients from the bottom, middle, and upper third of spending.
                     Table A.18: The Impact of the Entry of EmCare on the Frequency of Imaging, Robustness Checks

                               (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)                (6)                 (7)                (8)
                            Imaging          Imaging          Imaging          Imaging          Imaging            Imaging            Imaging             Imaging
                                  ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗                 ∗∗            ∗∗∗                   ∗∗                  ∗∗
     EmCare Entry           0.016            0.014            0.014            0.013            0.028              0.014               0.017               0.012∗∗
                             (0.005)          (0.005)          (0.005)         (0.006)           (0.009)           (0.007)             (0.008)             (0.005)

     Hospital FE              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes
     Month FE                 Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes
     Mean                    0.278            0.278            0.278            0.268            0.324              0.254               0.261               0.319
92




     SD                      0.448            0.448            0.448            0.443            0.468              0.435               0.439               0.466
     Observations          8,418,226        8,418,226        8,418,226        6,960,514        1,457,712          2,806,097           2,806,055           2,806,074

                                                                                                                Lowest third        Middle third        Upper third
                                            Patient                                             Non-zero           of the              of the              of the
                             No                             Patient and       Charlson
     Controls                              Character-                                           Charlson         historical          historical          historical
                           Controls                          Charlson         Score of 0
                                             istics                                              Score           spending            spending            spending
                                                                                                                distribution        distribution        distribution
     Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table presents least-squares estimates of Equation (1a). Each observation is a patient episode. The control
     group in all regressions is all hospitals in the US exclusive of those that outsourced their ED services to EmCare. We windsorized the top and bottom percentile
     of facility payments. Standard errors are clustered around hospitals. In columns 6,7, and 8 historical spending is split into thirds where each column contains the
     sample of patients from the bottom, middle, and upper third of spending.
                   Table A.19: The Impact of the Entry of EmCare on the Frequency of Admissions, Robustness Checks

                               (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)                (6)                 (7)                (8)
                          Admissions       Admissions       Admissions       Admissions       Admissions         Admissions          Admissions         Admissions
                                  ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗                   ∗                ∗∗∗
     EmCare Entry           0.022            0.022            0.021            0.014            0.053              0.011              0.016               0.035∗∗∗
                             (0.007)          (0.006)          (0.006)          (0.005)          (0.019)           (0.006)             (0.005)             (0.010)

     Hospital FE              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes
     Month FE                 Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes
     Mean                    0.090            0.090            0.090            0.071            0.181              0.066               0.070               0.134
93




     SD                      0.286            0.286            0.286            0.257            0.385              0.248               0.256               0.341
     Observations          8,418,226        8,418,226        8,418,226        6,960,514        1,457,712          2,806,097           2,806,055           2,806,074

                                                                                                                Lowest third        Middle third        Upper third
                                            Patient                                             Non-zero           of the              of the              of the
                             No                             Patient and       Charlson
     Controls                              Character-                                           Charlson         historical          historical          historical
                           Controls                          Charlson         Score of 0
                                             istics                                              Score           spending            spending            spending
                                                                                                                distribution        distribution        distribution
     Notes: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. This table presents least-squares estimates of Equation (1a). Each observation is a patient episode. The control
     group in all regressions is all hospitals in the US exclusive of those that outsourced their ED services to EmCare. We windsorized the top and bottom percentile
     of facility payments. Standard errors are clustered around hospitals. In columns 6,7, and 8 historical spending is split into thirds where each column contains the
     sample of patients from the bottom, middle, and upper third of spending.
                 Table A.20: ED Episodes and Annual Spending

                                                                                    Share of
         Emergency         Total Facility        Total Physician     Percent       Episodes at
          Episodes           Spending               Spending          ASO          in-network
                                                                                    hospitals
2011        61,331         $148,222,782           $19,125,875         87.6%           97.9%
2012        69,404         $170,582,628           $22,812,526         89.2%           99.0%
2013        67,317         $182,161,431           $22,551,581         91.5%           99.6%
2014        65,388         $187,074,086           $21,531,723         92.1%           99.8%
2015        60,496         $184,594,280           $21,197,031         90.4%           99.8%

Total      323,936         $872,635,207           $107,218,736        90.2%           99.2%
Notes: The table shows summary statistics for our data in New York State. Only episodes that occur
in an in-network hospital are included. There are a small percentage of episodes (> 0.5%) that are
missing a label for ASO or fully-insured.




                                            94
                                         Figure A.1

                              (a) Map of EmCare Locations




Notes: This map was taken from the webpage of EmCare’s parent company Envision Health-
care (https://www.evhc.net/vision/emcare). The underlying HTML source code from the
web page contains the latitude and longitude coordinates of each white point displayed. We
calculate each coordinate pair’s distance to AHA-registered hospital coordinates, and keep
hospitals that are within only a 30-mile radius from an AHA-registered hospital. If there are
multiple hospitals within a 30-mile radius, we keep only the nearest facility and define it as
the identified hospital. We further cross-validate our findings with hospitals from EmCare’s
job listings found on their website. Our final list includes hospitals that are identified using
mapping locations that are cross-validated with job hiring posts.




                                              95
                             (b) Map of TeamHealth Locations




Notes: This is a map from a 2009 Morgan Stanley report on TeamHealth. To determine the
hospital locations shown on this map, we used georeferencing in ArcGIS. Georeferencing takes
an image or scanned photo without spatial reference information and aligns it to a map with a
known coordinate system. In our case, we used a map of the United States (obtained here:
https://www.census.gov/geo/maps-data/data/cbf/cbf_state.html), and linked control points
from the US map to the map of TeamHealth’s locations. To link control points, the location
of two identical points on each map are identified (for example, the southern tip of Florida).
With several control points defined, the TeamHealth map is then warped and transformed to
overlay directly onto the known US map. With the map in place, we mark the center of each
blue dot as a hospital location. Because the map now has a defined coordinate system, we are
able to obtain the latitude and longitude from these markers. We subsequently calculate each
coordinate pair’s distance to AHA-identified hospital coordinates, and keep hospitals that are
within only a 30-mile radius from an AHA-identified hospital. If there are multiple hospitals
within a 30-mile radius, we keep only the nearest facility and define it as the identified hospital.
We cross-validate our mapping with hospitals from TeamHealth’s job listings page on their
website. Our final list of hospitals only includes hospitals that are both identified from the
map and appear in job listings.




                                                96
                  Figure A.2: Example of EmCare Job Listing




Notes:      This screen grab is taken from             EmCare’s   job   hiring   page.
(https://www.emcare.com/careers/clinical-job-search)




                                         97
Figure A.3: The Distribution of Hospital Out-of-Network Rates, 2011, 2013, and
2015




Notes: The figure shows the distribution of hospital out-of-network rates in years 2011, 2013,
and 2015. There are 3,345 hospitals that appear in each year of the data.




                                             98
                                         Figure A.4

(a) The Distribution of Out-of-Network Rates at Hospitals where EmCare Enters, 2011




Notes: The figure shows a histogram of out-of-network rates for hospitals prior to EmCare
entry in 2011. There are a total of 16 EmCare entry hospitals. Each bar shows the percent of
hospitals falling into a given out-of-network rate. The red vertical line is the average of all
EmCare hospitals from 2011-2015.




                                              99
(b) The Distribution of Out-of-Network Rates at Hospitals Where TeamHealth Enters,
2011




Notes: The figure shows a histogram of out-of-network rates for hospitals prior to TeamHealth
entry in 2011. There are a total of 10 TeamHealth entry hospitals. Each bar shows the percent
of hospitals falling into a given out-of-network rate. The red vertical line is the average of all
TeamHealth hospitals from 2011-2015.




                                              100
Figure A.5: Out-of-Network Rates at Hospitals Where EmCare Entered




                               101
Figure A.5: Out-of-Network Rates at Hospitals Where EmCare Entered (contin-
ued)




                                   102
Figure A.5: Out-of-Network Rates at Hospitals Where EmCare Entered (contin-
ued)




Notes: This figure plots the average quarterly out-of-network rates at hospitals where EmCare
entered. We present data from the four quarters before and the four quarters after EmCare
took over the management of each hospital’s ED.




                                            103
Figure A.6: Out-of-Network Rates at Hospitals Where TeamHealth Entered




                                 104
Figure A.6: Out-of-Network Rates at Hospitals Where TeamHealth Entered
(continued)




Notes: This figure plots the average quarterly out-of-network rates at hospitals where
TeamHealth entered. We present data from the four quarters before and the four quarters
after TeamHealth took over the management of each hospital’s ED.




                                         105
  Figure A.7: EmCare and TeamHealth Entry on Patient Characteristics

   Panel A: EmCare Entry on Hospitals’ Average Charlson Score of Patients




Panel B: EmCare Entry on Hospitals’ Average Patient 6-Month Spending History




                                    106
Figure A.7: EmCare and TeamHealth Entry on Patient Characteristics (contin-
ued)

   Panel C: TeamHealth Entry on Hospitals’ Average Charlson Score of Patients




   Panel D: TeamHealth on Hospitals’ Average Patient 6-Month Spending History




Notes: The panels plot the monthly average by hospital from 12 months before to 12 months
after EmCare or TeamHealth entered the hospital.




                                          107
