                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  USING GOALS TO MOTIVATE COLLEGE STUDENTS:
                 THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM FIELD EXPERIMENTS

                                         Damon Clark
                                          David Gill
                                        Victoria Prowse
                                          Mark Rush

                                      Working Paper 23638
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23638


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2017




Primary IRB approval was granted by Cornell University. We thank Cornell University and UC
Irvine for funding this project. We thank Daniel Bonin, Linda Hou, Jessica Monnet, Mason
Reasner, Peter Wagner, Laurel Wheeler and Janos Zsiros for excellent research assistance.
Finally, we are grateful for the many helpful and insightful comments that we have received from
seminar participants and in private conversations. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Damon Clark, David Gill, Victoria Prowse, and Mark Rush. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Using Goals to Motivate College Students: Theory and Evidence from Field Experiments
Damon Clark, David Gill, Victoria Prowse, and Mark Rush
NBER Working Paper No. 23638
July 2017
JEL No. C93,I23

                                            ABSTRACT

Will college students who set goals for themselves work harder and achieve better outcomes? In
theory, setting goals can help present-biased students to mitigate their self-control problem. In
practice, there is little credible evidence on the causal effects of goal setting for college students.
We report the results of two field experiments that involved almost four thousand college
students in total. One experiment asked treated students to set goals for performance in the
course; the other asked treated students to set goals for a particular task (completing online
practice exams). Task-based goals had large and robust positive effects on the level of task
completion, and task-based goals also increased course performance. Further analysis indicates
that the increase in task completion induced by setting task-based goals caused the increase in
course performance. We also find that performance-based goals had positive but small effects on
course performance. We use theory that builds on present bias and loss aversion to interpret our
results. Since task-based goal setting is low-cost, scaleable and logistically simple, we conclude
that our findings have important implications for educational practice and future research.


Damon Clark                                        Victoria Prowse
Department of Economics                            Purdue Univeristy
University of California, Irvine                   2072 Rawls Halls
Irvine, CA 92617                                   402 W. State Street
and NBER                                           West Lafayette, IN, 47907
clarkd1@uci.edu                                    vprowse@purdue.edu

David Gill                                         Mark Rush
Purdue University                                  University of Florida
Rawls 4023                                         Department of Economics
Krannert School of Management                      P.O. Box 117140
403 W. State St.                                   Gainesville, FL 32611-7140
West Lafayette, IN 47907                           mark.rush@cba.ufl.edu
gill53@purdue.edu
1     Introduction
Researchers and policy-makers worry that college students exert too little e↵ort, with conse-
quences for their learning, their graduation prospects, and ultimately their labor market out-
comes. With this in mind, attention has focused on policies and interventions that could increase
student e↵ort by introducing financial incentives, such as making student aid conditional on
meeting GPA cuto↵s and paying students for improved performance. However, these programs
are typically expensive and often yield disappointing results.1
    In this paper we aim to discover whether goal setting can motivate college students to work
harder and achieve better outcomes. We focus on goal setting for three main reasons. First, in
contrast to financial incentives, goal setting is low-cost, scaleable and logistically simple. Second,
students might lack self-control. In other words, although students might set out to exert their
preferred level of e↵ort, when the time comes to attend class or study, they might lack the self-
control necessary to implement these plans. The educational psychology literature finds that
self-control correlates positively with e↵ort, which supports the idea that some students under-
invest in e↵ort because of low self-control (e.g., Duckworth and Seligman, 2005, and Duckworth
et al., 2012). Third, the behavioral economics literature suggests that agents who lack self-
control can use commitment devices to self-regulate their behavior.2 Goal setting might act as
an e↵ective internal commitment device that allows students who lack self-control to increase
their e↵ort.3
    We gather large-scale experimental evidence from the field to investigate the causal e↵ects
of goal setting among college students. We study goals that are set by students themselves, as
opposed to goals set by another party (such as a counselor or professor), because self-set goals
can be personalized to each student’s degree of self-control. We study two types of goals: self-set
    1
      Studies using randomized experiments and natural experiments to evaluate the e↵ects of financial incentives
on the performance of college students have been inconclusive: Henry et al. (2004), Cha and Patel (2010), Scott-
Clayton (2011), De Paola et al. (2012) and Castleman (2014) report positive e↵ects; while Cornwell et al. (2005),
Angrist et al. (2009), Leuven et al. (2010), Patel and Rudd (2012) and Cohodes and Goodman (2014) do not find
significant e↵ects. Although there is little consensus on the reason behind the failure of many incentive programs,
Dynarski (2008) notes that the incentives may be irrelevant for many students, and Angrist et al. (2014) report
that one-third of the students in their study failed to fully understand a relatively simple grade-based incentive
scheme. In other experiments on college students, academic support services have been combined with financial
incentives. Results on the performance e↵ects of these interventions are again mixed: Angrist et al. (2009) and
Barrow et al. (2014) report strong e↵ects; Angrist et al. (2014) find weak e↵ects; and Miller et al. (2011) find no
significant e↵ects. Financial incentives are also controversial due to concerns that they might crowd out intrinsic
incentives to study (see, e.g., Cameron and Pierce, 1994, and Gneezy et al., 2011). See Lavecchia et al. (2016) for
a survey of financial incentives in higher education.
    2
      These commitment devices include purchase-quantity rationing of vice goods (Wertenbroch, 1998), deadlines
(Ariely and Wertenbroch, 2002), commitments to future savings (Thaler and Benartzi, 2004), long-term gym
membership contracts (DellaVigna and Malmendier, 2006), restricted access savings accounts (Ashraf et al.,
2006) and Internet blockers (Patterson, 2016), while Augenblick et al. (2015) show that experimental subjects in
the laboratory who are more present biased in the domain of work e↵ort are more likely to use a commitment
device. See Bryan et al. (2010) for a survey.
    3
      A small and recent literature in economics suggests that goal setting can influence behavior in other settings.
Harding and Hsiaw (2014) find that goal setting can influence consumption: energy savings goals reduced energy
consumption. Choi et al. (2016) find that goal setting can a↵ect savings: goal-based cues increased savings into
401k accounts. Finally, goals can increase worker performance even in the absence of monetary incentives for
achieving the goal: see Corgnet et al. (2015, 2016) for laboratory evidence (although Akın and Karagözoğlu,
forthcoming, find no e↵ect of goals), Goerg and Kube (2012) for field evidence and Goerg (2015) for a concise
survey. Although not focused on education, several psychologists argue for the motivational benefits of goals more
generally (see, e.g., Locke, 1968, Locke et al., 1981, Mento et al., 1987, Locke and Latham, 2002, and Latham and
Pinder, 2005).


                                                         1
goals that relate to performance in a course (performance-based goals) and self-set goals that
relate to a particular study task (task-based goals). Our performance-based goals are the goal-
based counterpart to performance-based financial incentives (see footnote 1). Our task-based
goals are motivated by recent research by Allan and Fryer (2011) and Fryer (2011) that suggests
that financial incentives for grade-school-aged children work well when they are tied to task
completion (e.g., reading a book).
    In considering both task-based goals and performance-based goals, our aim is not to test
which is more e↵ective. Instead, we aim to understand separately the impacts of two goal-
setting technologies that could easily be incorporated into the college setting. To do this, we
ran two separate experiments, each with its own within-cohort treatment-control comparison.
By learning whether each intervention is e↵ective in its own right, we can provide policy makers
and educators who are considering introducing a particular form of goal-setting with valuable
information about the likely impact of the intervention.4
    We administered two field experiments with almost four thousand college students in total.
The subjects were undergraduate students enrolled in an on-campus semester-long introductory
course at a public university in the United States. The course was well established prior to our
study and has been taught by the same professor for many years. The course is worth four credit
hours, and a letter grade of a C or better in the course is required to graduate with a bachelor’s
degree in the associated subject.
    In the task-based goals experiment, students were randomly assigned to a Treatment group
that was asked to set goals for the number of online practice exams that they would complete
in advance of each midterm exam and the final exam or to a Control group that was not. We
find that task-based goals are e↵ective. Asking students to set task-based goals for the number
of practice exams to complete increased the number of practice exams that students completed.
This positive e↵ect of task-based goals on the level of task completion is large, statistically
significant and robust.
    As well as increasing task completion, task-based goals also increased course performance.
The obvious explanation for this last result is that the increase in task completion induced by
setting task-based goals caused the increase in performance. Independent evidence that the
increase in task completion caused the increase in performance comes from an estimate of the
performance returns to completing practice exams. We obtained this estimate from a fixed e↵ects
estimator that exploits within-student variation in performance and practice exam completion
in the Control group (who were not asked to set goals). Together, our results suggest that if
tasks are chosen appropriately then task-based goals can improve educational performance as
well as induce greater task-specific investments.
    Interestingly, we also find that task-based goals were more e↵ective for male students than
for female students, both in terms of the impact on the number of practice exams completed and
on performance in the course. This finding is consistent with evidence from other educational
environments that suggests that males have less self-control than females (e.g., Duckworth and
Seligman, 2005, Buechel et al., 2014, and Duckworth et al., 2015) and with Duckworth et al.
    4
      We powered our experiments to detect plausible treatment-control di↵erences. Given our aim to understand
separately the impacts of two goal-setting technologies, we did not power our study to be able to test directly for
di↵erences in e↵ectiveness across experiments. Because we had little evidence ex ante to guide us regarding the
size of such di↵erences, calculating power ex ante was not realistic.


                                                        2
(2015)’s conjecture that educational interventions aimed at improving self-control may be espe-
cially beneficial for males.
    In the performance-based goals experiment, students were randomly assigned to a Treatment
group that was asked to set goals for their performance in the course or to a Control group that
was not. The performance measures for which goals were set included the overall course letter
grade and scores on the midterm exams and final exam. We find that performance-based goals
had positive but small and statistically insignificant e↵ects on course performance.
    We use theory to help guide the analysis and interpretation of our findings. In particular,
for each type of goal (performance- and task-based), we write down a simple model of goal
setting and then use this to generate possible hypotheses. Our models build on Koch and
Nafziger (2011) and are inspired by two key concepts in behavioral economics: present bias
and loss aversion. The models imply that present-biased students will, in the absence of goals,
under-invest in e↵ort. By acting as salient reference points, self-set goals can serve as internal
commitment devices that enable students to increase e↵ort.
    Our model of performance-based goal setting suggests three key reasons why performance-
based goals might not be very e↵ective in the setting that we studied. First, performance is
realized in the future, and so a present-biased student might not care much about the losses
incurred when failing to meet goals. Second, if students are overconfident in the presence of
uncertainty about the relationship between e↵ort and performance, then goals might not induce
(productive) e↵ort.5 Third, for most students the e↵ort-performance relationship is likely to be
stochastic, which makes performance-based goals risky and therefore less e↵ective.
    Our model of task-based goal setting suggests that, in the presence of present bias and loss
aversion, task-based goals can be highly e↵ective. Two of the considerations that reduce the
e↵ectiveness of performance-based goals do not apply: students control perfectly the level of
task completion and know straightaway the level of task completion that they achieve. Further-
more, to the extent that task-based goals direct students toward productive tasks, the e↵ect of
overconfidence is mitigated. One hypothesis for why task-based goal setting is more e↵ective for
males than females is that males are more present biased. This is consistent with the evidence
cited above from educational environments that suggests that men su↵er more from self-control
problems.
    The main contribution of this paper is to provide credible empirical evidence that task-
based goal setting can increase the e↵ort and performance of college students. We also show
that performance-based goals have positive but small and statistically insignificant e↵ects on
performance. Our study represents a substantial innovation on existing experimental evaluations
of the e↵ects of goal setting on the e↵ort and performance of college students. In particular, while
a handful of papers in psychology use experiments to study the e↵ects of self-set goals among
college students (Morgan, 1987; Latham and Brown, 2006; Morisano et al., 2010; Chase et al.,
2013), these di↵er from our analysis in three important respects. First, they rely on much smaller
samples. Second, they have not explored the impact of performance-based goals on performance
or the impact of task-based goals on performance.6 Third, they have not studied the e↵ect of
    5
      Our overconfidence explanation implies that students have incorrect beliefs about the best way to increase
their academic achievement. This is consistent with the explanation given by Allan and Fryer (2011) for why
performance-based financial incentives appear ine↵ective.
    6
      Morgan (1987) is the exception, but this small-scale study of task-based goal setting does not report a


                                                       3
task-based goals on task completion and, therefore, have not investigated the mechanism behind
any performance e↵ects of task-based goal setting.7
    Numerous studies in educational psychology report non-causal correlational evidence which
suggests that performance-based goal setting has strong positive e↵ects on performance (e.g.,
Zimmerman and Bandura, 1994, Schutz and Lanehart, 1994, Harackiewicz et al., 1997, Elliot and
McGregor, 2001, Barron and Harackiewicz, 2003, Linnenbrink-Garcia et al., 2008 and Darnon
et al., 2009). Another contribution of our paper is to cast doubt on this correlational evi-
dence using our experimental finding that performance-based goals have small and statistically
insignificant e↵ects on performance. The obvious explanation for the discrepancy between previ-
ous correlational estimates and our experimental estimate is that the correlational estimates do
not identify the relevant causal e↵ect. We use our sample to explore this possibility. In line with
previous correlational studies, in our experiment students who set ambitious performance-based
goals performed better: conditional on student characteristics, the correlation in our sample
between course performance (measured by total number of points scored out of one hundred)
and the level of the goal is 0.203 (p = 0.000) for students who set performance-based goals. The
di↵erence between the strong positive correlation based on non-experimental variation in our
sample and the small and statistically insignificant causal e↵ects that we estimate suggests that
correlational analysis gives a misleading impression of the e↵ectiveness of performance-based
goals.8
    Our analysis breaks new ground in understanding the impacts of goal setting among college
students. In particular, our experimental findings suggest that for these students, task-based
goals could be an e↵ective method of mitigating self-control problems. As we explain in detail in
the Conclusion of this paper, our findings have important implications for educational practice
and future research. Many colleges already o↵er a range of academic advising programs, includ-
ing mentors, study centers and workshops. These programs often recommend goal setting, but
only as one of several strategies that students might adopt to foster academic success. Our find-

statistical test of the relevant treatment-control comparison. In particular, Morgan (1987) ran an experiment
using one-hundred and eighty college students split into two control groups and three treatment groups. One
treatment group set themselves goals for study time, pages to read and topics to cover. The second treatment
group self-monitored but did not set goals. The third treatment group did both. The study tracked performance
but did not report task completion. Average performance of the treated subjects was higher than that of control
subjects. As noted above however, the paper does not report a statistical test of the performance di↵erence
between subjects who set goals and subjects in the controls.
     7
       Using a sample of seventy-seven college students, Schunk and Ertmer (1999) studied teacher-set instead
of self-set goals: they directed students who were acquiring computer skills to think about outcomes (that the
students had already been asked to achieve) as goals. Meanwhile, a literature in psychology uses small-scale
experiments to look at the e↵ects of teacher-set goals on the learning of grade-school-aged children (e.g., LaPorte
and Nath, 1976, Schunk, 1983, Schunk, 1984, Schunk and Rice, 1991, Schunk and Swartz, 1993, Schunk, 1996,
and Gri↵ee and Templin, 1997). There are important di↵erences between teacher-set goals for grade-school-aged
children and self-set goals for college students: first, college students can use self-set goals to regulate optimally
their own behavior given their private information about the extent of their self-control problem; and second, in
the school environment children are closely monitored by teachers and parents, which gives extrinsic motivation
to reach goals (for instance, children might worry about explicit and implicit penalties, monetary or otherwise, for
failing to achieve the goal set for them). Using a sample of eighty-four fourth-grade children, Shih and Alexander
(2000) explore experimentally the e↵ects of self-set goals (in particular, they study the e↵ects of self-set goals for
the number of fractions to solve in class on the ability to solve fractions in a later test).
     8
       For students who set task-based goals, the correlation between course performance (measured by total number
of points scored out of one hundred) and the level of the goal is 0.391 (p = 0.000), which is in line with correlational
findings from educational psychology (see, e.g., Elliot and McGregor, 2001, Church et al., 2001, and Hsieh et al.,
2007).


                                                           4
ings suggest that academic advising programs should give greater prominence to goal setting,
and that students should be encouraged to set task-based goals for activities that are important
for educational success. Our findings also suggest that courses should be designed to give stu-
dents opportunities to set task-based goals. In courses with some online components (including
fully online courses), it would be especially easy to incorporate task-based goal setting into the
technology used to deliver course content; in traditional classroom settings, students might be
encouraged to set task-based goals in consultation with instructors, who are well placed to select
productive tasks. In conjunction with our experimental findings, these possibilities demonstrate
that task-based goal setting is a scaleable and logistically simple intervention that could help
to improve college outcomes at low cost. This is a promising insight, and we argue in the
Conclusion that it ought to spur further research into the e↵ects of task-based goal setting in
other college contexts (e.g., two-year colleges) and for other tasks (e.g., attending lectures or
contributing to online discussions).
    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we describe our field experiments; in Section 3
we present the results of our task-based goals experiment; in Section 4 we present the results
of our performance-based goals experiment; in Section 5 we interpret our results using theory
that is inspired by present bias and loss aversion; and in Section 6 we conclude by discussing
the implications of our findings.




                                                5
2        Experimental design and descriptive statistics
2.1      Description of the sample
We ran our field experiments at a public university in the United States. Our subjects were
undergraduate students enrolled in a large on-campus semester-long introductory course. The
course was well established prior to our study and has been taught by the same professor for
many years. The course is worth four credit hours, and a letter grade of a C or better in the
course is required to graduate with a bachelor’s degree in the associated subject.
    As described in Section 2.2, we sought consent from all our subjects (the consent rate was
ninety-eight percent). Approximately four thousand students participated in total. We employed
a between-subjects design: each student was randomized into the Treatment group or the Control
group immediately on giving consent. Students in the Treatment group were asked to set goals
while students in the Control group were not asked to set any goals. As described in Section 2.3,
in the Fall 2013 and Spring 2014 semesters we studied the e↵ects of performance-based goals
on student performance in the course (the ‘performance-based goals’ experiment). As described
in Section 2.4, in the Fall 2014 and Spring 2015 semesters we studied the e↵ects of task-based
goals on task completion and course performance (the ‘task-based goals’ experiment).9
    Table 1 provides statistics about participant numbers and treatment rates. We have infor-
mation about participant demographics from the university’s Registrar data: Tables SWA.1,
SWA.2 and SWA.3 in Supplementary Web Appendix I summarize the characteristics of our
participants and provide evidence that our sample is balanced.10



                                                              Fall 2013 & Spring 2014     Fall 2014 & Spring 2015
                                           All semesters
                                                             (Performance-based goals)       (Task-based goals)

Number of participating students               3,971                   1,967                        2,004

Number of students in Treatment group          1,979                   995                           984
Number of students in Control group            1,992                   972                          1,020
Fraction of students in Treatment group         0.50                   0.51                          0.49


Notes: The number of participating students excludes: students who did not give consent to participate; students
who formally withdrew from the course; students who were under eighteen at the beginning of the semester;
students for whom the university’s Registrar data does not include SAT or equivalent aptitude test scores; and
one student for whom the Registrar data does not include information on gender.
                          Table 1: Participant numbers and treatment rates.




     9
     We also ran a small-scale pilot in the summer of 2013 to test our software.
    10
     For each characteristic we test the null that the di↵erence between the mean of the characteristic in the
Treatment Group and the Control group is zero, and we then test the joint null that all of the di↵erences equal
zero. The joint test gives p-values of 0.636, 0.153 and 0.471 for, respectively, all semesters, Fall 2013 and Spring
2014 (the performance-based goals experiment), and Fall 2014 and Spring 2015 (the task-based goals experiment).
See Tables SWA.1, SWA.2 and SWA.3 for further details.


                                                         6
2.2    Course structure
In all semesters, a student’s letter grade for the course was based on the student’s total points
score out of one hundred. The relationship between total points scored and letter grades was
fixed throughout our experiments and is shown in the grade key at the bottom of Figure SWA.1
in Supplementary Web Appendix II. The grade key was provided to all students at the start of
the course (via the course syllabus) and students were also reminded of the grade key each time
they checked their personalized online gradecard (described below).
     Points were available for performance in two midterm exams, a final exam and a number of
online quizzes. Points were also available for taking an online syllabus quiz and a number of
online surveys. For the Fall 2013 semester Figure 1 gives a timeline of the exams, quizzes and
surveys, and the number of points available for each. As described in Sections 2.3 and 2.4, the
course structure in other semesters was similar.
     Each student had access to a private personalized online gradecard that tracked the student’s
performance through the course and that was available to view at all times. After every exam,
quiz or survey, the students received an email telling them that their gradecard had been updated
to include the credit that they had earned from that exam, quiz or survey. The gradecards also
included links to answer keys for the online quizzes. Figure SWA.1 in Supplementary Web
Appendix II shows an example gradecard for a student in the Control group in the Fall 2013
semester.
     In all semesters, students had the opportunity to complete practice exams that included
question-by-question feedback. The opportunity to take practice exams was emphasized on the
first page of the course syllabus.11
     We sought consent from all of our subjects using an online consent form. The consent form
appeared immediately after students completed the online syllabus quiz and immediately before
the online start-of-course survey. Figure SWA.2 in Supplementary Web Appendix II provides
the text of the consent form.




  11
    In the Fall 2013 and Spring 2014 semesters the students downloaded the practice exams from the course
website. In the Fall 2014 and Spring 2015 semesters the students completed the practice exams online.


                                                   7
 Syllabus quiz and start-of-course survey
   Syllabus quiz            2 points for completion
   Consent form             For treated and control students
                            Treated students set goal for letter grade in course
   Start-of-course survey
                            2 points for completion
 Online quizzes
   10 online quizzes throughout the semester
   Each scored from 0 to 3 points
 Midterm exam 1
   Scored from 0 to 30 points
   Only maximum of midterm 1 & 2 scores counts for letter grade
 Midterm exam 2
   Scored from 0 to 30 points
   Only maximum of midterm 1 & 2 scores counts for letter grade
 Final exam
   Scored from 0 to 34 points
 End-of-course survey
   2 points for completion

                                   Figure 1: Fall 2013 semester timeline



2.3    Performance-based goals experiment
In the Fall 2013 and Spring 2014 semesters we studied the e↵ects of performance-based goals
on student performance in the course. In the Fall 2013 semester treated students were asked to
set a goal for their letter grade in the course. As outlined in Figure 1, treated students were
asked to set their goal during the start-of-course survey that all students were invited to take.12
In the Spring 2014 semester treated students were asked to set goals for their scores in the two
midterm exams and the final exam. As outlined in Figure 2, the treated students were asked to
set a goal for their score in a particular exam as part of a mid-course survey that all students
were invited to take.13
    Figures SWA.3 and SWA.4 in Supplementary Web Appendix II provide the text of the goal-
setting questions. In each case, the treated students were told that their goal would be private
and that: “each time you get your quiz, midterm and final scores back, your gradecard will
remind you of your goal.” Figures SWA.5 and SWA.6 illustrate how the goal reminders were
communicated to the treated students on the online gradecards. The gradecards, described in
Section 2.2, were a popular part of the course: the median number of times students viewed
their gradecard during the Fall 2013 and Spring 2014 semesters was twenty-three. In Spring
2014, when the mid-course survey before a particular exam closed, the students received an
email telling them that their online gradecard had been updated to include the credit that they
had earned from completing that mid-course survey; opening the gradecard provided a pre-exam
reminder of the treated student’s goal for their score in the forthcoming exam.

   12
      Treated students set their goal after the quiz on the syllabus. In every semester the syllabus gave the students
information about the median student’s letter grade in the previous semester.
   13
      The students were invited to take the mid-course survey three days before the exam.


                                                          8
           Syllabus quiz and start-of-course survey
             Syllabus quiz            1 point for completion
             Consent form             For treated and control students
             Start-of-course survey   1 point for completion
           Online quizzes
             9 online quizzes throughout the semester
             Each scored from 0 to 3 points
           Mid-course survey 1
             Treated students set goal for score in midterm exam 1
             2 points for completion
           Midterm exam 1
             Scored from 0 to 30 points
             Only maximum of midterm 1 & 2 scores counts for letter grade
           Mid-course survey 2
             Treated students set goal for score in midterm exam 2
             2 points for completion
           Midterm exam 2
             Scored from 0 to 30 points
             Only maximum of midterm 1 & 2 scores counts for letter grade
           Mid-course survey 3
             Treated students set goal for score in final exam
             2 points for completion
           Final exam
             Scored from 0 to 34 points
           End-of-course survey
             1 point for completion

                            Figure 2: Spring 2014 semester timeline



2.4   Task-based goals experiment
In the Fall 2014 and Spring 2015 semesters we studied the e↵ects of task-based goals on task
completion and course performance. Specifically, we studied the e↵ects of goals about the number
of practice exams to complete on: (i) the number of practice exams that students completed
(which we call the ‘level of task completion’); and (ii) the students’ performance in the course.
The experimental design was identical across the Fall 2014 and Spring 2015 semesters.
    The course structure in the Fall 2014 and Spring 2015 semesters was the same as that outlined
in Figure 2 for the Spring 2014 semester, except that before each of the two midterm exams and
the final exam, instead of setting performance-based goals, the treated students were asked to
set a goal for the number of practice exams to complete out of a maximum of five before that
particular exam (recall from Section 2.2 that students had the opportunity to complete practice
exams in all four semesters). The treated students were asked to set the goal as part of a mid-
course survey that all students were invited to take. Both the treated and control students had
the opportunity to complete up to five practice exams online before each exam. The opportunity
to take the online practice exams was communicated to the treated and control students in the
course syllabus, in the mid-course surveys (see Figure SWA.7 in Supplementary Web Appendix

                                               9
II) and in reminder emails before each exam (see Figure SWA.8). Figures SWA.9 and SWA.10
show the practice exam instructions and feedback screens.14
    Figure SWA.7 in Supplementary Web Appendix II provides the text of the goal-setting
question. The treated students were told that their goal would be private and that: “when
you take the practice exams you will be reminded of your goal.” Figures SWA.9 and SWA.10
illustrate how the goal reminders were communicated to the treated students when attempting
the practice exams. The treated students also received a reminder of their goal in the reminder
email about the practice exams that all students received (see Figure SWA.8). Reminders were
not provided on gradecards.

2.5    Descriptive statistics on goals
Table 2 presents some descriptive statistics on the goals that the treated students set and the
extent to which they achieved these. Looking at the first row of Panel I, we see that the vast
majority of treated students chose to set at least one goal, irrespective of whether the goal was
performance based or task based. Looking at the second row of Panel I, we see that on average
students in the performance-based goals experiment set performance goals of ninety percent (as
explained in the notes to Table 2, all performance goals have been converted to percentages of
the maximal performance), while on average students in the task-based goals experiment set task
goals of four out of five practice exams. The third row of Panel I tells us that these goals were
generally a little ambitious: achievement lagged somewhat behind the goals that the students
chose to set. Given that the goals were a little ambitious, many students failed to achieve their
goals: the fourth row of Panel I shows that each performance-based goal was reached by about
one-quarter of students while each task-based goal was reached by about one-half of students.15
Panels II and III show that the same patterns hold for both male and female students.




   14
      The students were invited to take the mid-course survey five days before the relevant exam. Practice exam
reminder emails were sent three days before the exam, at which time the practice exams became active. The
practice exams closed when the exam started.
   15
      Within the performance-based goals experiment, goals and goal achievement varied little according to whether
the students set a goal for their letter grade in the course or set goals for their scores in the two midterm exams
and the final exam.


                                                        10
                                  Panel I: All students in the Treatment group

                                                       Performance-based goals         Task-based goals

             Fraction who set at least one goal                   0.99                       0.98
                         Mean goal                               89.50                       4.05
                     Mean achievement                            78.40                       3.14
                 Fraction of goals achieved                       0.24                       0.53


                                 Panel II: Male students in the Treatment group

                                                       Performance-based goals         Task-based goals

             Fraction who set at least one goal                   0.99                       0.97
                         Mean goal                               90.35                       4.03
                     Mean achievement                            79.50                       3.03
                 Fraction of goals achieved                       0.25                       0.50


                               Panel III: Female students in the Treatment group

                                                       Performance-based goals         Task-based goals

             Fraction who set at least one goal                   0.99                       0.99
                         Mean goal                               88.68                       4.07
                     Mean achievement                            77.34                       3.23
                 Fraction of goals achieved                       0.24                       0.55


Notes: The fraction who set at least one goal is defined as the fraction of students in the Treatment group who
set at least one goal during the semester. A student is considered to have set a goal for her letter grade in the
course if she chose a goal better than an E (an E can be obtained with a total points score of zero). Other types
of goal are numerical, and a student is considered to have set such a goal if she chose a goal strictly above zero.
The mean goal, mean achievement and fraction of goals achieved are computed only for the students who set
at least one goal. The mean goal is calculated by averaging over the goals set by each student (that is, one,
two or three goals) and then averaging over students (goals for the letter grade in the course are converted to
scores out of one hundred using the lower grade thresholds on the grade key, and goals for scores in the midterms
and final exam are rescaled to scores out of one hundred). Mean achievement is calculated by averaging within
students over the outcome that is the object of each set goal and then averaging over students (outcomes that
correspond to performance-based goals are converted to scores out of one hundred as described previously for the
performance-based goals themselves). The fraction of goals achieved is calculated by averaging within students
over indicators for the student achieving each set goal and then averaging over students.
           Table 2: Descriptive statistics on goals for students in the Treatment group




                                                        11
3     Results of the task-based goals experiment
We now describe the results of our task-based goals experiment. In Section 3.1 we show that
task-based goals successfully shifted task completion. In Section 3.2 we show that task-based
goal setting also improved student performance in the course. Finally, in Section 3.3 we use
independent quantitative evidence to argue that the increase in task completion elicited by
task-based goal setting caused the improvement in student performance.

3.1   Impact of task-based goals on task completion
In this section we study the impact of task-based goals on the level of task completion, defined
as the number of practice exams that the student completed during the course. Recall that all
students in the task-based goals experiment had an opportunity to complete up to five practice
exams online before each of two midterms and the final exam, giving a maximum of fifteen
practice exams. As explained in Section 2, all students received question-by-question feedback
while they completed a practice exam. To preview our results, we find that asking students to
set task-based goals for the number of practice exams to complete successfully increased task
completion. The positive e↵ect of task-based goals on task completion is large, statistically
significant and robust.
    We start by looking at the e↵ects of task-based goals on the pattern of task completion. Fig-
ure 3(a) shows the pattern of task completion for the students in the Control group, who were
not asked to set goals. For example, Figure 3(a) shows that almost all students in the Control
group completed at least one practice exam during the course while around fifteen percent of the
students in the Control group completed all fifteen of the available practice exams. Figure 3(b)
shows how task-based goal setting changed the pattern of task completion. In particular, Fig-
ure 3(b) shows that the task-based goals intervention had significant e↵ects on the bottom and
the middle of the distribution of the number of practice exams completed: for example, task-
based goals increased the probability that a student completed at least one practice exam by
more than two percentage points (p-value = 0.020) and increased the probability that a student
completed eight or more practice exams by more than six percentage points (p-value = 0.004).




                                               12
                Proportion of students in the Control group

                                                        1
                   who completed ≥ X practice exams
                  0      .2      .4      .6    .8




                                                                                                                                     X
                                                              1

                                                                  2

                                                                      3

                                                                          4

                                                                               5

                                                                                   6

                                                                                         7

                                                                                              8

                                                                                                  9
                                                                                                       10

                                                                                                            11

                                                                                                                 12

                                                                                                                      13

                                                                                                                           14

                                                                                                                                15
                                                        ≥

                                                                  ≥

                                                                      ≥

                                                                          ≥

                                                                              ≥

                                                                                   ≥

                                                                                         ≥

                                                                                             ≥

                                                                                                  ≥
                                                                                                      ≥

                                                                                                            ≥

                                                                                                                 ≥

                                                                                                                      ≥

                                                                                                                           ≥

                                                                                                                                ≥
                                                                              Number of practice exams completed

             (a) Number of practice exams completed for students in the Control group of the
                                       task-based goals experiment
                Effect of task−based goals on probability

                                                   .1
                    of completing ≥ X practice exams
                −.05          0         .05




                                                                                                                                     X
                                                              1

                                                                  2

                                                                      3

                                                                          4

                                                                               5

                                                                                   6

                                                                                         7

                                                                                              8

                                                                                                  9
                                                                                                       10

                                                                                                            11

                                                                                                                 12

                                                                                                                      13

                                                                                                                           14

                                                                                                                                15
                                                        ≥

                                                                  ≥

                                                                      ≥

                                                                          ≥

                                                                              ≥

                                                                                   ≥

                                                                                         ≥

                                                                                             ≥

                                                                                                  ≥
                                                                                                      ≥

                                                                                                            ≥

                                                                                                                 ≥

                                                                                                                      ≥

                                                                                                                           ≥

                                                                                                                                ≥




                                                                              Number of practice exams completed

                                                                              Estimate                95% confidence interval

                          (b) E↵ects of task-based goals on the number of practice exams completed

Notes: The e↵ects shown in Panel (b) were estimated using OLS regressions of indicators of the student having
completed at least X practice exams for X 2 {1, .., 15} on an indicator for the student having been randomly
allocated to the Treatment group in the task-based goals experiment. The 95% confidence intervals are based on
heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors.


              Figure 3: E↵ects of task-based goals on the pattern of task completion




                                                                                             13
    Next, we look at how task-based goals changed the average level of task completion. Ta-
ble 3 reports OLS regressions of the number of practice exams completed during the course
on an indicator for the student having been randomly allocated to the Treatment group in the
task-based goals experiment. To give a feel for the magnitude of the e↵ects, the second row
reports the e↵ect size as a proportion of the standard deviation of the number of practice exams
completed in the Control group in the task-based goals experiment, while the third row reports
the average number of practice exams completed in the same Control group. From the results in
the first column, which were obtained from an OLS regression that includes controls for student
characteristics, we see that task-based goals increased the mean number of practice exams that
students completed by about 0.5 of an exam (the e↵ect has a p-value of 0.017). This corresponds
to an increase in practice exam completion of about 0.1 of a standard deviation, or almost six
percent relative to the average number of practice exams completed by students in the Control
group. From the second column we see that these results are quantitatively similar when we
omit the controls for student characteristics.


                                All students in the task-based goals experiment

                                                                 Number of practice exams completed
                                                                     OLS                 OLS

           E↵ect of asking students to set task-based goals           0.491⇤⇤              0.479⇤⇤
                                                                      (0.205)             (0.208)
                                                                      [0.017]             [0.022]

                    E↵ect / (SD in Control group)                     0.102                0.100

            Mean of dependent variable in Control group               8.627                8.627

                 Controls for student characteristics                  Yes                  No

                             Observations                             2,004                2,004


Notes: Both columns report OLS regressions of the number of practice exams completed during the course (out
of a maximum of fifteen) on an indicator for the student having been randomly allocated to the Treatment group
in the task-based goals experiment. In the first column we control for student characteristics as described in the
notes to Table 5 while in the second column we do not control for student characteristics. ‘SD in Control group’
refers to the standard deviation of the dependent variable in the Control group. Heteroskedasticity-consistent
standard errors are shown in round brackets and two-sided p-values are shown in square brackets. ⇤ , ⇤⇤ and ⇤⇤⇤
denote, respectively, significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels (two-sided tests).
           Table 3: E↵ects of task-based goals on the average level of task completion

    As we discussed in the Introduction, evidence from other educational environments suggests
that males have less self-control than females. This motivates splitting our analysis by gender
to examine whether self-set task-based goals act as a more e↵ective commitment device for male
students than for females. In line with this existing evidence on gender di↵erences in self-control,
Table 4 shows that the e↵ect of task-based goals is mainly confined to male students. We focus
our discussion on the first column of results, which were obtained from OLS regressions that
include controls for student characteristics (the second column of results shows that our findings
are robust to omitting these controls). Panel I shows that task-based goals increased the number
of practice exams that male students completed by about one exam. This corresponds to an


                                                        14
increase in practice exam completion of about 0.2 of a standard deviation, or almost eleven
percent relative to the average number of practice exams completed by male students in the
Control group. This positive e↵ect of task-based goals on the level of task completion for male
students is statistically significant at the one-percent level. Panel II shows that for female
students task-based goals increased the number of practice exams completed by less than 0.2 of
an exam, and this e↵ect is far from being statistically significant.
    Interestingly, in the Control group female students completed more practice exams than
males, and our task-based goals intervention eliminated most of the gender gap in practice
exam completion. Specifically, in the Control group females completed seventeen percent more
practice exams than males, while in the Treatment group females completed only seven percent
more practice exams than males.


                           Panel I: Male students in the task-based goals experiment

                                                                Number of practice exams completed
                                                                    OLS                 OLS

            E↵ect of asking students to set task-based goals          0.893⇤⇤⇤            0.809⇤⇤⇤
                                                                     (0.300)              (0.306)
                                                                     [0.003]              [0.008]

                    E↵ect / (SD in Control group)                     0.190               0.172

             Mean of dependent variable in Control group              7.892               7.892

                  Controls for student characteristics                Yes                  No

                             Observations                             918                  918


                          Panel II: Female students in the task-based goals experiment

                                                                Number of practice exams completed
                                                                    OLS                 OLS

            E↵ect of asking students to set task-based goals          0.156               0.217
                                                                     (0.281)              (0.281)
                                                                     [0.578]              [0.441]

                    E↵ect / (SD in Control group)                     0.033               0.045

             Mean of dependent variable in Control group              9.239               9.239

                  Controls for student characteristics                Yes                  No

                             Observations                             1,086               1,086


Notes: The regressions are the same as those reported in Table 3, except that we now split the sample by gender.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are shown in round brackets and two-sided p-values are shown in
square brackets. ⇤ , ⇤⇤ and ⇤⇤⇤ denote, respectively, significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels (two-sided tests).
        Table 4: Gender di↵erences in the e↵ects of task-based goals on task completion




                                                         15
3.2    Impact of task-based goals on student performance
We saw in Section 3.1 that task-based goal setting successfully increased the students’ level of
task completion. Table 5 provides evidence that asking students to set task-based goals also
improved student performance in the course. We consider three measures of performance: (i)
credit in the course, measured by students’ total points score in the course (out of one hundred)
that determines their letter grade; (ii) the probability that students achieved an A– or better;
and (iii) the probability that students achieved a B+ or better.16 The first column of Table 5
reports OLS regressions of credit on an indicator for the student having been randomly allocated
to the Treatment group in the task-based goals experiment. The second column, titled ‘Median’,
reports unconditional quantile regressions for the median of credit on the same indicator.17 The
third and fourth columns report OLS regressions of, respectively, an indicator for the student
having achieved an A– or better and an indicator for the student having achieved a B+ or better
on the same indicator as in the first two columns. To give a feel for the magnitude of the e↵ects,
the second row in each panel reports the e↵ect size as a proportion of the standard deviation of
the dependent variable in the Control group in the task-based goals experiment, while the third
row reports the average of the dependent variable in the same Control group.
    Panel I of Table 5 shows that, across male and female students, asking students to set goals
for the number of practice exams to complete improved performance by about 0.1 of a standard
deviation on average across the four specifications. Two of the specifications give significance at
the five-percent level, while the other two give significance at the ten-percent level. The tests
are all two-sided: using one-sided tests would give significance at the one-percent level in two
specifications and at the five-percent level in the other two.
    Panels II and III show that task-based goals were e↵ective for male students but not for
females. For male students task-based goals improved performance by almost 0.2 of a standard
deviation on average across the four specifications. This corresponds to an increase in credit of
almost two points and an increase in the probability of achieving an A– or better of almost ten
percentage points. The e↵ects of task-based goal-setting on the performance of male students
are strongly statistically significant (three of the four specifications give significance at the
one-percent level, while the fourth gives significance at the five-percent level). On the other
hand, Panel III shows that task-based goals were ine↵ective in raising performance for female
students. On average across the four specifications, task-based goals improved the performance
of female students by only 0.02 of a standard deviation (and the e↵ect of task-based goals on
the performance of female students is statistically insignificant in all four specifications).
    The regressions in Table 5 control for student characteristics: the results are quantitatively
similar but precision falls when we do not condition on student characteristics (see Table SWA.4
in Supplementary Web Appendix I).




  16
     B+ was the median letter grade across the four semesters of our study.
  17
     The median results were obtained using the estimator of Firpo et al. (2009), which delivers the e↵ect of the
treatment on the unconditional median of credit.


                                                       16
                             Panel I: All students in the task-based goals experiment

                                                    Total points score       Pr(Grade       A–)   Pr(Grade B+)
                                                     OLS       Median             OLS                  OLS

        E↵ect of asking students to set             0.742⇤      1.044⇤⇤           0.038⇤                0.049⇤⇤
               task-based goals                     (0.431)     (0.446)           (0.021)              (0.021)
                                                    [0.086]     [0.019]           [0.072]              [0.019]

        E↵ect / (SD in Control group)               0.068       0.096             0.077                 0.098

Mean of dependent variable in Control group         83.111      83.111            0.393                 0.493

                 Observations                       2,004       2,004             2,004                 2,004


                            Panel II: Male students in the task-based goals experiment

                                                    Total points score       Pr(Grade       A–)   Pr(Grade B+)
                                                     OLS       Median             OLS                  OLS

        E↵ect of asking students to set             1.787⇤⇤⇤    1.714⇤⇤⇤          0.092⇤⇤⇤              0.069⇤⇤
               task-based goals                     (0.657)     (0.642)           (0.031)              (0.031)
                                                    [0.006]     [0.008]           [0.003]              [0.025]

        E↵ect / (SD in Control group)               0.159       0.153             0.187                 0.138

 Mean of dependent variable in Control group        83.285      83.285            0.417                 0.529

                 Observations                        918         918               918                   918


                          Panel III: Female students in the task-based goals experiment

                                                    Total points score       Pr(Grade       A–)   Pr(Grade B+)
                                                     OLS       Median             OLS                  OLS

        E↵ect of asking students to set             -0.128      0.449             -0.008                0.033
               task-based goals                     (0.571)     (0.613)           (0.028)              (0.029)
                                                    [0.822]     [0.464]           [0.779]              [0.255]

        E↵ect / (SD in Control group)               -0.012      0.043             -0.016                0.065

 Mean of dependent variable in Control group        82.966      82.966            0.373                 0.463

                 Observations                       1,086       1,086             1,086                 1,086


Notes: The first column reports OLS regressions of total points score on an indicator for the student having
been randomly allocated to the Treatment group in the task-based goals experiment. The second column reports
unconditional quantile regressions for the median of total points score on the same indicator. The third and
fourth columns report OLS regressions of, respectively, an indicator for the student having achieved an A– or
better and an indicator for the student having achieved a B+ or better on the same indicator as in the first two
columns. ‘SD in Control group’ refers to the standard deviation of the dependent variable in the Control group.
We control for the student characteristics defined in Table SWA.1 in Supplementary Web Appendix I: (i) letting
Q denote the set containing indicators for the binary characteristics other than gender (race-based categories,
advanced placement credit, Fall semester) and Z denote the set containing the non-binary characteristics (age,
SAT score, high school GPA, first login time), we include j 2 Q, k 2 Z, k ⇥ l for k 2 Z and l 2 Z, and j ⇥ k
for j 2 Q and k 2 Z; and (ii) the models in Panel I further include gender together with gender interacted with
every control variable defined in (i). Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are shown in round brackets
and two-sided p-values are shown in square brackets. ⇤ , ⇤⇤ and ⇤⇤⇤ denote, respectively, significance at the 10%,
5% and 1% levels (two-sided tests).
                     Table 5: E↵ects of task-based goals on student performance

                                                       17
3.3    Did the increase in task completion cause the increase in performance?
So far we have shown that task-based goals increased the level of task completion and improved
student performance, with larger e↵ects for male students than for females. A natural explana-
tion for our results is that the increase in task completion induced by task-based goal setting
caused the improvement in student performance. A final round of analysis provides independent
evidence that supports this explanation. In particular, if the e↵ect of goal setting on perfor-
mance was caused by the increase in task completion, then this performance e↵ect of goal setting
should be comparable in magnitude to the e↵ect of goal setting on the number of practice ex-
ams completed multiplied by the e↵ect of completing a practice exam on performance. Evidence
that this is the case comes from an estimate of the performance e↵ect of completing a practice
exam using a fixed e↵ects estimation strategy. This strategy leverages within-student variation
in the number of practice exams completed across the two midterms and the final exam among
students in the Control group in the task-based goals experiment (who were not asked to set
goals).
    In more detail, we estimate the performance e↵ect of completing a practice exam using a
fixed e↵ects regression of points scored in one of the midterms or the final exam (which enters
the total points score as described in Section 2.4) on the number of practice exams completed
in preparation for that midterm or final exam. Each student-exam pair is an observation and
we include a fixed e↵ect for each student. The estimation sample includes only students from
the Control group of the task-based goals experiment. Thus the fixed e↵ects estimate measures
the performance returns to practice exams for students in the Control group who varied the
number of practice exams that they completed across the di↵erent exams (the vast majority did
so). Since students in the Control group were not asked to set goals, we estimate the e↵ect of
completing a practice exam uncontaminated by any e↵ects of our goal-setting intervention.
    The fixed e↵ects estimates reported in Table 6 suggest that completing a practice exam
increased the performance of students in the Control group by 1.486 points. If we multiply
this estimate by the e↵ect of goal setting on the number of practice exams completed (0.491
exams, from the first column of Table 3), we predict an e↵ect of goal setting on performance
of 0.730 points. This is remarkably close to the e↵ect of goal setting on performance that we
estimated previously from a treatment-control comparison of the students in the task-based
goals experiment (0.742 points, from the first column of Panel I of Table 5). The equivalent
calculations using our estimates for male students and for female students also line up reasonably
well: for males the predicted performance e↵ect of task-based goal setting is 1.241 points (1.389⇥
0.893) versus an estimated e↵ect of 1.787 points, while for female students the predicted e↵ect
of task-based goal setting is 0.247 points (1.579 ⇥ 0.156) versus an estimated e↵ect of -0.128
points. Overall, our fixed e↵ects estimates of the performance returns to completing practice
exams support the hypothesis that the increase in task completion induced by task-based goal
setting caused the improvement in student performance in the course.18

   18
      Further evidence for the hypothesis that the increase in task completion induced by task-based goal setting
caused the improvement in student performance comes from results showing that goal-setting did not a↵ect
another aspect of student behavior: participation in the course. In more detail, we construct an index of course
participation, which measures the proportion of course components that a student completed weighted by the
importance of each component in determining total points score in the course. We regress our index of course
participation on an indicator of the student having been randomly allocated to the Treatment group in the task-


                                                       18
                        Students in the Control group of the task-based goals experiment

                                                       Points scored in one of the midterms or the final exam
                                                        All students      Male students      Female students

        E↵ect of each completed practice exam                1.486⇤⇤⇤           1.389⇤⇤⇤            1.579⇤⇤⇤
                                                             (0.095)           (0.139)             (0.128)
                                                             [0.000]           [0.000]             [0.000]

             E↵ect/(SD in Control group)                     0.221              0.193               0.250

     Mean of dependent variable in Control group             23.413            23.491              23.349

                  Student fixed e↵ects                        Yes                Yes                 Yes

           Observations (student-exam pairs)                 3,060              1,389               1,671


Notes: Each column reports fixed e↵ects panel regressions of points scored in one of the midterms or the final exam
on the number of practice exams completed in preparation for that midterm or final exam. Each student-exam pair
is an observation (giving three observations per student). We include a fixed e↵ect for each student, and the fixed
e↵ects absorb any e↵ects of student characteristics on student performance. The sample includes only students
from the Control group of the task-based goals experiment, who were not asked to set goals. ‘SD in Control group’
refers to the standard deviation of the dependent variable in the Control group. Heteroskedasticity-consistent
standard errors (with clustering at the student level) are shown in round brackets and two-sided p-values are
shown in square brackets. ⇤ , ⇤⇤ and ⇤⇤⇤ denote, respectively, significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels (two-sided
tests).

Table 6: Fixed e↵ects estimates of the e↵ect of completed practice exams on student performance




based goals experiment. We find that the e↵ects of the treatment on course participation are small and far from
being statistically significant. The p-values for OLS regressions of this index on the treatment are 0.668, 0.367
and 0.730 for, respectively, all students, male students, and female students.


                                                        19
4        Results of the performance-based goals experiment
In this section we present the results of the performance-based goals experiment. Table 7 shows
that performance-based goals had positive but small and statistically insignificant e↵ects on
student performance in the course. We first explain the structure of the table and we then
describe the results reported in the table.
    As in Section 3.2, we consider three measures of performance: (i) credit in the course, mea-
sured by students’ total points score in the course (out of one hundred) that determines their
letter grade; (ii) the probability that students achieved an A– or better; and (iii) the probability
that students achieved a B+ or better.19 The first column of Table 7 reports ordinary least
squares (OLS) regressions of credit on an indicator for the student having been randomly allo-
cated to the Treatment group in the performance-based goals experiment. The second column,
titled ‘Median’, reports unconditional quantile regressions for the median of credit on the same
indicator.20 The third and fourth columns report OLS regressions of, respectively, an indicator
for the student having achieved an A– or better and an indicator for the student having achieved
a B+ or better on the same indicator as in the first two columns. The second row in each panel
reports the e↵ect size as a proportion of the standard deviation of the dependent variable in
the Control group in the performance-based goals experiment, while the third row reports the
average of the dependent variable in the same Control group.
    We can see from Panel I of Table 7 that for the whole sample in the performance-based
goals experiment asking students to set performance-based goals had positive but small and
statistically insignificant e↵ects on student performance in the course. The p-values are never
close to the thresholds for statistical significance at conventional levels. Within the performance-
based goals experiment, neither goals for letter grades in the course nor goals for scores in the
two midterms and the final exam had a statistically significant e↵ect on student performance.21
We continue to find statistically insignificant e↵ects when we break the sample down by gender
in Panels II and III. The regressions in Table 7 control for student characteristics: when we do
not condition on student characteristics, we continue to find no statistically significant e↵ects
(see Table SWA.5 in Supplementary Web Appendix I).
    In line with previous correlational studies (see the Introduction), we find that students who
set ambitious performance-based goals performed better. Conditional on student characteristics,
the correlation in our sample between course performance (measured by total number of points
scored out of one hundred) and the level of the goal is 0.203 (p = 0.000) for students who
set performance-based goals. The di↵erence between the strong positive correlation based on
non-experimental variation in our sample and the small and statistically insignificant causal
e↵ects that we estimate suggests that correlational analysis gives a misleading impression of the
e↵ectiveness of performance-based goals.


    19
      B+ was the median letter grade across the four semesters of our study.
    20
      The median results were obtained using the estimator of Firpo et al. (2009), which delivers the e↵ect of the
treatment on the unconditional median of credit.
   21
      For each of the four specifications reported in Panel I, and using the ten-percent-level criterion, we find
no statistically significant e↵ect of either type of performance-based goal, and we find no statistically significant
di↵erence between the e↵ects of the two types of goal. For the case of OLS regressions of credit on the treatment,
the p-values for the two e↵ects and the di↵erence are, respectively, p = 0.234, p = 0.856, and p = 0.386.


                                                         20
                        Panel I: All students in the performance-based goals experiment

                                                  Total points score     Pr(Grade       A–)   Pr(Grade B+)
                                                   OLS     Median             OLS                  OLS

        E↵ect of asking students to set            0.300     0.118             0.002                0.001
          performance-based goals                 (0.398)    (0.459)          (0.020)               (0.021)
                                                  [0.452]    [0.797]          [0.931]               [0.978]

        E↵ect / (SD in Control group)              0.028     0.011             0.004                0.001

 Mean of dependent variable in Control group      83.220     83.220            0.389                0.498

                 Observations                      1,967     1,967             1,967                1,967


                      Panel II: Male students in the performance-based goals experiment

                                                  Total points score     Pr(Grade       A–)   Pr(Grade B+)
                                                   OLS     Median             OLS                  OLS

        E↵ect of asking students to set            0.430     0.576             0.008                0.028
          performance-based goals                 (0.594)    (0.618)          (0.030)               (0.030)
                                                  [0.469]    [0.352]          [0.796]               [0.352]

        E↵ect / (SD in Control group)              0.041     0.055             0.016                0.057

 Mean of dependent variable in Control group      83.644     83.644            0.403                0.511

                 Observations                       933       933               933                  933


                     Panel III: Female students in the performance-based goals experiment

                                                  Total points score     Pr(Grade       A–)   Pr(Grade B+)
                                                   OLS     Median             OLS                  OLS

        E↵ect of asking students to set            0.181    -0.330            -0.004                -0.025
          performance-based goals                 (0.536)    (0.642)          (0.028)               (0.029)
                                                  [0.736]    [0.607]          [0.894]               [0.392]

        E↵ect / (SD in Control group)              0.017    -0.031            -0.008                -0.049

 Mean of dependent variable in Control group      82.864     82.864            0.377                0.487

                 Observations                      1,034     1,034             1,034                1,034


Notes: The first column reports OLS regressions of total points score on an indicator for the student having
been randomly allocated to the Treatment group in the performance-based goals experiment. The second column
reports unconditional quantile regressions for the median of total points score on the same indicator. The third
and fourth columns report OLS regressions of, respectively, an indicator for the student having achieved an A–
or better and an indicator for the student having achieved a B+ or better on the same indicator as in the first
two columns. ‘SD in Control group’ refers to the standard deviation of the dependent variable in the Control
group. We control for student characteristics as explained in the notes to Table 5. Heteroskedasticity-consistent
standard errors are shown in round brackets and two-sided p-values are shown in square brackets. ⇤ , ⇤⇤ and ⇤⇤⇤
denote, respectively, significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels (two-sided tests).
                Table 7: E↵ects of performance-based goals on student performance




                                                       21
5     Using theory to interpret our experimental findings
5.1    Motivation
In this section we suggest some hypotheses for our findings. For each type of goal (performance-
and task-based), our approach is to write down a simple model of goal setting and then use this
to generate possible hypotheses. We acknowledge that these models are not the only ones that
we could have used, but we are not aiming to test theory. Rather, we are using theory to guide
the analysis and interpretation of our findings.
    Our models build on Koch and Nafziger (2011) and are inspired by two key concepts in
behavioral economics: present bias and loss aversion. The concept of present bias captures the
idea that people lack control because they place a high weight on current utility (Strotz, 1956).22
More specifically, a present-biased discounter places more weight on current utility relative to
utility n periods in the future than she does on utility at future time t relative to utility at time
t + n. This implies that present-biased discounters exhibit time inconsistency, since their time
preferences at di↵erent dates are not consistent with one another. In the context of education,
a present-biased student might set out to exert her preferred level of e↵ort, but when the time
comes to attend class or review for a test she might lack the self-control necessary to implement
these plans.23 Strotz (1956) and Pollak (1968) were the first to analyze how time-inconsistent
agents make choices anticipating the di↵erent time preferences of their future selves. Building
on this insight, Strotz (1956) noted that present-biased agents can mitigate their self-control
problem by using commitment devices to bind their future self.24
    The concept of loss aversion captures the idea that people dislike falling behind a salient
reference point (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979).25 In the context of education, a loss-averse
student might work particularly hard in an attempt to achieve a salient reference point (e.g., a
particular grade in her course).
    Together, the literatures on present bias and loss aversion suggest that self-set goals might
serve as an e↵ective commitment device. Specifically, self-set goals might act as salient reference
points, helping present-biased agents to mitigate their self-control problem and so steer their
e↵ort toward its optimal level. Indeed, Koch and Nafziger (2011) developed a model of goal
setting based on this idea that we build on here. Unlike us, however, Koch and Nafziger (2011)
did not explore the e↵ectiveness of di↵erent types of goals.26
   22
      Present bias has been proposed as an explanation for aspects of many behaviors such as addiction (Gruber and
Kőszegi, 2001), early retirement (Diamond and Kőszegi, 2003), smoking (Khwaja et al., 2007), welfare program
participation (Fang and Silverman, 2009) and credit card borrowing (Meier and Sprenger, 2010). See Dhami
(2016) for a recent comprehensive survey of the literature on present bias.
   23
      Under standard (i.e., exponential) discounting this self-control problem disappears.
   24
      We provide examples of such commitment devices in footnote 2 in the Introduction.
   25
      Loss aversion has been proposed as a foundation of a number of phenomena such as the endowment e↵ect
(Kahneman et al., 1990), small-scale risk aversion (Rabin, 2000), the disposition e↵ect (Genesove and Mayer,
2001), and the role of expectations in single-agent decision-making (Bell, 1985; Kőszegi and Rabin, 2006) and in
strategic interactions (Gill and Stone, 2010; Gill and Prowse, 2012).
   26
      Koch and Nafziger (2011)’s model also di↵ers from our models in that agents in their model choose from
only two possible e↵ort levels, while our models allow students to choose both e↵ort and goals from a continuum.
Again without exploring the e↵ectiveness of di↵erent types of goals, Jain (2009) also studies theoretically how
present-biased agents can use goals as reference points; in Jain (2009)’s model utility is discontinuous at the
reference point, rather than kinked as in Kahneman and Tversky (1979)’s model of loss aversion that we and
Koch and Nafziger (2011) use. Heath et al. (1999) and Wu et al. (2008) linked goals to loss aversion, but did
not make the connection to present bias. Finally, a related theoretical literature studies expectations as goals


                                                       22
5.2     Performance-based goal setting
5.2.1    Simple model

We start by building a simple model of performance-based goal setting. In Section 5.2.2 we
use the model to suggest three hypotheses for why performance-based goals might not be very
e↵ective in the context that we studied.
    At period one the student sets a goal g       0 for performance f     0; we call the student at
period one the student-planner. At period two the student chooses e↵ort e            0; we call the
student at period two the student-actor. The student-actor incurs a cost of e↵ort C(e) = ce2 /2,
with c > 0. At period three performance is realized and the student incurs any disutility
from failing to achieve her goal; we call the student at period three the student-beneficiary.
Performance increases one-to-one in e↵ort exerted by the student-actor at period two, i.e., f (e) =
e, and the student-beneficiary’s utility increases one-to-one in performance.27 The student-
beneficiary is loss averse around her goal: she su↵ers goal disutility that depends linearly on
how far performance falls short of the goal set by the student-planner at period one. The student-
beneficiary’s goal disutility is given by l max{g f (e), 0}. The parameter l > 0 captures the
strength of loss aversion, which in our context we call the ‘strength of goal disutility’.28,29
    The student is present biased. In particular, the student exhibits quasi-hyperbolic discount-
ing, with 2 (0, 1) and 2 (0, 1]: the student discounts utility n periods in the future by a
factor n .30 Under quasi-hyperbolic discounting the student-planner discounts period-two util-
ity by a factor    and period-three utility by a factor 2 , and so discounts period-three utility
by relative to period-two utility. The student-actor, on the other hand, discounts period-three
utility by    relative to immediate period-two utility. Since      < , the student-planner places
more weight on utility from performance at period three relative to the cost of e↵ort at period
two than does the student-actor.
    As a result of this present bias, and in the absence of a goal, the student-planner’s desired
e↵ort is higher than the e↵ort chosen by the student-actor: that is, the student exhibits a
self-control problem due to time inconsistency.31 We formalize this as follows:




(Suvorov and Van de Ven, 2008; Hsiaw, 2013; Hsiaw, 2016; Koch and Nafziger, 2016).
   27
      Using one-to-one relationships instead of more general linear relationships is without loss of generality.
   28
      Specifically, l measures the psychological loss from failing to achieve the goal relative to ‘material’ utility.
   29
      This formulation implies that the student su↵ers disutility from failing to achieve her goal. However, it
also implies that she enjoys no elation from exceeding the goal. This latter assumption can be justified in two
ways. First, the more parsimonious one-parameter model of loss aversion allows us to gain useful insights into
the e↵ectiveness of goal setting. Second, if students enjoyed elation from exceeding their goals, they would have
a strategic incentive to set low goals in order to enjoy the utility boost from exceeding them, but we do not see
evidence that this motivation is an important driver of behavior in our data.
   30
      Laibson (1997) was the first to apply the analytically tractable quasi-hyperbolic (or ‘beta-delta’) model of
discounting to analyze the choices of present-biased time-inconsistent agents. Like us, Laibson (1997) finds the
equilibria of a dynamic game among a sequence of temporal selves.
   31
      When g = 0, goal disutility is zero since max{g f (e), 0} = 0, and so g = 0 is equivalent to the absence of a
goal.


                                                         23
Remark 1
In the absence of a goal the student exhibits time inconsistency:
(i) The student-actor chooses e↵ort e = /c.
(ii) The student-planner would like the student-actor to exert e↵ort ê = /c > e.

Proof. See Supplementary Web Appendix III.1.

   To alleviate her self-control problem due to time-inconsistency, the student-planner might
choose to set a goal. Goals can be e↵ective by increasing the student-actor’s marginal incentive
to work in order to avoid the goal disutility that results from failing to achieve the goal.
   To demonstrate this point, we solve for the subgame-perfect Nash equilibria of the game
outlined above, in which the players are the student-planner and student-actor. We do so by
backward induction. First, we analyze the e↵ort choice of the student-actor at period two for
any goal set by the student-planner at period one. The student-actor’s utility is given by:

                      uact (e|g) =          [f (e)   l max{g   f (e), 0}] C(e)                   (1)
                                                                     ce2
                                 =          [e   l max{g   e, 0}]        .                       (2)
                                                                       2

   Proposition 1 shows how the student-actor’s e↵ort responds to the goal.

Proposition 1
Let e =    (1 + l)/c and recall from Remark 1 that e =       /c < e denotes the student-actor’s
e↵ort in the absence of a goal.
(i) When g  e, the student-actor exerts e↵ort e⇤ = e.
(ii) When g 2 [e, e], the student-actor exerts e↵ort e⇤ = g.
(iii) When g e, the student-actor exerts e↵ort e⇤ = e.

Proof. See Supplementary Web Appendix III.1.

    Proposition 1 tells us that, perhaps unsurprisingly, the goal does not raise e↵ort when it is
set lower than the student-actor’s optimal level of e↵ort in the absence of a goal e. Intermediate
goals are e↵ective: intermediate goals induce the student-actor to work hard enough to achieve
the goal in order to avoid disutility from falling short of the goal. Beyond a certain point
the marginal cost of e↵ort outweighs the marginal reduction in goal disutility, and so the goal
induces an increase in e↵ort only to an upper bound e. Goals above the upper bound leave the
student-actor to su↵er some goal disutility. This upper bound increases as the time-inconsistency
problem becomes less severe (higher ) and as the strength of goal disutility l goes up.
    Having established how the student-actor’s e↵ort responds to any goal set by the student-
planner, we now consider the student-planner’s optimal choice of goal. Letting e⇤ (g) represent
the student-actor’s optimal e↵ort given a goal g, the student-planner’s utility is given by:

            uplan (g|e⇤ (g)) =     2
                                       [f (e⇤ (g))   l max{g   f (e⇤ (g)), 0}]       C(e⇤ (g))   (3)
                                                                             c[e⇤ (g)]2
                            =      2
                                       [e⇤ (g)   l max{g   e⇤ (g), 0}]                    .      (4)
                                                                                 2



                                                     24
Proposition 2
Recall from Remark 1 that e = /c and ê = /c denote, respectively, student-actor e↵ort and
student-planner desired e↵ort in the absence of a goal.
Recall from Proposition 1 that e =       (1 + l)/c denotes maximal student-actor e↵ort in the
presence of a goal.
(i) The optimal choice of goal for the student-planner is given by g ⇤ = min{ê, e}.
(ii) When (1 + l) < 1, g ⇤ = e.
(iii) When (1 + l) 1, g ⇤ = ê.
(iv) E↵ort of the student-actor e⇤ = g ⇤ > e, and so the student-actor works harder than in the
absence of goal.

Proof. See Supplementary Web Appendix III.1.

    We know from Proposition 1 that goals in the range [e, e] induce the student-actor to work
to achieve the goal, but that higher goals are ine↵ective in raising e↵ort above e. Thus, the
student-planner will never set a goal higher than e, since higher goals are not e↵ective but leave
the student-actor to su↵er some goal disutility from failing to achieve the goal. If the student-
planner could simply impose a level of e↵ort on the student-actor, then we know from Remark 1
that she would choose ê. When (1+l) is big enough, ê  e, and so the student-planner achieves
her desired level of e↵ort by setting g ⇤ = ê. This case holds when the time-inconsistency problem
is not too severe (high ) or the strength of goal disutility l is sufficiently high. When her desired
level of e↵ort is not achievable, the student-planner sets g ⇤ = e, and so the student-planner uses
the goal to induce as much e↵ort from the student-actor as she is able to. In either case, the
optimal goal induces the student to work harder than she would in the absence of a goal and
the student always achieves her goal in equilibrium.

5.2.2   Why might performance-based goals not be very e↵ective?

This model of performance-based goal setting suggests that performance-based goals can improve
course performance. However, our experimental data show that performance-based goals had a
positive but small and statistically insignificant e↵ect on student performance (Table 7). In our
view, the simple model sketched above suggests three hypotheses for why performance-based
goals might not be very e↵ective in the context that we studied (we view these hypotheses as
complementary).

Timing of goal disutility

In the simple model, the student works in period two and experiences any goal disutility from
failing to achieve her performance-based goal in period three (i.e., when performance is realized).
This temporal distance will dampen the motivating e↵ect of the goal. Formally, the student-
actor discounts goal disutility by a factor    < 1; in the expression for maximal student-actor
e↵ort in the presence of a goal, e, the parameter measuring the strength of goal disutility, l, is
multiplied by this discount factor (see Proposition 2). Even when the temporal distance between
e↵ort and goal disutility is modest, the timing of goal disutility dampens the e↵ectiveness of



                                                 25
performance-based goals because quasi-hyperbolic discounters discount the near future relative
to the present by a factor even if ⇡ 1 over the modest temporal distance.

Overconfidence

In the simple model, students understand perfectly the relationship between e↵ort and perfor-
mance. In contrast, the education literature suggests that students face considerable uncertainty
about the educational production function, and that this uncertainty could lead to students hold-
ing incorrect beliefs about the relationship between e↵ort and performance (e.g., Romer, 1993,
and Fryer, 2013). Furthermore, the broader behavioral literature shows that people tend to be
overconfident when they face uncertainty (e.g., Weinstein, 1980, Camerer and Lovallo, 1999, and
Park and Santos-Pinto, 2010). The behavioral literature also provides a number of theoretical
underpinnings for overconfidence (e.g., Brunnermeier and Parker, 2005, Johnson and Fowler,
2011, and Gossner and Steiner, 2016).
    Suppose that some students are overconfident. An overconfident student believes that the
production function is given by f (·), when in fact performance is given by hf (·) with h 2 (0, 1)
for any value of e↵ort. An overconfident student will act as if the production function is given
by f (·), and so the model in Section 5.2.1 describes her choice of goal and e↵ort. However, the
student’s actual performance with goal setting and in the absence of a goal will be a proportion
h of that expected by the student. As a result, the impact of performance-based goal setting on
performance will be reduced by this proportion h. Furthermore, the overconfident student will
unexpectedly fail to achieve her performance-based goal.

Performance uncertainty

In the simple model, the student knows for sure how her e↵ort translates into performance (i.e.,
the relationship between e↵ort and performance involves no uncertainty). As such, her goal is
always achieved in equilibrium. In practice, the relationship between e↵ort and performance is
likely to be noisy and, as in our experiment, performance-based goals are not always reached.
The student could face uncertainty about her own ability or about the productivity of work
e↵ort. The student might also get unlucky: for instance, the draw of questions on the exam
might be unfavorable or the student might get sick near the exam.
    To introduce uncertainty about performance in a straightforward way, suppose that the
student is risk neutral and that with known probability ⇡ 2 (0, 1) her e↵ort translates into
performance according to f (·) as in Section 5.2.1, while with probability 1 ⇡ performance f = 0
(since we assume that ⇡ is known, the student is neither overconfident nor underconfident).32
    The formal details of the analysis are relegated to Supplementary Web Appendix III.3. The
uncertainty directly reduces the student-actor’s marginal incentive to exert e↵ort, which reduces
by a factor ⇡ the equilibrium goal and equilibrium e↵ort with and without goal setting. However,
this general reduction in incentives is not the only e↵ect of uncertainty: performance-based goals
become risky because when performance turns out to be low the student fails to achieve her
performance-based goal and so su↵ers goal disutility that increases in the goal (as in the simple

  32
     We can think of f = 0 as a baseline level of performance that the student achieves with little e↵ort even in
the absence of goal setting.


                                                       26
model, goals are never exceeded in equilibrium). In contrast to the case of overconfidence
discussed above, goal failure is not unexpected: the student facing uncertainty anticipates that
she will not always achieve her performance-based goal.
    Anticipating the goal disutility su↵ered when performance turns out to be low, the student-
planner further scales back the performance-based goal that she sets for the student-actor, which
reduces the e↵ectiveness of performance-based goal setting. Formally, this extra e↵ect adds the
second term to the numerator in the expression for ẽ in Proposition SWA.4 in Supplementary
Web Appendix III.3.33,34

5.3     Task-based goal setting
5.3.1    Simple model

We now model task-based goal setting. At period one the student-planner sets a goal g 0 for
the number of units of the task to complete a      0. We call a the ‘level of task completion’.
At period two the student-actor chooses the level of task completion a. The student-actor
incurs a cost of task completion C(a) = a2 /2, with  > 0. Furthermore, at period two the
loss-averse student-actor su↵ers goal disutility that depends linearly on how far the level of
task completion falls short of the goal set by the student-planner at period one: she su↵ers
goal disutility of    max{g a, 0}, where the loss parameter captures the strength of goal
           35
disutility. At period three performance is realized. Performance increases linearly in the level
of task completion: f (a) = ✓a, with ✓ > 0; while the student-beneficiary’s utility increases
one-to-one in performance.36 The present-biased student exhibits quasi-hyperbolic discounting
as described in Section 5.2.1. Thus the student-actor’s utility is given by:

                            uact (a|g) =        f (a)       [ max{g    a, 0} + C(a)]                           (5)
                                                        
                                                                              a2
                                        =       ✓a          max{g     a, 0} +     ;                            (6)
                                                                               2




   33
      Proposition SWA.4 in Supplementary Web Appendix III.3 focuses on the case in which uncertainty is not
too big. When the student faces a lot of uncertainty, the extra e↵ect could lead the student-planner to prefer not
to set a goal at all.
   34
      This scaling back of goals is not necessarily at odds with the fact that the performance-based goals that we
see in the data appear ambitious. First, the goal will appear ambitious relative to average achievement because,
as noted above, when performance turns out to be low the student fails to achieve her goal. Second, without any
scaling back the goals might have been even higher. Third, the overconfidence that we discuss above could keep
the scaled-back goal high. Fourth, we explain in Section 5.3.4 below that students likely report as their goal an
‘aspiration’ that is only relevant if, when the time comes to study, the cost of e↵ort turns out to be particularly
low: the actual cost-specific goal that the student aims to hit could be much lower than this aspiration.
   35
      As explained in footnote 29, we do not include any elation from exceeding the goal. We use new notation for
the parameter that measures the strength of goal disutility because the units used to measure the level of task
completion are di↵erent from the performance units in Section 5.2.1. Note also that goal disutility is incurred at
period two here because the student-actor observes how far she is from the task-based goal immediately when she
stops working on the task. For performance-based goals in Section 5.2.1 goal disutility is incurred at period three
when performance is realized.
   36
      Units of performance and units of task completion are both defined externally, and so we need to introduce
the parameter ✓ to model a linear relationship between them.


                                                        27
and, letting a⇤ (g) represent the student-actor’s optimal level of task completion given a goal g,
the student-planner’s utility is given by:

               uplan (g|a⇤ (g)) =           2
                                                f (a⇤ (g))        [ max{g    a⇤ (g), 0} + C(a⇤ (g))]           (7)
                                                              
                                                                                           [a⇤ (g)]2
                                    =       2
                                                ✓a⇤ (g)            max{g    a⇤ (g), 0} +                .      (8)
                                                                                               2

    When we solve the game by backward induction, we get results that are qualitatively similar
to those for performance-based goals in Section 5.2.1. The formal results and proofs are relegated
to Supplementary Web Appendix III.2. The three relevant thresholds now become:

                                    ✓                ✓                      ✓+
                         a=             ;   â =       > a;         a=            > a.                         (9)
                                                                          

    Mirroring Remark 1, in the absence of a goal the present-biased student exhibits a self-control
problem due to time inconsistency: the student-actor chooses a level of task completion a, which
is smaller than the student-planner’s desired level of task completion â. The upper bound on
student-actor task completion in the presence of a goal is given by a. Mirroring Proposition 1,
this upper bound increases as the time-inconsistency problem becomes less severe (higher )
and as the strength of goal disutility goes up. Mirroring Proposition 2, the optimal choice
of goal for the student-planner is given by g ⇤ = min{â, a} and the optimal goal induces a level
of task completion by the student-actor of a⇤ = g ⇤ > a; the optimal goal induces a higher
level of task completion than in the absence of a goal, and the student always achieves her goal
in equilibrium.37 The goal increases the level of task completion as well as improving course
performance.

5.3.2    Why were task-based goals e↵ective?

Our experimental data show that task-based goals improved task completion and course perfor-
mance (see Table 3 for the e↵ect on task completion and Table 5 for the e↵ect on course perfor-
mance).38 How might we account for these findings, given our analysis of why performance-based
goals might not be very e↵ective? In our view, an obvious answer is that with task-based goal
setting, the three factors that reduce the e↵ectiveness of performance-based goals (Section 5.2.2)
are of lesser importance or do not apply at all.

Timing of goal disutility

In the case of task-based goal setting, any goal disutility from failing to achieve the task-based
goal is su↵ered immediately when the student stops working on the task in period two. Thus,
unlike the case of performance-based goal setting discussed in Section 5.2.2, there is no temporal
   37
      When      ✓+         ✓, â  a, and so the student-planner achieves her desired level of task completion by
setting g ⇤ = â. Similarly to Proposition 2, this case holds when the time-inconsistency problem is not too severe
(high ) or the strength of goal disutility is sufficiently high.
   38
      It is possible that some students in the Control group (who were not invited to set goals) might already
use goals as a commitment device. However, since we find that task-based goals are successful at increasing
performance, we conclude that many students in the Control group did not use goals or set goals that were
not fully e↵ective. We note that asking students to set goals might make the usefulness of goal setting as a
commitment device more salient and so e↵ective. Reminding students of their goal, as we did, might also help to
make them more e↵ective.


                                                             28
distance that dampens the motivating e↵ect of the goal. Formally, in the expression for maximal
task completion in the presence of a goal, a, the parameter measuring the strength of goal
disutility, , is undiscounted (see (9)).

Overconfidence

As discussed in Section 5.2.2, overconfidence reduces the e↵ectiveness of goal setting. Recall
that an overconfident student acts as if the production function is given f (·), when in fact
performance is given by hf (·), which reduces the impact of goal setting on performance by the
proportion h. In the case of task-based goal setting, this e↵ect is mitigated if practice exams
direct students toward productive tasks: in that case h goes up. Plausibly, teachers have better
information about which tasks are likely to be productive, and asking students to set goals for
productive tasks is one way to improve the power of goal setting for overconfident students.
    Instead of improving the power of goal setting by directing overconfident students toward
productive tasks, it is conceivable that task-based goals improved performance via another
channel: signaling to students in the Treatment group that practice exams were an e↵ective
task. But we think this is highly unlikely. First, we were careful to make the practice exams as
salient as possible to the Control group. Second, students in the Control group in fact completed
many practice exams. Third, it is hard to understand why only men would respond to the signal.

Performance uncertainty

In Section 5.2.2, we introduced uncertainty about performance. It is straightforward to add per-
formance uncertainty into the simple model of task-based goal setting outlined in Section 5.3.1.
The formal details of the analysis are relegated to Supplementary Web Appendix III.3. The im-
portant point to note is that even with uncertainty about performance, the student continues to
achieve her task-based goal: there is no ‘task uncertainty’. The reason is that the student-actor
controls the number of units of the task that she completes and so can guarantee to hit her
task-based goal. Thus, unlike the case of performance-based goals with uncertainty, the student
has no reason to scale back her task-based goal to reduce goal disutility in the event that the
goal is not reached.

5.3.3    Why were task-based goals more e↵ective for men than for women?

Our data show that task-based goals are more e↵ective for men than for women. More specif-
ically: in the Control group without goal setting men completed fewer practice exams than
women (Table 4); and task-based goals increased performance and the number of practice ex-
ams completed more for men than for women (Tables 5 and 4 respectively). In the context of our
simple model of task-based goal setting (Section 5.3.1), one hypothesis that could explain this
finding is that the male students in our sample are more present biased than the female students
(i.e., the men have a lower parameter). Existing empirical evidence supports the idea that
men may have less self-control and be more present biased than women.39 Interestingly, in a
   39
      In the Introduction we referred to evidence from educational environments that females have more self-control
than males (e.g., Duckworth and Seligman, 2005, Buechel et al., 2014, and Duckworth et al., 2015). Consistent
with gender di↵erences in self-control, incentivized experiments suggest that men may be more present biased than
women. When the earliest payment is immediate (no ‘front-end delay’), which provides a test of quasi-hyperbolic


                                                        29
laboratory experiment in which goals were set by the experimenter rather than by the subjects
themselves, Smithers (2015) finds that goals increased the work performance of men but not
that of women.
    To understand the role of present bias, first note that the student-actor’s level of task com-
pletion in the absence of a goal a is increasing in : the more present biased the student, the
fewer practice exams he or she completes without a goal. Thus, if men are more present biased
than women, then their higher degree of present bias will push down their level of task comple-
tion in the Control group relative to that of women. Second, the increase in task completion
induced by goal setting also depends on the degree of present bias: in particular, the di↵erence
between the student-planner’s desired level of task completion â and the student-actor’s level
of task completion in the absence of a goal a is decreasing in . Thus, if men are more present
biased than women, then goal setting will tend to be more e↵ective at increasing the number of
practice exams that men complete, which in turn feeds into a larger e↵ect on performance.

5.3.4    Why were task-based goals not always achieved?

In the simple models outlined in Sections 5.2.1 and 5.3.1 goals are always achieved. In Sec-
tion 5.2.2 we explained how overconfidence and performance uncertainty can result in a student’s
failure to achieve her performance-based goal. A puzzle remains: even though task-based goals
are more frequently achieved than performance-based goals, task-based goals are not always
achieved (Table 2).
    Failure to achieve task-based goals emerges naturally if we relax the assumption that costs
are known with certainty. In particular, suppose that the student-actor’s cost parameter (c or
) can be high or low, and that the student-actor draws her cost parameter in period two before
she decides how hard to work (the analysis extends naturally to any number of possible cost
draws). For example, the cost uncertainty could be driven by uncertainty about the set of leisure
activities available to the student during the time that she planned to study. Anticipating this
cost uncertainty, we allow the student-planner to set a goal for both possible cost draws. The
optimal goal for a given cost draw is just as in the models in Sections 5.2.1 and 5.3.1 with no cost
uncertainty, and the student-actor always works hard enough to achieve the cost-specific goal.
Of course, we ask the student to report only one goal: we assume here that the student-planner
reports to us only her goal for the low-cost draw. This goal is like an aspiration: if the cost turns
out to be high, the goal is scaled down to reflect the higher cost. Because we as the experimenter
observe only the reported aspiration, when the cost is high we observe a failure to achieve the
reported aspiration, even though the student achieves her cost-specific goal.




discounting, McLeish and Oxoby (2007), Meier and Sprenger (2010) and Prince and Shawhan (2011) find that
men are more present biased than women, while Tanaka et al. (2010) find no gender di↵erence in present bias for
rural Vietnamese (in Meier and Sprenger, 2010, when controls that include endogenous behavioral measures are
included men remain more present biased than women, but the e↵ect is no longer statistically significant). When
rural Malawians are given an unexpected opportunity to reverse an earlier commitment, Giné et al. (forthcoming)
find that men are more likely to reverse their earlier choice and instead choose an earlier but smaller payment.
When the earliest payment is not immediate (‘front-end delay’), no gender di↵erences have been found (see Bauer
and Chytilová, 2013, for rural Indians and Harrison et al., 2005, where the earliest payment is delayed by a
month).


                                                      30
6        Conclusion
Our experimental findings suggest that task-based goal setting is an intervention that can im-
prove college outcomes: asking students to set goals for the number of practice exams to com-
plete increased the number of practice exams that students completed and increased course
performance. Further empirical analysis supports the most obvious explanation for this finding:
task-based goal setting induces greater task-specific investment, which in turn improves course
performance.
    This raises the question of how best to incorporate task-based goal setting into the college
environment. Academic advising services could be a particularly promising vehicle for promoting
the benefits of task-based goal setting. American colleges already o↵er a panoply of academic ad-
vising services to students. These include counselors and mentors, campus centers that students
can visit, and student success programs and courses that students are encouraged or required to
follow (e.g., as part of academic remediation activities). Students in receipt of these services are
often advised that goal setting is an essential study skill. For example, the college that provides
the course that we study has a “Teaching Center” that provides academic advising services to
students. These services include online resources that recommend that students implement five
“essential study strategies”, one of which is to “Set Goals”. Another example is CUNY’s Ac-
celerated Study in Associate Programs (ASAP), which encourages first-year students to attend
seminars that explicitly cover goal setting, alongside other study skills (Scrivener et al., 2015).40
    These academic advising services often present goal setting as one of many strategies that
students might try. Moreover, they do not prescribe the particular types of goals that students
should set.41 Our results suggest that advising services should consider giving greater promi-
nence to task-based goal setting. For example, advisors could encourage students to set goals for
the number of lectures that they will attend in a semester rather than the grade they will achieve
on a course. Advisors could also encourage students to set task-based goals in consultation with
course instructors, who have the information necessary to advise students on which tasks will
likely be most productive (e.g., reviewing lecture notes versus studying the course textbook).
    The most direct way to incorporate task-based goal setting into the college environment
would be for instructors to design courses that promote task-based goal setting. In a traditional
course format, an instructor could encourage students to set goals for particular tasks by de-
voting lecture time or a section of the syllabus to a discussion of study strategies. In a course
that required students to complete certain tasks online (e.g., homework assignments or class
discussion), the opportunity to set goals could be built into the technology used to deliver these
course components (similarly to the way that we built goal setting into the surveys that preceded
the online practice exams that students completed as part of the course that we studied). In a
fully online course, it would be especially easy to incorporate task-based goal setting into the
technology used to deliver course content. For example, students could be invited to set goals
for the number of end-of-module questions they will answer correctly before progressing to the
next module.

    40
     The ASAP have received a lot of attention for their large e↵ects on student retention (Scrivener et al., 2015).
    41
     For example, the online resources provided by the “Teaching Center” in the college that provides the course
that we study advise students to set goals that are Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Realistic and Timely
(SMART). There is no mention of whether goals should be performance- or task-based.


                                                        31
    This discussion suggests that task-based goal setting could easily be incorporated into the
college learning environment. Coupled with our analysis, this suggests that task-based goal
setting is a low-cost, scaleable and feasible intervention that could improve college outcomes.
This is a promising finding, and it suggests several lines of interesting future research. First, it
would be interesting to conduct similar experiments in other types of colleges. For example, our
subjects (who attend a four-year college) are likely more able than two-year college students (e.g.,
as reflected in SAT scores). If they also possess more self-control than these two-year college
students, then goal setting might be even more e↵ective at two-year colleges. Second, assuming
that our findings generalize across settings, it would be interesting to examine the e↵ects of self-
set goals for other tasks such as attending class, contributing to online discussions or working
through textbook chapters. This type of research could uncover important relationships between
task characteristics and the e↵ects of task-based goal-setting. For example, some tasks are
public (e.g., attending class, contributing to online discussion) whereas others are private (e.g.,
working through textbook chapters); it would be useful to discover whether public or private
tasks are more responsive to goal setting.42 A useful byproduct of this type of research is that
it can advance our knowledge of the production function for course performance. Specifically, if
task-based goal setting increases course performance only through the e↵ects of goal setting on
task-specific investments, then assignment to the goals treatment is an instrument that can be
used to identify the performance e↵ects of these investments. It would be interesting to compare
the causal e↵ects of di↵erent task-specific investments, such as attending class, working through
lecture notes and completing practice exams.43
    To summarize, we believe that our study marks an important step toward a better un-
derstanding of the role that self-set goals could play in motivating college students to work
harder and perform better. Research in psychology and economics provides reason to expect
that college students, like other agents in the economy, will lack self-control. Our results break
new ground by suggesting that self-set goals can act as an e↵ective commitment device that
helps college students to self-regulate behavior and mitigate these self-control problems. Specif-
ically, our empirical findings suggest that task-based goal setting could be an especially e↵ective
method of mitigating self-control problems and thereby improving college performance. Since
task-based goal setting could easily be incorporated into the college environment, our findings
have important implications for educational practice. As noted above, future research should
probe the e↵ects of task-based goal setting in other contexts and for other tasks.




   42
      On the one hand, we might expect the costs of failing to meet goals to be larger for public tasks (e.g., if
these are more salient to students). On the other hand, these costs may be lower if there is an “anti-nerd” class
culture.
   43
      There is already a small literature on the performance e↵ects of attending class. For example, Dobkin et al.
(2010) and Arulampalam et al. (2012) exploit quasi-experiments to estimate the e↵ects of attendance on college
course performance.


                                                       32
References
Akın, Z. and Karagözoğlu, E. (forthcoming). The role of goals and feedback in incentivizing
 performance. Managerial and Decision Economics
Allan, B.M. and Fryer, R.G. (2011). The power and pitfalls of education incentives. Policy
 Paper, Hamilton Project
Angrist, J., Lang, D., and Oreopoulos, P. (2009). Incentives and services for college achieve-
 ment: Evidence from a randomized trial. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
 1(1): 136–163
Angrist, J., Oreopoulos, P., and Williams, T. (2014). When opportunity knocks, who
 answers? New evidence on college achievement awards. Journal of Human Resources, 49(3):
 572–610
Ariely, D. and Wertenbroch, K. (2002). Procrastination, deadlines, and performance: Self-
 control by precommitment. Psychological Science, 13(3): 219–224
Arulampalam, W., Naylor, R.A., and Smith, J. (2012). Am I missing something? The
 e↵ects of absence from class on student performance. Economics of Education Review, 31(4):
 363–375
Ashraf, N., Karlan, D., and Yin, W. (2006). Tying Odysseus to the mast: Evidence from
 a commitment savings product in the Philippines. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2):
 635–672
Augenblick, N., Niederle, M., and Sprenger, C. (2015). Working over time: Dynamic
 inconsistency in real e↵ort tasks. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(3): 1067–1115
Barron, K.E. and Harackiewicz, J.M. (2003). Revisiting the benefits of performance-
 approach goals in the college classroom: Exploring the role of goals in advanced college
 courses. International Journal of Educational Research, 39(4): 357–374
Barrow, L., Richburg-Hayes, L., Rouse, C.E., and Brock, T. (2014). Paying for perfor-
 mance: The education impacts of a community college scholarship program for low-income
 adults. Journal of Labor Economics, 32(3): 563–599
Bauer, M. and Chytilová, J. (2013). Women, children and patience: Experimental evidence
 from Indian villages. Review of Development Economics, 17(4): 662–675
Bell, D.E. (1985). Disappointment in decision making under uncertainty. Operations Research,
 33(1): 1–27
Brunnermeier, M.K. and Parker, J.A. (2005). Optimal expectations. American Economic
 Review, 95(4): 1092–1118
Bryan, G., Karlan, D., and Nelson, S. (2010). Commitment devices. Annual Review of
 Economics, 2(1): 671–698
Buechel, B., Mechtenberg, L., and Petersen, J. (2014). Peer e↵ects and students’ self-
 control. SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2014-024, Humboldt University
Camerer, C. and Lovallo, D. (1999). Overconfidence and excess entry: An experimental
 approach. American Economic Review, 89(1): 306–318
Cameron, J. and Pierce, W.D. (1994). Reinforcement, reward, and intrinsic motivation: A
 meta-analysis. Review of Educational research, 64(3): 363–423
Castleman, B.L. (2014). The impact of partial and full merit scholarships on college entry
 and success: Evidence from the Florida Bright Futures Scholarship program. EdPolicyWorks
 Working Paper, University of Virginia
Cha, P. and Patel, R. (2010). Rewarding progress, reducing debt: Early results from
 Ohio’s performance-based scholarship demonstration for low-income parents. Technical Re-
 port, MDRC




                                             33
Chase, J.A., Houmanfar, R., Hayes, S.C., Ward, T.A., Vilardaga, J.P., and Follette,
  V. (2013). Values are not just goals: Online ACT-based values training adds to goal setting
  in improving undergraduate college student performance. Journal of Contextual Behavioral
  Science, 2(3): 79–84
Choi, J.J., Haisley, E., Kurkoski, J., and Massey, C. (2016). Small cues change savings
  choices. Mimeo, Yale University
Church, M.A., Elliot, A.J., and Gable, S.L. (2001). Perceptions of classroom environment,
  achievement goals, and achievement outcomes. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93(1):
  43–54
Cohodes, S.R. and Goodman, J.S. (2014). Merit aid, college quality, and college comple-
  tion: Massachusetts’ Adams scholarship as an in-kind subsidy. American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, 6(4): 251–285
Corgnet, B., Gómez-Miñambres, J., and Hernán-Gonzalez, R. (2015). Goal setting
  and monetary incentives: When large stakes are not enough. Management Science, 61(12):
  2926–2944
Corgnet, B., Gómez-Miñambres, J., and Hernán-Gonzalez, R. (2016). Goal setting
  in the principal-agent model: Weak incentives for strong performance. CEDEX Discussion
  Paper 2016-09, University of Nottingham
Cornwell, C.M., Lee, K.H., and Mustard, D.B. (2005). Student responses to merit schol-
  arship retention rules. Journal of Human Resources, 40(4): 895–917
Darnon, C., Butera, F., Mugny, G., Quiamzade, A., and Hulleman, C.S. (2009). Too
  complex for me! Why do performance-approach and performance-avoidance goals predict exam
  performance? European Journal of Psychology of Education, 24(4): 423–434
De Paola, M., Scoppa, V., and Nisticò, R. (2012). Monetary incentives and student achieve-
  ment in a depressed labor market: Results from a randomized experiment. Journal of Human
  Capital, 6(1): 56–85
DellaVigna, S.D. and Malmendier, U. (2006). Paying not to go to the gym. American
  Economic Review, 96(3): 694–719
Dhami, S. (2016). The Foundations of Behavioral Economic Analysis. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
  versity Press
Diamond, P. and Kőszegi, B. (2003). Quasi-hyperbolic discounting and retirement. Journal
  of Public Economics, 87(9): 1839–1872
Dobkin, C., Gil, R., and Marion, J. (2010). Skipping class in college and exam performance:
  Evidence from a regression discontinuity classroom experiment. Economics of Education
  Review, 29(4): 566–575
Duckworth, A.L., Quinn, P.D., and Tsukayama, E. (2012). What No Child Left Behind
  leaves behind: The roles of IQ and self-control in predicting standardized achievement test
  scores and report card grades. Journal of Educational Psychology, 104(2): 439–451
Duckworth, A.L. and Seligman, M.E. (2005). Self-discipline outdoes IQ in predicting aca-
  demic performance of adolescents. Psychological Science, 16(12): 939–944
Duckworth, A.L., Shulman, E.P., Mastronarde, A.J., Patrick, S.D., Zhang, J., and
  Druckman, J. (2015). Will not want: Self-control rather than motivation explains the female
  advantage in report card grades. Learning and Individual Di↵erences, 39: 13–23
Dynarski, S. (2008). Building the stock of college-educated labor. Journal of Human Resources,
  43(3): 576–610
Elliot, A.J. and McGregor, H.A. (2001). A 2⇥ 2 achievement goal framework. Journal of
  Personality and Social Psychology, 80(3): 501–519
Fang, H. and Silverman, D. (2009). Time-inconsistency and welfare program participation:
  Evidence from the NLSY. International Economic Review, 50(4): 1043–1077
Firpo, S., Fortin, N.M., and Lemieux, T. (2009). Unconditional quantile regressions. Econo-
  metrica, 77(3): 953–973


                                             34
Fryer, R.G. (2011). Financial incentives and student achievement: Evidence from randomized
  trials. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4): 1755–1798
Fryer, R.G. (2013). Information and student achievement: Evidence from a cellular phone
  experiment. Working Paper 19113, NBER
Genesove, D. and Mayer, C. (2001). Loss aversion and seller behavior: Evidence from the
  housing market. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4): 1233–1260
Gill, D. and Prowse, V. (2012). A structural analysis of disappointment aversion in a real
  e↵ort competition. American Economic Review, 102(1): 469–503
Gill, D. and Stone, R. (2010). Fairness and desert in tournaments. Games and Economic
  Behavior, 69(2): 346–364
Giné, X., Goldberg, J., Silverman, D., and Yang, D. (forthcoming). Revising commit-
  ments: Field evidence on the adjustment of prior choices. Economic Journal
Gneezy, U., Meier, S., and Rey-Biel, P. (2011). When and why incentives (don’t) work to
  modify behavior. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(4): 191–209
Goerg, S.J. (2015). Goal setting and worker motivation. IZA World of Labor, 178: 1–10
Goerg, S.J. and Kube, S. (2012). Goals (th) at work–goals, monetary incentives, and workers’f
  performance. Preprint 2012/19, Max Planck Institute for Research on Collective Goods
Gossner, O. and Steiner, J. (2016). Optimal illusion of control and related perception biases.
  Discussion Paper 11478, CEPR
Gri↵ee, D.T. and Templin, S.A. (1997). Goal setting a↵ects task performance. In Proceedings
  of the JALT 1997 International Conference on Language Teaching and Learning, 21–26
Gruber, J. and Kőszegi, B. (2001). Is addiction rational? Tprdicheory and evidence. Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 116(4): 1261–1303
Harackiewicz, J.M., Barron, K.E., Carter, S.M., Lehto, A.T., and Elliot, A.J. (1997).
  Predictors and consequences of achievement goals in the college classroom: Maintaining in-
  terest and making the grade. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73(6): 1284–1295
Harding, M. and Hsiaw, A. (2014). Goal setting and energy conservation. Journal of Eco-
  nomic Behavior & Organization, 107: 209–227
Harrison, G.W., Lau, M.I., and Rutström, E.E. (2005). Dynamic consistency in Denmark:
  A longitudinal field experiment. Economics Working Paper 05-02, University of Central
  Florida
Heath, C., Larrick, R.P., and Wu, G. (1999). Goals as reference points. Cognitive Psychol-
  ogy, 38(1): 79–109
Henry, G.T., Rubenstein, R., and Bugler, D.T. (2004). Is HOPE enough? Impacts of
  receiving and losing merit-based financial aid. Educational Policy, 18(5): 686–709
Hsiaw, A. (2013). Goal-setting and self-control. Journal of Economic Theory, 148(2): 601–626
Hsiaw, A. (2016). Goal bracketing and self-control. Mimeo, Brandeis University
Hsieh, P., Sullivan, J.R., and Guerra, N.S. (2007). A closer look at college students:
  Self-efficacy and goal orientation. Journal of Advanced Academics, 18(3): 454–476
Jain, S. (2009). Self-control and optimal goals: A theoretical analysis. Marketing Science,
  28(6): 1027–1045
Johnson, D.D. and Fowler, J.H. (2011). The evolution of overconfidence. Nature, 477(7364):
  317–320
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J.L., and Thaler, R.H. (1990). Experimental tests of the endow-
  ment e↵ect and the Coase theorem. Journal of Political Economy, 98(6): 1325–1348
Kahneman, D. and Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk.
  Econometrica, 47(2): 263–291
Kőszegi, B. and Rabin, M. (2006). A model of reference-dependent preferences. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 121(4): 1133–1165
Khwaja, A., Silverman, D., and Sloan, F. (2007). Time preference, time discounting, and
  smoking decisions. Journal of Health Economics, 26(5): 927–949


                                             35
Koch, A.K. and Nafziger, J. (2011). Self-regulation through goal setting. Scandinavian
  Journal of Economics, 113(1): 212–227
Koch, A.K. and Nafziger, J. (2016). Goals and bracketing under mental accounting. Journal
  of Economic Theory, 162: 305–351
Laibson, D. (1997). Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  112(2): 443–477
LaPorte, R.E. and Nath, R. (1976). Role of performance goals in prose learning. Journal of
  Educational Psychology, 68(3): 260–264
Latham, G.P. and Brown, T.C. (2006). The e↵ect of learning vs. outcome goals on self-
  efficacy, satisfaction and performance in an MBA program. Applied Psychology, 55(4): 606–
  623
Latham, G.P. and Pinder, C.C. (2005). Work motivation theory and research at the dawn
  of the twenty-first century. Annual Review of Psychology, 56(1): 485–516
Lavecchia, A.M., Liu, H., and Oreopoulos, P. (2016). Behavioral economics of education:
  Progress and possibilities. In E.A. Hanushek, S. Machin, and L. Woessman, editors, Handbook
  of the Economics of Education, Vol. 5, 1–74. North Holland
Leuven, E., Oosterbeek, H., and van der Klaauw, B. (2010). The e↵ect of financial
  rewards on students’ achievement: Evidence from a randomized experiment. Journal of the
  European Economic Association, 8(6): 1243–1265
Linnenbrink-Garcia, L., Tyson, D.F., and Patall, E.A. (2008). When are achievement
  goal orientations beneficial for academic achievement? A closer look at main e↵ects and
  moderating factors. Revue Internationale de Psychologie Sociale, 21(1): 19–70
Locke, E.A. (1968). Toward a theory of task motivation and incentives. Organizational Be-
  havior and Human Performance, 3(2): 157–189
Locke, E.A. and Latham, G.P. (2002). Building a practically useful theory of goal setting
  and task motivation: A 35-year odyssey. American Psychologist, 57(9): 705–717
Locke, E.A., Shaw, K.N., Saari, L.M., and Latham, G.P. (1981). Goal setting and task
  performance: 1969–1980. Psychological Bulletin, 90(1): 125–152
McLeish, K.N. and Oxoby, R.J. (2007). Gender, a↵ect and intertemporal consistency: An
  experimental approach. Discussion Paper 2663, IZA
Meier, S. and Sprenger, C. (2010). Present-biased preferences and credit card borrowing.
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(1): 193–210
Mento, A.J., Steel, R.P., and Karren, R.J. (1987). A meta-analytic study of the e↵ects of
  goal setting on task performance: 1966–1984. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
  Processes, 39(1): 52–83
Miller, C., Binder, M., Harris, V., and Krause, K. (2011). Staying on track: Early findings
  from a performance-based scholarship program at the university of New Mexico. Technical
  Report, MDRC
Morgan, M. (1987). Self-monitoring and goal setting in private study. Contemporary Educa-
  tional Psychology, 12(1): 1–6
Morisano, D., Hirsh, J.B., Peterson, J.B., Pihl, R.O., and Shore, B.M. (2010). Setting,
  elaborating, and reflecting on personal goals improves academic performance. Journal of
  Applied Psychology, 95(2): 255–264
Park, Y.J. and Santos-Pinto, L. (2010). Overconfidence in tournaments: Evidence from the
  field. Theory and Decision, 69(1): 143–166
Patel, R. and Rudd, T. (2012). Can scholarships alone help students succeed? Lessons from
  two New York City community colleges. Technical Report, MDRC
Patterson, R.W. (2016). Can behavioral tools improve online student outcomes? Experimen-
  tal evidence from a massive open online course. Mimeo, United States Military Academy at
  West Point
Pollak, R.A. (1968). Consistent planning. Review of Economic Studies, 35(2): 201–208


                                             36
Prince, J.T. and Shawhan, D.L. (2011). Is time inconsistency primarily a male problem?
  Applied Economics Letters, 18(6): 501–504
Rabin, M. (2000). Risk aversion and expected-utility theory: A calibration theorem. Econo-
  metrica, 68(5): 1281–1292
Romer, D. (1993). Do students go to class? Should they? Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  7(3): 167–174
Schunk, D.H. (1983). Developing children’s self-efficacy and skills: The roles of social com-
  parative information and goal setting. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 8(1): 76–86
Schunk, D.H. (1984). Enhancing self-efficacy and achievement through rewards and goals:
  Motivational and informational e↵ects. Journal of Educational Research, 78(1): 29–34
Schunk, D.H. (1996). Goal and self-evaluative influences during children’s cognitive skill
  learning. American Educational Research Journal, 33(2): 359–382
Schunk, D.H. and Ertmer, P.A. (1999). Self-regulatory processes during computer skill
  acquisition: Goal and self-evaluative influences. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91(2):
  251–260
Schunk, D.H. and Rice, J.M. (1991). Learning goals and progress feedback during reading
  comprehension instruction. Journal of Literacy Research, 23(3): 351–364
Schunk, D.H. and Swartz, C.W. (1993). Goals and progress feedback: E↵ects on self-efficacy
  and writing achievement. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 18(3): 337–354
Schutz, P.A. and Lanehart, S.L. (1994). Long-term educational goals, subgoals, learning
  strategies use and the academic performance of college students. Learning and Individual
  Di↵erences, 6(4): 399–412
Scott-Clayton, J. (2011). On money and motivation: A quasi-experimental analysis of finan-
  cial incentives for college achievement. Journal of Human Resources, 46(3): 614–646
Scrivener, S., Weiss, M.J., Ratledge, A., Rudd, T., Sommo, C., and Fresques, H.
  (2015). Doubling graduation rates: Three-year e↵ects of CUNY’s Accelerated Study in Asso-
  ciate Programs (ASAP) for developmental education students. Technical Report, MDRC
Shih, S.S. and Alexander, J.M. (2000). Interacting e↵ects of goal setting and self- or other-
  referenced feedback on children’s development of self-efficacy and cognitive skill within the
  Taiwanese classroom. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92(3): 536–543
Smithers, S. (2015). Goals, motivation and gender. Economics Letters, 131: 75–77
Strotz, R.H. (1956). Myopia and inconsistency in dynamic utility maximization. Review of
  Economic Studies, 23(3): 165–180
Suvorov, A. and Van de Ven, J. (2008). Goal setting as a self-regulation mechanism. Working
  Paper 122, CEFIR NES
Tanaka, T., Camerer, C.F., and Nguyen, Q. (2010). Risk and time preferences: Linking
  experimental and household survey data from Vietnam. American Economic Review, 100(1):
  557–571
Thaler, R.H. and Benartzi, S. (2004). Save more tomorrowT M : Using behavioral economics
  to increase employee saving. Journal of Political Economy, 112(S1): S164–S187
Weinstein, N.D. (1980). Unrealistic optimism about future life events. Journal of Personality
  and Social Psychology, 39(5): 806–820
Wertenbroch, K. (1998). Consumption self-control by rationing purchase quantities of virtue
  and vice. Marketing Science, 17(4): 317–337
Wu, G., Heath, C., and Larrick, R. (2008). A prospect theory model of goal behavior.
  Mimeo, University of Chicago
Zimmerman, B.J. and Bandura, A. (1994). Impact of self-regulatory influences on writing
  course attainment. American Educational Research Journal, 31(4): 845–862




                                              37
Supplementary Web Appendix

    (Intended for Online Publication)
Supplementary Web Appendix I                                   Tables




                                                 Mean value                       Treatment-Control di↵erence
                                      Treatment group    Control group             Di↵erence  S.E. p-value

                Age                         0.005               -0.005               0.010      0.032    0.764
               Male                         0.477                0.455               0.022      0.016    0.171
               Black                        0.064                0.051               0.012      0.007    0.091
        Non-Hispanic white                  0.604                0.619              -0.015      0.015    0.328
             Hispanic                       0.193                0.192               0.000      0.013    0.984
               Asian                        0.102                0.092               0.009      0.009    0.328
            SAT score                       0.001               -0.001               0.002      0.032    0.945
         High school GPA                   -0.016                0.016              -0.032      0.032    0.320
    Advanced placement credit               0.759                0.756               0.003      0.014    0.800
           Fall semester                    0.620                0.607               0.012      0.015    0.435
         First login time                  -0.004                0.004              -0.007      0.032    0.820


Notes: The Treatment and Control groups contain 1,979 and 1,992 students respectively. Information about age,
gender, race, SAT scores, high school GPA and advanced placement credit was obtained from the university’s
Registrar data. Age is measured on the first of the month in which the semester began and is rounded down to
the nearest whole month. The variable SAT score is the sum of the student’s scores on the verbal, analytic and
numerical components of the primary aptitude test in the Registrar data (these are SAT scores for the majority of
students). Advanced placement credit is an indicator for the student having entered the university with advanced
placement credit. Fall semester is an indicator for the student having participated in the course in the Fall
semester. First login time is the elapsed time between when the first email invitation to take the syllabus quiz
was sent and when the student first logged into the course webpage. Each of the non-binary characteristics (age,
SAT score, high School GPA and first login time) has been standardized to have a mean of zero and a variance
of one within the Fall 2013 and Spring 2014 semesters combined (the performance-based goals experiment) and
within the Fall 2014 and Spring 2015 semesters combined (the task-based goals experiment). The standardization
of SAT score is stratified to ensure that this variable has the same mean and the same variance among students
taking each type of aptitude test. S.E. is the standard error of the di↵erence between the characteristic mean
in the Treatment group and the characteristic mean in the Control group and is obtained assuming independent
samples with equal variances. p-value is the two-sided p-value for the null hypothesis that the magnitude of the
di↵erence between the characteristic mean in the Treatment group and the characteristic mean in the Control
group is zero. The joint significance of the characteristics is tested using a -squared test based on the results of
a probit regression of an indicator for treatment on an intercept and the eleven characteristics listed in this table:
the p-value for the joint null hypothesis that none of the eleven characteristics predicts treatment is 0.636.
                    Table SWA.1: Characteristics of students across all semesters




                                    Supplementary Web Appendix, p. 1
                                                Mean value                     Treatment-Control di↵erence
                                     Treatment group    Control group           Di↵erence  S.E. p-value

                Age                        0.007              -0.007               0.014     0.045    0.761
               Male                        0.491               0.457               0.035     0.023    0.124
               Black                       0.069               0.047               0.022     0.011    0.037
        Non-Hispanic white                 0.628               0.644              -0.016     0.022    0.464
             Hispanic                      0.175               0.175               0.000     0.017    0.999
               Asian                       0.094               0.085               0.009     0.013    0.482
            SAT score                     -0.048               0.050              -0.098     0.045    0.030
         High school GPA                  -0.044               0.045              -0.089     0.045    0.049
    Advanced placement credit              0.762               0.770              -0.008     0.019    0.686
           Fall semester                   0.575               0.591              -0.016     0.022    0.482
         First login time                 -0.003               0.004              -0.007     0.045    0.876


Notes: The Treatment and Control groups contain 995 and 972 students respectively. The p-value for the joint null
hypothesis that none of the eleven characteristics predicts treatment is 0.153. Also see the notes to Table SWA.1.

         Table SWA.2: Characteristics of students in Fall 2013 & Spring 2014 semesters
                           (performance-based goals experiment)




                                                Mean value                     Treatment-Control di↵erence
                                     Treatment group    Control group           Di↵erence  S.E. p-value

                Age                        0.003               -0.003              0.005     0.045    0.903
               Male                       0.462                0.454               0.008     0.022    0.704
               Black                       0.058                0.055              0.003     0.010    0.769
        Non-Hispanic white                 0.579               0.595              -0.016     0.022    0.472
             Hispanic                     0.210                0.209               0.002     0.018    0.932
               Asian                      0.109                0.099               0.010     0.014    0.476
            SAT score                     0.051               -0.049               0.101     0.045    0.024
         High school GPA                  0.013               -0.012               0.025     0.045    0.579
    Advanced placement credit              0.756                0.742              0.014     0.019    0.472
           Fall semester                   0.665               0.624               0.041     0.021    0.055
         First login time                 -0.004                0.004             -0.007     0.045    0.868


Notes: The Treatment and Control groups contain 984 and 1,020 students respectively. The p-value for the
joint null hypothesis that none of the eleven characteristics predicts treatment is 0.471. Also see the notes to
Table SWA.1.
         Table SWA.3: Characteristics of students in Fall 2014 & Spring 2015 semesters
                               (task-based goals experiment)




                                   Supplementary Web Appendix, p. 2
                            Panel I: All students in the task-based goals experiment

                                                  Total points score      Pr(Grade       A–)   Pr(Grade B+)
                                                   OLS      Median             OLS                  OLS

        E↵ect of asking students to set            0.743     0.924⇤            0.042⇤               0.043⇤
               task-based goals                   (0.474)    (0.475)           (0.022)              (0.022)
                                                  [0.117]    [0.052]           [0.057]              [0.052]

        E↵ect / (SD in Control group)              0.068      0.085            0.086                0.087

Mean of dependent variable in Control group       83.111     83.111            0.393                0.493

                 Observations                      2,004      2,004            2,004                2,004


                          Panel II: Male students in the task-based goals experiment

                                                  Total points score      Pr(Grade       A–)   Pr(Grade B+)
                                                   OLS      Median             OLS                  OLS

        E↵ect of asking students to set           1.581⇤⇤    1.700⇤⇤           0.093⇤⇤⇤             0.058⇤
               task-based goals                   (0.706)    (0.674)           (0.033)              (0.033)
                                                  [0.025]    [0.012]           [0.005]              [0.078]

        E↵ect / (SD in Control group)              0.141      0.151            0.189                0.115

 Mean of dependent variable in Control group      83.285     83.285            0.417                0.529

                 Observations                      918        918               918                  918


                         Panel III: Female students in the task-based goals experiment

                                                  Total points score      Pr(Grade       A–)   Pr(Grade B+)
                                                   OLS      Median             OLS                  OLS

        E↵ect of asking students to set            0.017      0.471            -0.003               0.030
               task-based goals                   (0.637)    (0.652)           (0.029)              (0.030)
                                                  [0.979]    [0.470]           [0.921]              [0.320]

        E↵ect / (SD in Control group)              0.002      0.045            -0.006               0.060

 Mean of dependent variable in Control group      82.966     82.966            0.373                0.463

                 Observations                      1,086      1,086            1,086                1,086


Notes: The regressions are the same as those reported in Table 5, except that we no longer include controls for
student characteristics. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are shown in round brackets and two-sided
p-values are shown in square brackets. ⇤ , ⇤⇤ and ⇤⇤⇤ denote, respectively, significance at the 10%, 5% and 1%
levels (two-sided tests).
Table SWA.4: E↵ects of task-based goals on student performance without controls for student
                                      characteristics




                                  Supplementary Web Appendix, p. 3
                       Panel I: All students in the performance-based goals experiment

                                                  Total points score     Pr(Grade       A–)   Pr(Grade B+)
                                                   OLS     Median             OLS                  OLS

        E↵ect of asking students to set           -0.237    -0.360            -0.020               -0.022
          performance-based goals                 (0.458)   (0.494)           (0.022)              (0.023)
                                                  [0.605]   [0.466]           [0.360]              [0.339]

        E↵ect / (SD in Control group)             -0.022    -0.034            -0.041               -0.043

 Mean of dependent variable in Control group      83.220    83.220            0.389                0.498

                 Observations                     1,967      1,967            1,967                1,967


                      Panel II: Male students in the performance-based goals experiment

                                                  Total points score     Pr(Grade       A–)   Pr(Grade B+)
                                                   OLS     Median             OLS                  OLS

        E↵ect of asking students to set           -0.223     0.041            -0.015               0.002
          performance-based goals                 (0.672)   (0.665)           (0.032)              (0.033)
                                                  [0.740]   [0.951]           [0.649]              [0.951]

        E↵ect / (SD in Control group)             -0.021     0.004            -0.030               0.004

 Mean of dependent variable in Control group      83.644    83.644            0.403                0.511

                 Observations                      933        933              933                  933


                     Panel III: Female students in the performance-based goals experiment

                                                  Total points score     Pr(Grade       A–)   Pr(Grade B+)
                                                   OLS     Median             OLS                  OLS

        E↵ect of asking students to set           -0.304    -0.810            -0.027               -0.046
          performance-based goals                 (0.625)   (0.689)           (0.030)              (0.031)
                                                  [0.626]   [0.240]           [0.365]              [0.138]

        E↵ect / (SD in Control group)             -0.029    -0.076            -0.056               -0.092

 Mean of dependent variable in Control group      82.864    82.864            0.377                0.487

                 Observations                     1,034      1,034            1,034                1,034


Notes: The regressions are the same as those reported in Table 7, except that we no longer include controls for
student characteristics. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are shown in round brackets and two-sided
p-values are shown in square brackets. ⇤ , ⇤⇤ and ⇤⇤⇤ denote, respectively, significance at the 10%, 5% and 1%
levels (two-sided tests).
Table SWA.5: E↵ects of performance-based goals on student performance without controls for
                                 student characteristics




                                  Supplementary Web Appendix, p. 4
Supplementary Web Appendix II                    Figures


              Component         Points available Points scored     Answer key
              Syllabus Quiz            2               2              N/A
         Start-Of-Course Survey        2               2              N/A
                  Quiz 1               3               2           Answer Key
                  Quiz 2               3               3           Answer Key
                  Quiz 3               3               2           Answer Key
                  Quiz 4               3               2           Answer Key
                  Quiz 5               3
                  Quiz 6               3
                  Quiz 7               3
                  Quiz 8               3
                  Quiz 9               3
                 Quiz 10               3

              Best Midterm              30
               Midterm 1
               Midterm 2

               Final Exam               34

         End-Of-Course-Survey            2

             Total Points              100               13


                   Grade Key

                   Total Points Scored (out of 100) Letter Grade
                             91 and above                 A
                                90 to 88                 A-
                                87 to 86                 B+
                                85 to 81                  B
                                80 to 78                 B-
                                77 to 76                 C+
                                75 to 70                  C
                                69 to 66                  D
                             65 and below                 E



 Figure SWA.1: Example gradecard for a student in the Control group (Fall 2013 semester)




                            Supplementary Web Appendix, p. 5
Consent Form for Cornell University Research Team Study on Course Performance

Before you start the survey, I want to tell you about a “Cornell University Research Team” that is
conducting research to evaluate which factors contribute to good performance on this course.

Research Method
The team will use:
- Survey responses.
- Grades from this course.
- Information held by the [University name] registrar (e.g., admissions data, demographic information).

Confidentiality
- All the information will be made anonymous.
- This means that your name will never be seen by the Cornell University Research Team and will not be
associated with the findings.

What you will be asked to do in this study
Nothing.

Risks
There are no risks to you.

Right to withdraw from the study
You have the right to withdraw from the study at any time during the semester. If you withdraw there
will be no consequences for you; your academic standing, record, or relationship with the university will
not be a↵ected. Details of how to withdraw are available from the course webpage.

Who to contact if you have questions about the study:
Cornell Research Team: [curt@cornell.edu]
Full contact details are available from the course webpage.

Who to contact about your rights as a participant in this study:
Cornell Institutional Review Board, Ithaca NY. Email: irbhp@cornell.edu, phone: 607-255-5138; website:
www.irb.cornell.edu. Concerns/complaints can also be anonymously reported through Ethicspoint (web:
www.hotline.cornell.edu, phone (toll-free): 1-866-293-3077). Full contact details are available from the
course webpage.

The Cornell University Research Team would be very grateful if you’d be willing to consent
to your data being used in this study. Remember that your name will never be seen by the Research
Team and there is nothing you need to do. (If you choose not to consent, you will still receive [1%][2%]
towards your score for this course from completing the survey).



                      Yes, I consent                            No, I don’t consent



                                   Figure SWA.2: Consent form




                               Supplementary Web Appendix, p. 6
                    Please set a goal for your grade in this course.

                       Think carefully before setting your goal.

  The professor and the TA will not see your goal. However, each time you get your
  quiz, midterm and final scores back, your gradecard will remind you of your goal.

                            My goal for this course is:

                                    A
                                    A
                                    B+
                                    B
                                    B
                                    C+
                                    C
                                    D
                                    E
                                    Prefer not to say


  Figure SWA.3: Fall 2013 semester goal-setting question in start-of-course survey




Please set a goal for your score in the [Midterm 1][Midterm 2][Final] Exam.

Think carefully before setting your goal.

The professor and the TA will not see your goal. However, each time you get your quiz,
midterm and final exam scores back, your gradecard will remind you of your goal.

My goal for my score in the [Midterm 1][Midterm 2][Final] Exam is:


                                        out of [30][30][34]

                                     Prefer not to say




  Figure SWA.4: Spring 2014 semester goal-setting question in mid-course surveys




                         Supplementary Web Appendix, p. 7
 The goal that you set for this course is: X
                (You set your goal in the start-of-course survey)

       Component         Points available Points scored         Answer key
       Syllabus Quiz             2               2                 N/A
  Start-Of-Course Survey         2               2                 N/A
           Quiz 1                3               2              Answer Key
           Quiz 2                3               3              Answer Key
           Quiz 3                3               2              Answer Key
             ...                ...             ...                 ...

        Figure SWA.5: Fall 2013 semester goal reminder on gradecard




     Component            Points available Points scored   Answer key
          ...                    ...             ...           ...
          ...                    ...             ...           ...
          ...                    ...             ...           ...
     Best Midterm                30             24
      Midterm 1                                 22       Your goal(*): X
      Midterm 2                                 24       Your goal(*): Y

      Final Exam                  34                         Your goal(*): Z

End-Of-Course-Survey               1

     Total Points                100                 41
* You set this goal as part of a Mid-Course Survey

             Grade Key

                Total Points Scored (out of 100) Letter Grade
                          91 and above                 A
                               ...                     ...


       Figure SWA.6: Spring 2014 semester goal reminder on gradecard




                      Supplementary Web Appendix, p. 8
 {Treated and control students}

 Practice Exams

 There will be 5 practice exams for the [Midterm 1][Midterm 2][Final] Exam. Each practice
 exam will contain the same number of questions as the [Midterm 1][Midterm 2][Final] Exam.


 The practice exams for the [Midterm 1][Midterm 2][Final] Exam will become active when
 Mid-Course Survey [1][2][3] closes. You will receive a reminder email at that time.


 {Treated students only}

 Question 6

 Please set a goal for the number of practice exams that you will complete out of the 5 practice
 exams for the [Midterm 1][Midterm 2][Final] Exam.

 Think carefully before setting your goal.

 The professor and the TA will not see your goal. However, when you take the practice exams
 you will be reminded of your goal.

 My goal is to complete

                out of the 5 practice exams for the [Midterm 1][Midterm 2][Final] Exam

              Prefer not to say




Figure SWA.7: Fall 2014 & Spring 2015 semesters practice exams information and goal-setting
                              question in mid-course surveys




                             Supplementary Web Appendix, p. 9
       Dear Econ2023 Students,

       The 5 practice exams for the [Midterm 1][Midterm 2][Final] Exam are now active.

       {Treated students only} Your goal is to complete X out of the 5 practice exams
       (you set this goal as part of Mid-Course Survey [1][2][3]).

       To go to the practice exams, please go to the course webpage and follow the link.

       Note that you will not receive any further reminders about the practice exams for
       the [Midterm 1][Midterm 2][Final] Exam and the practice exams will close when the
       [Midterm 1][Midterm 2][Final] Exam begins.

       This is an automated email from the ECO 2023 system.


       Figure SWA.8: Fall 2014 & Spring 2015 semesters practice exams reminder email




                 Practice Exams for the [Midterm 1][Midterm 2][Final] Exam

 You have completed X out of the 5 practice exams for the [Midterm 1][Midterm 2][Final]
                                        Exam

{Treated students only} Your goal is to complete Z out of the 5 practice exams
             (you set this goal as part of Mid-course Survey [1][2][3]).

 Instructions:
   •   To take one of the practice exams, click on the link below.
   •   You can only take each practice exam once.
   •   There is no time limit.
   •   After answering each question, you will be given the correct answer.
   •   This will be your only opportunity to see the correct answer.
   •   You will not be able to go back to previous questions.


                                       Practice Exam X+1



  Figure SWA.9: Fall 2014 & Spring 2015 semesters practice exams introductory screen




                             Supplementary Web Appendix, p. 10
            Practice Exam X for the [Midterm 1][Midterm 2][Final] Exam

                         Your score was Y out of [30][30][34]

            You have now completed X out of the 5 practice exams for the
                       [Midterm 1][Midterm 2][Final] Exam

{Treated students only} Your goal is to complete Z out of the 5 practice exams
             (you set this goal as part of Mid-course Survey [1][2][3]).


                            Return To Practice Exams Screen



   Figure SWA.10: Fall 2014 & Spring 2015 semesters practice exams feedback screen




                        Supplementary Web Appendix, p. 11
Supplementary Web Appendix III                             Formal results and proofs
Supplementary Web Appendix III.1                  Proofs for Section 5.2.1
Proof of Remark 1.
    In the absence of a goal, the student-actor’s utility and the student-planner’s utility are given
by, respectively:

                                   uact (e) =      f (e) C(e)                                   (10)
                                                         ce2
                                            =      e         ;                                  (11)
                                                          2
                                                   2
                                 uplan (e) =         f (e)     C(e)                             (12)
                                                   2        ce2
                                            =          e          .                             (13)
                                                            2

Both utilities are strictly concave since c > 0. Straightforward maximization then gives the
result.

Proof of Proposition 1.
  Using (2), on the range e 2 [0, g]:

                                    @uact
                                            =  (1 + l) ce;                                      (14)
                                       @e
                                   @ 2 uact
                                            = c < 0; and so                                     (15)
                                     @e2
                                          ⇤
                                         e = min {e, g} .                                       (16)

   Using (2), on the range e 2 [g, 1):

                                    @uact
                                            =     ce;                                           (17)
                                       @e
                                   @ 2 uact
                                            = c < 0; and so                                     (18)
                                     @e2
                                          ⇤
                                         e = max {e, g} .                                       (19)

   (i) When g  e, on the range e 2 [0, g], e⇤ = g, and on the range e 2 [g, 1), e⇤ = e. Thus,
on the range e 2 [0, 1), e⇤ = e.
   (ii) When g 2 [e, e], on the range e 2 [0, g], e⇤ = g, and on the range e 2 [g, 1), e⇤ = g.
Thus, on the range e 2 [0, 1), e⇤ = g.
   (iii) When g e, on the range e 2 [0, g], e⇤ = e, and on the range e 2 [g, 1), e⇤ = g. Thus,
on the range e 2 [0, 1), e⇤ = e.

Proof of Proposition 2.
  On the range g 2 [0, e], e⇤ (g) = e from Proposition 1, and so @e⇤ /@g = 0 and
max{g e⇤ (g), 0} = 0. Using (4), duplan /dg = 0 and so any g 2 [0, e] is optimal (including e).
  On the range g 2 [e, e], e⇤ (g) = g from Proposition 1, and so @e⇤ /@g = 1 and




                              Supplementary Web Appendix, p. 12
max{g    e⇤ (g), 0} = 0. Using (4), and noting that ê > e and e > e:

                                 duplan        2
                                           =           cg;                                   (20)
                                    dg
                                d2 uplan
                                           =     c < 0; and so                               (21)
                                  dg 2
                                       g ⇤ = min{ê, e} > e.                                 (22)

   On the range g 2 [e, 1), e⇤ (g) = e from Proposition 1, and so @e⇤ /@g = 0 and
max{g e⇤ (g), 0} = g e. Using (4), duplan /dg =        2 l < 0 and so g ⇤ = e.

                                         ⇤
   Stitching the ranges together gives g = min{ê, e} > e. Parts (ii) and (iii) follow, given that
e < ê , (1 + l) < 1. Finally, (iv) follows immediately from Proposition 1.




                             Supplementary Web Appendix, p. 13
Supplementary Web Appendix III.2                  Results and proofs for Section 5.3.1
Remark SWA.1
In the absence of a goal the student exhibits time inconsistency:
(i) The student-actor chooses a level of task completion a = ✓/.
(ii) The student-planner would like the student-actor to choose a level of task completion â =
 ✓/ > a.

Proof of Remark SWA.1.
    In the absence of a goal, the student-actor’s utility and the student-planner’s utility are given
by, respectively:

                                  uact (a) =      f (a)    C(a)                                 (23)
                                                          a2
                                            =     ✓a          ;                                 (24)
                                                           2
                                                  2
                                 uplan (a) =        f (a)       C(a)                            (25)
                                                  2         a2
                                            =         ✓a          .                             (26)
                                                             2

Both utilities are strictly concave since  > 0. Straightforward maximization then gives the
result.



Proposition SWA.1
Let a = ( ✓ + )/ and recall from Remark SWA.1 that a = ✓/ < a denotes the student-
actor’s level of task completion in the absence of a goal.
(i) When g  a, the student-actor chooses a level of task completion a⇤ = a.
(ii) When g 2 [a, a], the student-actor chooses a level of task completion a⇤ = g.
(iii) When g a, the student-actor chooses a level of task completion a⇤ = a.

Proof of Proposition SWA.1.
  Using (6), on the range a 2 [0, g]:

                                    @uact
                                            =  ✓+        a;                                    (27)
                                      @a
                                   @ 2 uact
                                            =  < 0; and so                                     (28)
                                     @a2
                                          ⇤
                                         a = min {a, g} .                                       (29)

   Using (6), on the range a 2 [g, 1):

                                    @uact
                                            =  ✓ a;                                            (30)
                                      @a
                                   @ 2 uact
                                            =  < 0; and so                                     (31)
                                     @a2
                                          ⇤
                                         a = max {a, g} .                                       (32)

   (i) When g  a, on the range a 2 [0, g], a⇤ = g, and on the range a 2 [g, 1), a⇤ = a. Thus,
on the range a 2 [0, 1), a⇤ = a.

                              Supplementary Web Appendix, p. 14
   (ii) When g 2 [a, a], on the range a 2 [0, g], a⇤ = g, and on the range a 2 [g, 1), a⇤ = g.
Thus, on the range a 2 [0, 1), a⇤ = g.
   (iii) When g a, on the range a 2 [0, g], a⇤ = a, and on the range a 2 [g, 1), a⇤ = g. Thus,
on the range a 2 [0, 1), a⇤ = a.



Proposition SWA.2
Recall from Remark SWA.1 that a =         ✓/ and â = ✓/ denote, respectively, student-actor
task completion and student-planner desired task completion in the absence of a goal.
Recall from Proposition SWA.1 that a = ( ✓ + )/ denotes maximal student-actor task com-
pletion in the presence of a goal.
(i) The optimal choice of goal for the student-planner is given by g ⇤ = min{â, a}.
(ii) When ✓ + < ✓, g ⇤ = a.
(iii) When ✓ +          ✓, g ⇤ = â.
(iv) Student-actor task completion a⇤ = g ⇤ > a, and so the level of task completion is higher
than in the absence of goal.

Proof of Proposition SWA.2.
  On the range g 2 [0, a], a⇤ (g) = a from Proposition SWA.1, and so @a⇤ /@g = 0 and
max{g a⇤ (g), 0} = 0. Using (8), duplan /dg = 0 and so any g 2 [0, a] is optimal (including a).
  On the range g 2 [a, a], a⇤ (g) = g from Proposition SWA.1, and so @a⇤ /@g = 1 and
max{g a⇤ (g), 0} = 0. Using (8), and noting that â > a and a > a:

                                  duplan        2
                                            =     ✓      g;                                   (33)
                                     dg
                                 d2 uplan
                                            =       < 0; and so                               (34)
                                   dg 2
                                        g ⇤ = min{â, a} > a.                                  (35)

   On the range g 2 [a, 1), a⇤ (g) = a from Proposition SWA.1, and so @a⇤ /@g = 0 and
max{g a⇤ (g), 0} = g a. Using (8), duplan /dg =            < 0 and so g ⇤ = a.
   Stitching the ranges together gives g ⇤ = min{â, a} > a. Parts (ii) and (iii) follow, given that
a < â , ✓ + < ✓. Finally, (iv) follows immediately from Proposition SWA.1




                              Supplementary Web Appendix, p. 15
Supplementary Web Appendix III.3                              Performance uncertainty
Supplementary Web Appendix III.3, Part A: Task-based goals (Section 5.3.2)

For task-based goals, when we add uncertainty as described in the third part of Section 5.3.2
the student-actor’s utility (given by (5) and (6) with no uncertainty) and the student-planner’s
utility (given by (7) and (8) with no uncertainty) become, respectively:

                  Euact (a|g) =             [⇡f (a) + (1 ⇡)(0)] [ max{g a, 0} + C(a)]                          (36)
                                                   
                                                                    a2
                                   =        ⇡✓a       max{g a, 0} +     ;                                      (37)
                                                                     2
  Euplan (g|a⇤ (g)) =         [⇡f (a⇤ (g)) + (1 ⇡)(0)]
                               2
                                                            [ max{g a⇤ (g), 0} + C(a⇤ (g))] (38)
                                            
                                                                  [a⇤ (g)]2
                      =    2
                             ⇡✓a⇤ (g)          max{g a⇤ (g), 0} +            .              (39)
                                                                      2

    Comparing (37) and (39) to (6) and (8) without uncertainty, the only di↵erence is that every
✓ in the case without uncertainty has been replaced by ⇡✓. Since ✓ 2 (0, 1) and ⇡✓ 2 (0, 1),
the results for task-based goals without uncertainty described in Supplementary Web Appendix
III.2 continue to hold with uncertainty, replacing every ✓ with ⇡✓.



Supplementary Web Appendix III.3, Part B: Performance-based goals (Section 5.2.2)

For performance-based goals, when we add uncertainty as described in the third part of Sec-
tion 5.2.2 the student-actor’s utility (given by (1) and (2) with no uncertainty) and the student-
planner’s utility (given by (3) and (4) with no uncertainty) become, respectively:

    Euact (e|g) =          {⇡[f (e)         l max{g      f (e), 0}] + (1  ⇡)[0 l max{g           0, 0}]}   C(e) (40)
                                                                            ce2
                     =     {⇡[e         l max{g      e, 0}]   (1    ⇡)lg}       ;                              (41)
                                                                             2
  Euplan (g|e⇤ (g)) =
      2
          {⇡[f (e⇤ (g))   l max{g          f (e⇤ (g)), 0}] + (1    ⇡)[0    l max{g     0, 0}]}       C(e⇤ (g)) (42)
                                                                                           c[e⇤ (g)]2
                      =    2
                               {⇡[e⇤ (g)      l max{g     e⇤ (g), 0}]     (1   ⇡)lg}                  .        (43)
                                                                                               2

Remark SWA.2
In the absence of a goal the student exhibits time inconsistency:
(i) The student-actor chooses e↵ort e = ⇡/c.
(ii) The student-planner would like the student-actor to exert e↵ort ê = ⇡/c > e.




                                       Supplementary Web Appendix, p. 16
Proof of Remark SWA.2.
    In the absence of a goal, the student-actor’s utility and the student-planner’s utility are given
by, respectively:

                         Euact (e) =       [⇡f (e) + (1 ⇡)(0)] C(e)                             (44)
                                                  ce2
                                     =     ⇡e         ;                                         (45)
                                                   2
                                           2
                        Euplan (e) =         [⇡f (e) + (1 ⇡)(0)]  C(e)                          (46)
                                           2         ce2
                                     =         ⇡e          .                                    (47)
                                                      2

Both utilities are strictly concave since c > 0. Straigthforward maximization then gives the
result.



Proposition SWA.3
Let e = ⇡(1 + l)/c and recall from Remark SWA.2 that e =              ⇡/c < e denotes the student-
actor’s e↵ort in the absence of a goal.
(i) When g  e, the student-actor exerts e↵ort e⇤ = e.
(ii) When g 2 [e, e], the student-actor exerts e↵ort e⇤ = g.
(iii) When g e, the student-actor exerts e↵ort e⇤ = e.

Proof of Proposition SWA.3.
  Using (41), on the range e 2 [0, g]:

                                   @Euact
                                             =  ⇡(1 + l) ce;                                    (48)
                                       @e
                                  @ 2 Euact
                                             = c < 0; and so                                    (49)
                                     @e2
                                           ⇤
                                          e = min {e, g} .                                      (50)

   Using (41), on the range e 2 [g, 1):

                                   @Euact
                                             =  ⇡ ce;                                           (51)
                                       @e
                                  @ 2 Euact
                                             = c < 0; and so                                    (52)
                                     @e2
                                           ⇤
                                          e = max {e, g} .                                      (53)

   (i) When g  e, on the range e 2 [0, g], e⇤ = g, and on the range e 2 [g, 1), e⇤ = e. Thus,
on the range e 2 [0, 1), e⇤ = e.
   (ii) When g 2 [e, e], on the range e 2 [0, g], e⇤ = g, and on the range e 2 [g, 1), e⇤ = g.
Thus, on the range e 2 [0, 1), e⇤ = g.
   (iii) When g e, on the range e 2 [0, g], e⇤ = e, and on the range e 2 [g, 1), e⇤ = g. Thus,
on the range e 2 [0, 1), e⇤ = e.




                              Supplementary Web Appendix, p. 17
Proposition SWA.4
Recall from Remark SWA.2 that e = ⇡/c denotes student-actor e↵ort in the absence of a goal.
Recall from Proposition SWA.3 that e = ⇡(1 + l)/c denotes maximal student-actor e↵ort in
the presence of a goal.
Let ẽ = [ ⇡   (1 ⇡)l]/c and recall from Remark SWA.2 that ê = ⇡/c > ẽ denotes the student-
planner’s desired e↵ort in the absence of a goal.
There exists a ⇡ 2 (0, 1) such that for all ⇡ 2 [⇡, 1):
(i) The optimal choice of goal for the student-planner is given by g ⇤ = min{ẽ, e}.
(ii) When (1 + l) + l(1 ⇡)/⇡ < 1, g ⇤ = e.
(iii) When (1 + l) + l(1 ⇡)/⇡ 1, g ⇤ = ẽ.
(iv) E↵ort of the student-actor e⇤ = g ⇤ > e, and so the student-actor works harder than in the
absence of goal.

Proof of Proposition SWA.4.
   On the range g 2 [0, e], e⇤ (g) = e from Proposition SWA.3, and so @e⇤ /@g = 0 and
max{g e⇤ (g), 0} = 0. Using (43), dEuplan /dg =         2 (1 ⇡)l < 0 and so g ⇤ = 0. Note also
that lim⇡!1 (dEuplan /dg) = 0, and so:

                              lim [Euplan (g = e)   Euplan (g = 0)] = 0.                      (54)
                              ⇡!1

  On the range g 2 [e, e], e⇤ (g) = g from Proposition SWA.3, and so @e⇤ /@g = 1 and
max{g e⇤ (g), 0} = 0. Using (43), and noting that e > e:

                               dEuplan        2
                                          =     [⇡ (1 ⇡)l]          cg;                       (55)
                                  dg
                              d2 Euplan
                                          =      c < 0; and so                                (56)
                                 dg 2
                                      g ⇤ = min{max{ẽ, e}, e}.                               (57)

Note also that lim⇡!1 (ẽ e) > 0 and lim⇡!1 (e e) > 0. Thus, on the range g 2 [e, e],
g ⇤ = min{ẽ, e} > e for ⇡ sufficiently close to 1.
    When ⇡ = 1, from the proof of Proposition 2, g ⇤ = min{ê, e} gives the student-planner
strictly more utility than g = e. Furthermore, lim⇡!1 (55) = (20), lim⇡!1 ẽ = ê|⇡=1 , lim⇡!1 e =
e|⇡=1 and lim⇡!1 e = e|⇡=1 . Thus:

                        lim [Euplan (g = min{ẽ, e})    Euplan (g = e)] > 0.                  (58)
                        ⇡!1

    On the range g 2 [e, 1), e⇤ (g) = e from Proposition SWA.3, and so @e⇤ /@g = 0 and
max{g e⇤ (g), 0} = g e. Using (43), dEuplan /dg =              2 l < 0 and so g ⇤ = e.

    Stitching the ranges together, and using (54) and (58), there exists a ⇡ 2 (0, 1) such that
g ⇤ = min{ẽ, e} > e for all ⇡ 2 [⇡, 1). Parts (ii) and (iii) follow, given that e < ẽ , (1 + l) +
l(1 ⇡)/⇡ < 1. Finally, (iv) follows immediately from Proposition SWA.3.




                               Supplementary Web Appendix, p. 18
