                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         TAX AUDITS AS SCARECROWS:
                EVIDENCE FROM A LARGE-SCALE FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                      Marcelo L. Bérgolo
                                         Rodrigo Ceni
                                       Guillermo Cruces
                                      Matias Giaccobasso
                                     Ricardo Perez-Truglia

                                      Working Paper 23631
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23631


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 2017, Revised January 2020

We thank the Uruguay’s national tax administration (Dirección General Impositiva) for their
collaboration. We thank Gustavo Gonzalez for his support, without which this research would not
have been possible. We thank Joel Slemrod for his valuable feedback, as well as that of seminar
participants at University of Berkeley, University of Michigan, University of California San
Diego, Dartmouth University, Universidad Di Tella, Universidad de la Republica, Universidad de
Santiago de Chile, Universidad Católica de Chile, UADE, Corporación Andina de Fomento
(Buenos Aires), Banco Central del Uruguay, LACEA 2017, the 2017 NBER Public Economics
Fall Meeting, the 2017 RIDGE Public Economics Conference, the 2017 Zurich Center for
Economic Development Conference, the 2017 Advances with Field Experiments Conference, the
2018 PacDev Conference, the 2018 AEA Annual Meetings, the 2018 LAGV Conference, the
2018 IIPF Annual Congress, the 2019 LACEA BRAIN Conference and the 2019 National Tax
Association meeting. This project benefited from funding by CEF, CEDLAS-UNLP and IDRC.
The AEA RCT registration number is AEARCTR-0004593. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Marcelo L. Bérgolo, Rodrigo Ceni, Guillermo Cruces, Matias Giaccobasso, and
Ricardo Perez-Truglia. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Tax Audits as Scarecrows: Evidence from a Large-Scale Field Experiment
Marcelo L. Bérgolo, Rodrigo Ceni, Guillermo Cruces, Matias Giaccobasso, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia
NBER Working Paper No. 23631
July 2017, Revised January 2020
JEL No. C93,H26,K42

                                         ABSTRACT

The canonical model of Allingham and Sandmo (1972) predicts that firms evade taxes by
optimally trading off between the costs and benefits of evasion. However, there is no direct
evidence that firms react to audits in this way. We conducted a large-scale field experiment in
collaboration with Uruguay’s tax authority to address this question. We sent letters to 20,440
small- and medium-sized firms that collectively paid more than 200 million dollars in taxes per
year. Our letters provided exogenous yet nondeceptive signals about key inputs for their evasion
decisions, such as audit probabilities and penalty rates. We measured the effect of these signals
on their subsequent perceptions about the auditing process, based on survey data, as well as on
the actual taxes paid, based on administrative data. We find that providing information about
audits had a significant effect on tax compliance but in a manner that was inconsistent with
Allingham and Sandmo (1972). Our findings are consistent with an alternative model, risk-as-
feelings, in which messages about audits generate fear and induce probability neglect. According
to this model, audits may deter tax evasion in the same way that scarecrows frighten off birds.


Marcelo L. Bérgolo                              Matias Giaccobasso
Instituto de Economia (IECON)                   Anderson School of Management - UCLA
Universidad de La Republica                     110 Westwood Plaza, C 3.10
1926 Gonzalo Ramirez                            Los Angeles, CA 90077
Montevideo, Uruguay                             mgiaccobasso@ad.ucla.edu
mbergolo@iecon.ccee.edu.uy
                                                Ricardo Perez-Truglia
Rodrigo Ceni                                    Anderson School of Management
Instituto de Economia (IECON)                   University of California, Los Angeles
Universidad de La Republica                     110 Westwood Plaza
1375 Joaquin Requena                            Los Angeles, CA 90095
Montevideo, Uruguay                             and NBER
rceni@iecon.ccee.edu.uy                         ricardo.truglia@anderson.ucla.edu

Guillermo Cruces
CEDLAS
Univesidad Nacional de La Plata
Calle 6 entre 47 y 48
La Plata, Argentina
gcruces@cedlas.org



An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23631
1       Introduction
Tax audits have been standard tools of most tax administrations throughout history. Audits
increase tax revenues directly, because firms caught evading must pay taxes on the hidden
income and corresponding penalties. However, with the exception of large taxpayers, these
direct revenues are insufficient to make audits cost-effective. Audits play a central role in
the deterrence paradigm of tax evasion: the threat of being audited in the future, of being
caught evading and having to pay penalties deters firms from evading taxes in the present.
    Audits may be useful to foster tax compliance, but there is no direct evidence on how firms
react to them. The Allingham and Sandmo (1972) model (hereafter, A&S ) is the canonical
model of tax evasion in economics. This model is an application of Becker (1968), in which
selfish individuals choose whether to engage in criminal activities based on the trade-off
between expected costs and benefits. In A&S, firms choose the optimal amount of income to
hide from the tax authority so that the marginal benefits (i.e., the lower tax burden) equal
the marginal costs (i.e., the penalties if caught). Whether firms in the real world react to
audits in a calculated manner, as in A&S, is still a source of debate (Alm et al., 1992; Dhami
and al Nowaihi, 2007; Luttmer and Singhal, 2014; Slemrod, 2018). In this study, we provide
direct tests of the A&S model based on a high-stakes, large-scale field experiment.
    We study a context in which taxpayers should care about the threat of being audited:
small- and medium-sized firms in Uruguay that are subject to the Value Added Tax (VAT).
Tax agencies can sometimes use third-party reporting to automatically detect and rectify tax
evasion regardless of whether the taxpayer is audited or not, thus making the audit threat
irrelevant. For instance, the U.S. Internal Revenues Service uses their electronic records
to compare the wage amount reported by an individual to the amount reported by the
individual’s employer. This algorithm automatically rectifies the discrepancies in reporting
and sends a notification to the taxpayer with the updated tax amount to be paid. Because the
evasion will be caught through the third-party reporting regardless of whether the individual
is audited or not, taxpayers should not care about the threat of being audited in such a
context (Kleven et al., 2011). On the contrary, in our context of VAT in a developing country,
such automatic cross-checking and rectification does not exist. The VAT paper trail, which
consists of non-electronic invoices, can only be scrutinized in the event of an audit.1 Thus,
tax authorities must still rely heavily on the threat of audits to discourage VAT evasion
(Gomez-Sabaini and Jimenez, 2012; Bergman and Nevarez, 2006).

    1
     While the VAT requires a paper trail, which is a form of third-party reporting, this paper trail is subject
to significant limitations. Most important, there is no simple algorithm to detect tax evasion automatically.
Second, the paper trail breaks down when reaching the consumer (Naritomi, 2019). Third, firms can also
collude with each other to tamper with the paper trail (Pomeranz, 2015).

                                                       2
    We collaborated with Uruguay’s Internal Revenue Service (from hereon, referred to as
IRS) to conduct a natural field experiment with a sample of 20,440 small- and medium-
sized firms that are subject to the VAT. For our study, the IRS mailed four different types
of letters with information about audits to the owners of each of these firms.2 Some of the
information contained in each of these letters was randomly assigned, with the goal of testing
predictions of A&S. Using IRS administrative records, we measured the subsequent effects
of the information contained in the letters on the firms’ compliance with the VAT and other
tax liabilities in the following year. Additionally, we collaborated with the IRS to conduct
a post-mailing survey to capture the effect of this information on these firms’ subsequent
perceptions about audits.
    The first part of the experimental design, following the seminal work by Slemrod et al.
(2001), measures how informing taxpayers about tax enforcement affects their tax com-
pliance. Firms were randomized into four different letter types: baseline, audit-statistics,
audit-endogeneity, and public-goods. The baseline letter type included brief and generic tax
information that the IRS often includes in its communications with firms. The audit-statistics
letter type was identical to the baseline letter, with additional information about the prob-
ability of being audited and the penalty rate, based on tax administration statistics. The
relevant hypothesis is that adding the audit-statistics message to the baseline letter will de-
ter tax evasion and thus increase post-treatment tax payments. We also can compare the
effects of this audit-statistics message with the effects of other types of messages. The audit-
endogeneity letter provides information about a different feature of the auditing process.
The audit-endogeneity letter was identical to the baseline letter, with an additional message
about how evading taxes increases the probability of being audited. The last letter type was
designed to provide a benchmark for a message that might increase tax compliance but does
not involve tax audits. The public-goods letter was identical to the baseline letter, with an
additional message describing the social costs from evasion: a set of public goods that could
be provided if tax evasion was lower.
    The first part of the results show that, consistent with Slemrod et al. (2001) and the
subsequent literature, informing firms about tax enforcement increases their tax compliance.
We find that adding the audit-statistics message to the baseline letter increases tax payments
by about 6.3%. This effect is economically large: the estimated average VAT evasion rate in
Uruguay is 26% (Gomez-Sabaini and Jimenez, 2012), meaning that the 6.3% increase equates
to a 24% reduction in VAT evasion. This effect also is highly statistically significant and
robust to a number of checks, such as alternative specifications and event-study falsification

   2
     Throughout the paper, for simplicity, we refer to firms’ perceptions and behavior as a shorthand for
firms’ owners or managers perceptions and behavior.

                                                   3
tests. The other message related to audits, audit-endogeneity, also significantly increased tax
compliance by about 7.4%. This effect is statistically indistinguishable from the 6.3% effect
of the audit-statistics message and robust. In comparison, the public-goods message had a
smaller effect (4.3%) and was statistically insignificant in the main specification. Its effect
was even smaller in magnitude, and statistically insignificant, in the alternative specifications.
    The main goal of this experiment was not to demonstrate that firms react to information
about audits but to understand why they react. More precisely, the second and most im-
portant part of the experimental design tests the hypothesis that firms react to information
about audits as predicted by A&S. We provide two tests of A&S. The first exploits survey
data on perceptions about audits. If the audit-statistics letter increased average compliance,
to be consistent with A&S, it must be true that this message increased the perceived proba-
bility of being audited or the perceived penalty rate. To test this hypothesis, we designed a
survey, to be sent months after the firms received the audit-statistics and audit-endogeneity
letters, which elicited perceptions about the probability of being audited and the penalty
rate.
    The second test of A&S is based on heterogeneity in the signals provided in the letters.
We included exogenous, non-deceptive variation in the information about audit probabilities
and penalty rates in the audit-statistics letter. To generate this information, we computed
the average probabilities and penalty rates using a series of random samples of 50 firms.
This sample size was small enough to introduce non-trivial sampling variation in the average
probabilities and fines shown to the subjects. That is, a given firm could receive a letter
saying that the audit probability is 8%, 10%, or 15%, depending on the sample of similar
firms chosen for that particular letter. These random variations in probabilities and penalties
shown to the firms allow us to test whether, as predicted by A&S, firms evade less when they
face higher audit probabilities and higher penalty rates.
    As a complement to the audit-statistics treatment arm, we designed a separate treatment
arm that created exogenous variation in expected audit probabilities in a more direct way.
The audit-threat letter type was sent to a separate sample of firms that were pre-selected
by the IRS for auditing. We randomly divided this set of firms into two groups, one with
a 25% probability of being audited and the other with a 50% probability. The audit-threat
letter informed firms of the audit probability that was assigned to them. Again, we can test
whether, as predicted by A&S, firms evade less when they face a higher audit probability.
    The second part of the results suggests that the effects of the audit-statistics letter are not
consistent with A&S. The results for the first test, based on the survey data, indicate that
the audit-statistics message reduced the perceived probability of being audited. According
to A&S, a reduction in the perceived probability of being audited should have reduced tax


                                                4
compliance. On the contrary, we find that the audit-statistics message increased average
compliance.
    The second test shows that, contrary to the A&S prediction, the effect of the audit-
statistics message does not change with the signals of audit probability and penalty rates
included in the letter. The estimated elasticity of tax compliance, with respect to audit
probabilities and penalty rates, is close to zero and precisely estimated. We find qualitatively
and quantitatively similar effects between the audit-statistics and audit-threat treatment
arms. Moreover, we compare our experimental estimates to the results from calibrations
of A&S. We reject the null hypothesis of A&S, even under conservative assumptions about
how much firms learned from the audit-statistics message. These results suggest probability
neglect – i.e., that firms react to similarly to the threat of being audited regardless of the
actual probability of that happening or the penalties involved.3
    In sum, we find that informing firms about tax audits increased their tax compliance
but this reaction to the information was inconsistent with the optimal reaction predicted by
A&S. On average firms reduced, rather than increased, their perceived probability of being
audited. And firms did not react more when facing a higher probability of being audited or
a higher penalty rate. These results suggest that firms may comply with taxes because of
the threat of being audited but not necessarily in the optimal fashion of A&S.
    This leaves open the question of which alternative model best explains the firms’ reactions
to audits. Models of salience (Chetty et al., 2009) and prospect theory (Kahneman and
Tversky, 1979) can explain some but not all findings. Instead, our preferred interpretation
is based on the model of risk-as-feelings (Loewenstein et al., 2001). The models used for
choice under risk are typically cognitive; that is, people make decisions using some type of
expectation-based calculus. The risk-as-feelings model proposes that responses to fearsome
situations may differ substantially from cognitive evaluations of the same risks. When fear
is involved, the responses to risks are quick, automatic, and intuitive and thus neglect the
underlying probabilities (Sunstein, 2003; Zeckhauser and Sunstein, 2010). This model of
risk-as-feelings can reconcile all of our key findings. Moreover, we present anecdotal and
survey evidence indicating that fear of being audited does indeed play a significant role in
tax compliance. We also discuss policy implications for increasing tax capacity.
    Our study relates to various strands of literature. First, it belongs to a recent but growing
literature that uses field experiments in partnership with tax authorities to study the decisions
of individuals to pay taxes. In a seminal contribution, Slemrod et al. (2001) showed that, for a
   3
     We offer an additional test of A&S, which exploits heterogeneity by prior beliefs. According to A&S,
the compliance effect of a given signal about audit probability should depend on the firm’s prior belief about
that probability. We test this hypothesis using a proxy for the prior belief based on the firms’ pre-treatment
exposure to audits. The results from this test are also suggestive of probability neglect.

                                                      5
sample of U.S. self-employed individuals, those who were randomly assigned to receive a letter
from the Minnesota Department of Revenue with an enforcement message reported higher
income in their tax returns. Similar messages about tax enforcement have been shown to have
positive effects on tax compliance in other contexts (for recent reviews, see Pomeranz and
Vila-Belda, 2018; Slemrod, 2018; Alm, 2019).4 One standard interpretation in this literature
is that taxpayers react to the information about tax enforcement tools and, in line with A&S,
reduce their evasion to re-optimize their behavior. However, there is no direct evidence in
favor or against this interpretation. Our contribution is to fill this gap in the literature.
    This paper is closely related to a group of studies testing the predictions of A&S in a
laboratory setting. For example, Alm et al. (1992) conducted a laboratory experiment in
which undergraduate students play a tax evasion game. Subjects can hide income from the
experimenter, but some subjects are randomly selected to be audited and, if caught evading,
must pay a penalty. The authors show that tax compliance in the game increases significantly
with audit and penalty rates, but these effects are economically small and smaller than those
predicted by optimizing behavior in the context of A&S. The laboratory experiment setting
of Alm et al. (1992) and similar studies have several advantages, such as full control over
the rules of the game and freedom in the selection of the model parameters. However,
these laboratory experiments have two main limitations. First, the subjects are typically
undergraduate students playing the tax game for the first time and with no prior experience
paying taxes in the real world. In contrast, subjects in our field experiment are experienced
firm owners who have been registered with the tax agency, and thus paying taxes, for an
average of 15 years. Second, subjects from laboratory experiments typically pay taxes in
the game amounting to less than USD 10. In contrast, subjects in our field experiment paid
on average USD 11,800 per year, which is in the same order of magnitude as the country’s
GDP per capita.5 We contribute to this literature in two ways. First, we show that A&S
does not fare substantially better in a natural context with experienced subjects and high
stakes. Second, we show that audit threats may still be useful for the tax agency even if the
individuals do not react optimally to them.
    Our findings also contribute to the more general debate about the determinants of tax
compliance. One of the main puzzles in the literature is that evasion rates seem too low,
given the low detection probabilities and penalty rates, especially among smaller firms and
self-employed individuals (Luttmer and Singhal, 2014). One traditional explanation for this

   4
      The following are some examples: Slemrod et al. (2001); Kleven et al. (2011); Fellner et al. (2013);
Pomeranz (2015); Castro and Scartascini (2015); Dwenger et al. (2016); Perez-Truglia and Troiano (2018).
    5
      More specifically, in the 12 months before our experiment firms in our sample paid an average of USD
7,770 in VAT and USD 4,070 in other taxes. In comparison, the GDP per capita in Uruguay was about USD
15,000 in 2015.

                                                    6
puzzle is based on tax morale: firms and individuals do not evade taxes because they feel
morally obliged to comply (Luttmer and Singhal, 2014). Our evidence suggests an alternative
explanation for the puzzle: due to the emotional nature of the decision, taxpayers overreact to
the threat of audits. In other words, audits may scare taxpayers into compliance in the same
way that scarecrows scare birds. Indeed, this interpretation can provide an explanation for
the paradox that, despite the low audit probabilities and penalty rates, most taxpayers report
the threat of audits to be a major reason why they report their taxable income truthfully
(United States Internal Revenue Service, 2018).
    Last, our study is also part of a recent but growing literature on behavioral biases among
firms (DellaVigna and Gentzkow, 2017). We document two sources of profit-maximizing
frictions. First, the fact that firm owners have biased beliefs about audit probabilities suggests
the presence of information frictions. Second, the findings of probability neglect and the
possibility of over-reaction to audits suggest the present of optimization frictions.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the experimental design. Section 3
presents the data sources and discusses the implementation of the field experiment. Section
4 presents the results on the average effect of the audit-statistics message, and Section 5
presents the two tests of A&S. Section 6 discusses the interpretation of the findings. The
final section concludes.


2     Experimental Design
Our experiment consisted of a mailing campaign from Uruguay’s IRS with multiple treatment
arms and sub-treatments. Rather than comparing firms that received a letter to firms that
did not, all of our analyses are based on comparisons between firms that received letters with
subtle variations in their content. We can thus control for the potential effects of simply
receiving a letter from the tax authority, which might induce compliance on its own – for
instance, as a reminder to pay taxes.
    The letters consisted of a single sheet of paper with the name of the recipient in the
header, the official letterhead of the IRS, and the scanned signature of the IRS General
Director. These letters were folded, sealed in an envelope with the official letterhead of
the IRS on the outside, and sent by certified mail, which guarantees direct delivery to the
recipient, who must sign upon receipt.




                                                7
2.1     Baseline Letter
The first type of letter is the baseline letter, a sample of which is provided in Appendix
A.1. The baseline letter contained some information about the goals and responsibilities of
the tax authority, which the IRS routinely includes in its communications with firms. It
explained that the individual was randomly selected to receive this information, that the
letter was for information purposes only, and that there was no need to reply or to provide
any documentation to the IRS. The letters in the other treatment arms included the same
text as in the baseline letter, but also included an additional paragraph, printed in a larger
type size and in boldface.


2.2     Audit-Statistics Letter
In the audit-statistics letter type, we added a paragraph to the baseline letter that provided
information about the audit probabilities and tax evasion penalty rates. According to the
Allingham and Sandmo (1972) model, we expect risk-averse firms to be interested in this
information, because it helps them optimize their evasion decisions and potentially increase
their bottom line.6 Furthermore, these figures should be particularly valuable in a context
where information about audits is limited. For instance, it is easy to find online data about
factors potentially relevant for firms’ decision-making, such as prices, inflation and exchange
rates. However, information about tax audit probabilities (and, to a lesser extent, actual
penalties paid by evading firms) is much harder to come by. Tax authorities seem to prefer
to conceal this information.
    Appendix A.2 presents a sample of the audit-statistics letter type. The additional para-
graph included information about audit probabilities (p) and penalty rates (θ) for a random
sample of firms that were similar to the recipient, as follows:

       “On the basis of historical information on similar businesses, there is a probability
       of [p%]that the tax returns you filed for this year will be audited in at least one
       of the coming three years. If, pursuant to that auditing, it is determined that tax
       evasion has occurred, you will be required to pay not only the amount previously
       unpaid, but also a fee of approximately [θ%] of that amount.”

Note that we communicated the probability that firms will be audited in at least one of the
three following years, because IRS experts stated that this was the relevant probability for
firms’ decision-making. Uruguay’s tax law indicates that tax audits should cover the previous
   6
    We assume that firms in our sample are risk averse, which is plausible since we deal mainly with small
and medium firms. However, A&S has been generalized to settings with risk-neutral agents (Reinganum and
Wilde, 1985; Srinivasan, 1973).

                                                    8
three years of tax returns and, as a result, the probability that the current year’s tax report
will be audited is roughly equal to the probability that the firm will be audited at least once
over the following three years.
    In our sample, the average value of p is 11.7%, and the average value of θ is 30.6%.
Tax agencies in most countries do not publish data on the values of p and θ, which makes
it difficult to compare the Uruguayan case to other contexts. In the United States, for
which some comparable data are available, these two parameters are on the same order of
magnitude: self-employed individuals face a p of 11.42% and a base θ of 20%.7
    The goal of this treatment arm was to generate exogenous variation in the firms’ per-
ceptions about audit probabilities and penalty rates. Because of legal considerations and
other constraints, we could not assign different firms to different sets of information about
these factors. We instead induced non-deceptive, exogenous variation in messages that may
affect these perceptions by exploiting the sampling variation in statistics about audits and
penalties.
    More specifically, we divided the firms into five groups of “similar firms,” corresponding
to the five quintiles of total VAT payments in the fiscal year before our intervention. For each
firm, we then drew a random sample of 50 other firms from the same quintile (i.e., similar
firms), from which we computed the averages of p and θ. This randomization strategy gen-
erated 940 different combinations of p and θ. These estimates of p and θ were unbiased and
consistent with the explanation given in a footnote that we included in the letter, thus infor-
mation provided to recipients was nondeceptive. The footnote explained how we estimated
the values of p and θ:

       “Estimates are based on data from the 2011–2013 period for a group of firms with
       similar characteristics, for instance, in terms of total revenue. The probability
       of being audited was calculated as a percentage of audited firms in a random
       sub-sample of firms. The rate of the fee was estimated as an average of a random
       sub-sample of audits.”

The values of p ranged from 2% to 25%, with an average of about 11.7%. The values of
θ ranged from 15% to 68%, with an average of about 30.6%. Figure 1 presents the audit
probability and penalty size distribution across five groups by firm size (one in each row) and
the distribution of the generated within-group (i.e., VAT payment quintiles) parameters. The

   7
     First, there is an annual probability of being audited of 2.1%, according to the ratio of returns examined
for businesses with no income tax credit and with a reported income between USD 25,000 and 200,000 (Table
9a of IRS, 2014). Each audit covers the previous 3 to 6 years, which implies that the the probability that
the current year’s tax filing will be eventually audited ranges from 5.88% to 11.42%. Second, IRS usually
imposes a basic penalty of θ=20%, although the penalties can be higher in more severe cases.

                                                      9
vertical line denotes the average probability based on all members of the group. If we based
our estimates of p and θ included in the letter on the population of firms, every member of
the group would have received the same signal (the vertical line). As we computed p and θ
from samples of 50 firms, the sampling variation implies that different members of each group
received different signals. For example, Figure 1.a.1. shows that in group 1, the average p
for all group members is 8.1%, whereas the histogram depicts the different signals actually
sent to firms within the group. These signals center around the average p, but they range
from 2.5% to 20%. Note the differences in the vertical lines across groups: for firms in the
first quintile, the average randomized p is 8.1%, and this value increases monotonically up
to 13.4% for those in the top quintile. This means that a small share of the variation across
subjects in the values of p and θ included in the letter results from non-random variation
across groups, whereas the within-group variation is fully due to random variation, which is
an important factor for the following econometric model.8


2.3     Audit-Threat Letter
To complement the evidence from the audit-statistics sub-treatment, we implemented an
alternative way of randomizing perceptions about audit probabilities using an audit-threat
letter. We devised a treatment arm that randomly assigned firms to groups with different
probabilities of being audited in the following year. A sample of the audit-threat letter is
presented in A.3. The audit-threat letter was identical to the baseline letter, with the following
additional paragraph:

       “We would like to inform you that the business you represent is one of a group
       of firms pre-selected for auditing in 2016. A [X%] of the firms in that group will
       then be randomly selected for auditing.”

This audit-threat treatment arm was applied to a separate experimental sample, a group of
high-risk firms selected by the IRS audit department. The recipients of the audit-threat letter
thus cannot be compared to those of the baseline letter. Instead, we randomly assigned the
firms in this treatment arm to two groups, one with a probability of being audited in the
following year of 25% (X=25%) and another with a probability of being audited twice as
large (X=50%). These messages were non-deceptive: the IRS audit department provided a
commitment that they would conduct audits according to these probabilities in the following
year.
   8
     To measure the share of the variation that corresponds to the cluster size, we regress each parameter on
the quintiles of VAT payments. Regressing p over pre-treatment VAT quintiles dummies results in R2 = 0.118,
while regressing θ over the same dummies results in R2 = 0.007.

                                                     10
2.4     Audit-Endogeneity Letter
The audit-statistics and audit-threat treatment arms conveyed quantitative information about
audit probabilities and penalty rates. We also wanted to incorporate into our research design a
message about a different aspect of the audit process. Most tax agencies, including Uruguay’s,
account for firm characteristics when deciding which ones to audit. They assign higher
audit probabilities to firms with higher evasion risk. As a result, evading taxes typically
increases the probability of being audited. This factor was incorporated as a special case in
A&S, in which audit probabilities were determined endogenously. If unsuspecting firms learn
about the endogenous nature of their audit probabilities, they should revise their tax evasion
decisions and reduce the amount of tax evaded.9
    We used this insight from economic theory to devise the audit-endogeneity message about
the nature of the audit process. We asked our counterparts at the IRS to use their evasion-
risk scores to divide a small sample of firms into two groups: those suspected of evading taxes
and those not suspected of evading taxes. We then computed the difference in audit rates
from 2011–2013 between the two groups: the rates were approximately twice as high for the
former group. We used this information to create the message in the audit-endogeneity letter
type, which was identical to the baseline letter with the addition of the following paragraph
(see sample in Appendix A.4):

       “The IRS uses data on thousands of taxpayers to detect firms that may be evading
       taxes; most of its audits are aimed at those firms. Evading taxes, then, doubles
       your chances of being audited.”


2.5     Public-Goods Letter
We also devised a treatment arm to provide a benchmark for the effect of messages intended
to increase tax compliance without directly mentioning audits. In line with previous studies
(see Blumenthal et al., 2001; Fellner et al., 2013; Pomeranz, 2015; Dwenger et al., 2016),
we wanted to include a message that would leverage non-pecuniary motives to increase tax
compliance. We designed a non-pecuniary message that was expected to be most effective
at increasing compliance by the IRS staff and authorities: a message providing information
about the cost of evasion in terms of the provision of public goods, in the spirit of the model
of Cowell and Gordon (1988).10
   9
      Konrad et al. (2016) present suggestive evidence of this mechanism in the context of a laboratory exper-
iment: taxpayers facing a situation where suspicious attitudes toward tax officers increase the probability of
being audited increase their tax compliance by 80%.
   10
      This message is also related to the laboratory experiment from Alm et al. (1992), which presents evidence
that one of the reasons why people decide to pay taxes is their valuation of the public goods provided by

                                                      11
   The public-goods letter is identical to the baseline letter, with the addition of a specific
paragraph listing a series of services and public goods that the government could provide if
tax evaders reduced their evasion by 10% (see Appendix A.5 for a sample of the letter):

      “If those who currently evade their tax obligations were to evade 10% less, the
      additional revenue collected would enable all of the following: to supply 42,000
      portable computers to school children; to build 4 high schools, 9 elementary
      schools, and 2 technical schools; to acquire 80 patrol cars and to hire 500 police
      officers; to add 87,000 hours of medical attention by doctors at public hospitals;
      to hire 660 teachers; to build 1,000 public housing units (50m2 per unit). There
      would be resources left over to reduce the tax burden. The tax behavior of each
      of us has direct effects on the lives of us all.”

We used estimates from different governmental agencies to make the calculations reflected in
this message. 11


2.6     Survey Design
We designed a survey to be conducted with a sample of owners from our main subject pool,
months after they received the letters. The IRS, with the support of the Inter-American
Center of Tax Administrations and the United Nations, had previously administered a survey
on the costs of tax compliance for small- and medium-sized businesses. We collaborated with
the tax authority in the design and implementation of a new survey, which included a specific
module tailored for our research design. The survey also included seven additional modules,
designed by the IRS, about the costs of tax compliance and other topics. Appendix A.6 shows
a sample of the email with the invitation to participate in the online survey. We partnered
with local and international universities to increase respondent confidence and to highlight
that the survey was part of a scientific study and not an audit or compliance exercise by the
IRS.
   To further ensure trustworthy responses, the IRS assured potential respondents that the
survey responses would remain anonymous and that they could not be traced back to specific
individuals or firms. To measure the effect of our experiment on these survey responses, we
embedded a code in the survey link to identify the treatment arm of the experiment to
which the recipient was assigned. These codes did not uniquely identify any single firm, but

means of the tax revenues.
   11
      These agencies were: Administracion Nacional de Educacion Publica (ANEP), CEIBAL, Ministerio de
Salud Publica (MSP), Ministerio del Interior (MI), Ministerio de Vivienda, Ordenamiento Territorial y Medio
Ambiente (MVOTMA).

                                                    12
they allowed us to link treatment arms and completed questionnaires while maintaining the
anonymity of responses.
   Appendix A.7 shows a snapshot of our survey module. We designed questions to assess
whether the audit-statistics message shifted perceptions of the recipients of our letters,12 by
means of the two following questions:

         Perceived Audit Probability: “In your opinion, what is the probability that the
         tax returns filed by a company like yours will be audited at least in one of the
         next three years (from 0% to 100%)?”
         Perceived Penalty Rate: “Let us imagine that a company like yours is audited
         and that tax evasion is detected. What, in your opinion, is the penalty (in %)
         as determined by law that the firm must pay in addition to the originally unpaid
         amount? For example, a fee of X% means that, for each $100 not paid, the firm
         would have to pay those original $100 plus $X in penalties.”

After each question, we elicited how certain the subject felt about his or her response on a
scale from 1 to 4, where 1 is “not at all sure” and 4 is “very sure.”


3        Data Sources and Implementation of the Field Ex-
         periment
3.1       Institutional Context
Uruguay is a South American country with an annual GDP per capita of about USD 15,000
in 2015. The country is not an outlier in terms of the size of the government, with total tax
revenues for all levels of government amounting to 19% of GDP in 2015. This country is not
an atypical in terms of tax evasion. According to estimates from Gomez-Sabaini and Jimenez
(2012), evasion of VAT in Uruguay was around 26% in 2008. This is the third-lowest rate
among the nine Latin American countries included in the study and comparable to evasion
rates in more developed economies. For example, the evasion rate for Italy in 2006 was esti-
mated at 22% (Gomez-Sabaini and Moran, 2014).13 Uruguay is not an outlier in terms of tax
morale either. According to data from the 2010–2013 wave of the World Values Survey, 77.2%
    12
      For the sake of completeness, we also included a question in the survey to measure the subject’s awareness
about the endogeneity of audit probabilities. This question and related results are described in detail in
Appendix B.5.2.
   13
      Gomez-Sabaini and Jimenez (2012) compute those rates by applying the “indirect” method to estimate
tax evasion. This method is based on the comparison of collected VAT to aggregate consumption data from
the System of National Accounts (SNA).

                                                      13
of respondents from Uruguay stated that evading taxes is “Never Justifiable,” whereas this
proportion is 68.2% on average (population-weighted) for all other Latin American countries
and 70.9% for the United States.
     Our main focus is on the VAT. As is common in many countries, the VAT represents the
largest tax liability for firms in Uruguay and also the largest source of tax revenue. At the
time of the study, standard VAT rate was 22%,14 and VAT revenues accounted for nearly
half of the total tax revenues.15
     In other contexts, tax authorities do not need to rely on audits to mitigate tax evasion.
For example, the U.S. Internal Revenues Service uses their electronic records to compare the
wage amount reported by an taxpayer to the amount reported by his or her employer. This
algorithm automatically rectifies the discrepancies in reporting and sends a notification to
the taxpayer with the updated tax amount to be paid. Because the evasion will be caught
through the third-party reporting regardless of whether the individual is audited or not, the
probability of being audited should be irrelevant for taxpayers (Kleven et al., 2011).
     Instead, we focused on a context in which tax authorities must still rely heavily on the
threat of audits to discourage evasion. There is some third-party reporting VAT, consisting
of the paper trail of invoices for sales and purchases.16 However, this type of third party
reporting is highly imperfect. Most important, there is no automatic cross-checking and rec-
tification of VAT payments. This limitation arises because the paper trail was non-electronic
and thus could only be scrutinized by the tax agency in the event of an audit.17 Additionally,
the VAT paper trail has other limitations documented in the literature, such as breaking
down at the consumer end (Pomeranz 2015; Naritomi 2019). The tax agency has access to
other enforcement tools, such as tax withholding, but those other tools have limitations too.
As a result, audits are still one of the main ways in which the tax agency can detect tax
evasion in our context (Gomez-Sabaini and Jimenez, 2012; Bergman and Nevarez, 2006).




  14
       A small number of products considered basic necessities either have a 10% rate or are exempt from the
tax.
  15
      Own calculations based on data from the Central Bank of Uruguay and from the Internal Revenue
Service. Other sources of tax revenues include the personal income tax, the corporate tax, and some specific
taxes to consumption, businesses and wealth.
   16
      Firms may credit VAT paid on input costs (i.e., imports and purchases from their suppliers) against the
total sales of goods and services to their costumers (i.e., “tax debit”). They pay VAT to the IRS only on
the excess of the total “tax debit” over the tax credit. If the tax credit exceeds the debit, the excess may be
carried over for future tax years. While the VAT should in theory be similar in its effects to a retail sales
tax, in practice the two types of taxes differ in some significant aspects (Slemrod, 2008).
   17
      In other countries, the use of standardized electronic invoicing systems may facilitate and automatize
the cross-check of the VAT trail to detect evasion.

                                                      14
3.2     Subject Pool and Randomization
Our experiment was conducted in collaboration with the IRS of Uruguay. As of May 2015,
there were 120,142 firms registered in the agency’s database. A sub-sample of 4,597 firms,
pre-selected by the IRS, was put aside for the audit-threat sample, which we call the secondary
experimental sample. Of the remaining firms, we followed a series of criteria to select our
main experimental sample. We first excluded some firms by request of the IRS. For instance,
we excluded firms subject to special regimes for VAT payments (very small or very large
firms). We also kept in the experimental sample only those firms that made VAT payments
in at least three different months in the previous 12-month period and those with a total
value of at least USD 1,000.18
    To maximize the impact of our information provision experiment, we did our best to
ensure that the letters would be delivered to the firms’ owners.19 Moreover, in very large
firms, the effect of the information could be substantially diluted, as it may not reach the
owner or the individuals making decisions about tax compliance. Thus, we excluded from our
subject pool firms with a total value exceeding USD 100,000 during the previous 12 months.
    These criteria left a subject pool of 20,471 firms for the main experimental sample. All
firms were randomly assigned to receive one of the four letter types, with the following
distribution: 62.5% were assigned to the main treatment arm (audit-statistics letter), and
12.5% were assigned to each of the three remaining letter types (baseline, audit-endogeneity,
and public-goods).20 After removing the roughly 18.5% of letters that were returned by
the postal service, the final distribution of letter types was as follows: 10,272 received audit-
statistics; 2,064 received baseline; 2,039 received audit-endogeneity; and 2,017 received public-
goods letters (total N = 16,392). The 4,597 firms in the secondary sample were assigned to
receive the audit-threat letter. Half were randomly assigned to the message of a 25% audit
probability, and the other half to the 50% audit probability. After excluding the 12% of
letters returned by the postal service, we were left with 2,015 firms in the 25% probability
group and 2,033 firms in the 50% probability group (total N = 4,048). Table B.1 in Appendix
B.1 provides descriptive statistics for the firms in our subject pool.
    Table 1 allows us to compare the balance of pre-treatment characteristics between firms
assigned to the different letter types. Columns (1) through (4) correspond to firms in the

  18
      The sample selection was conducted in May 2015, so this 12-month period spans from April 2014 to
March 2015.
   19
      In some cases, owners provide the address of external accountants instead of their own or their firms.
We removed from the sample firms that were registered with an accountant’s mailing address as their own
(the IRS keeps records of addresses for all registered accountants).
   20
      The randomization to letter types was stratified by the quintiles of the distribution of VAT payments
over the fiscal year before our intervention.

                                                    15
main experimental sample. For each characteristic, column (5) presents the p-value of the
test of the null hypothesis that the averages for these characteristics are the same across all
four letter types. As expected, the differences across letter types are economically small and
statistically insignificant. Columns (6) through (8) of Table 1 present a similar balance test,
except for the secondary sample used for the audit-threat arm. Again, the characteristics are
balanced across the two sub-treatments in the audit-threat treatment arm.


3.3     Outcomes of Interest
The letters were provided to Uruguay’s postal service on August 21, 2015. The vast majority
of the letters were delivered during September, and therefore we set August as the last month
of the pre-treatment period and October as the first month of the post-treatment period.
The main outcome of interest in our study is the total amount of VAT liabilities remitted
by taxpayers in the 12 months after receiving the letter.21 To test for the persistence of
our treatment effects, we defined a second period of observation between October 2016 and
September 2017 (i.e., up to two years after the intervention).
    On average, the total amount of VAT paid by firms that received the baseline letter
in the 12-month pre-treatment period was about USD 7,700, whereas the amount for the
corresponding post-treatment period was approximately USD 6,500. This negative trend
in VAT payments can be explained by the fact that this sample contains a high share of
small firms with a high turnover rate. The size of post-treatment VAT payments varied
substantially, ranging from the 10th percentile of USD 400 to the 90th percentile of USD
16,550.22
    We can further break down firms’ VAT payments according to their timing. We can
observe the date of transfer to the IRS as well as the month for which the payment was
imputed. Firms can back-date payments to cover liabilities from previous periods. As firms
typically make VAT payments on a monthly basis, they normally cover the current and
previous months, which we call concurrent payments. We classified payments for two or
more months in the past as retroactive payments – that is, adjustments for revisions in past
liabilities. About 99.4% of firms made at least one concurrent payment in the 12-month
pre-treatment period, whereas only 23.8% of firms made at least one retroactive payment
over this same period.
    It should be noted that the retroactive payments do not reflect delinquency nor outstand-
ing debts to the tax authority. Overall VAT liabilities are computed on a yearly basis, and

  21
     This variable includes all VAT payments, including direct VAT payments and indirect VAT withholdings.
  22
     Table B.2 in Appendix B.2 presents detailed descriptive statistics about the distribution of pre- and
post- treatment payments for firms that received the baseline letter type.

                                                   16
firms make monthly payments according to their provisional receipts on a pay-as-you-go basis
to avoid a large bill at the end of the fiscal year. Retroactive payments reflect changes in past
liabilities – i.e., a firm in the supply chain modified the cost of an input, etc., and they might
be used to correct past underpayments. Retroactive payments thus represent adjustments to
firms’ accounts and not unpaid past liabilities.
    Finally, although we focused on VAT payments in our analysis, we obtained data from
the IRS on the other main taxes paid by the firms, such as corporate income taxes and net
worth taxes. These two taxes and the VAT jointly represent more than 96% of the total tax
burden of firms. We used payments of these taxes as additional outcomes of interest to study
whether firms effectively changed their overall compliance or if they substituted evasion of
VAT for that of other taxes.


3.4    Survey Implementation
The IRS communicates mainly by postal mail, and it thus has mailing addresses for all
registered firms. It also keeps records of email addresses for a subset of firms that have used
their online services. We emailed invitations to all firms in the main experimental sample
with a valid email address. Our intention was to survey firms soon after they received our
letters, but the survey was postponed due to implementation challenges. While we wanted to
roll the survey out shortly after the mailing interventions, for reasons outside of our control
we were not able to roll it out until May 2016, nine months after the intervention. We sent
the email invitations to participate in the online survey to 3,845 firms. Table B.1 shows that
the firms we invited to the survey (column (5)) were similar in characteristics to those in the
main experimental sample (column (2)).
    Our purpose was to elicit the beliefs of firm owners. We did not include email addresses
that were repeated more than three times in the full sample, as these most likely corresponded
to accounting firms representing multiple small and medium enterprises. Even after applying
this criteria, the IRS records could not ensure that the registered email address corresponded
to the firms’ owners. We thus asked the survey respondent to self-identify as one of the
following five types: owner, internal accountant, external accountant, manager, or other
employee. From the 3,845 recipients that we invited to participate in the survey, we received
2,331 responses (response rate of 60.6%). Of these 2,331, 45% self-identified as owner, 16.2%
as non-owner, and the remaining 38.8% did not provide a response to this question.23 In
our main specification, we excluded responses that identified recipients as non-owners. The
results were similar if we included only those who actively identified as owners (reported in
  23
    The non-owner responses are distributed as follows: 4.4% as internal accountant, 5.4% as external
accountant, 1.9% as manager, 4.5% as other employee.

                                                 17
Appendix B.5.1). Among respondents who self-identified as owners, the missing data rate for
our three key questions was between 19.5% and 23.3%, which is comparable to the average
non-response rate for all questions in the survey (17.8%). Finally, per request of the IRS,
respondents could skip as many questions as they wanted.


4     Results: Average Effect of Messages
4.1    Econometric Specification
Our main specification captures the impact of our mailing campaign on our outcomes of inter-
est (subsequent tax payments). These results are obtained by comparing the post-treatment
tax payments of firms assigned to the audit-statistics, audit-endogeneity, and public-goods
letters with the payments from recipients of the baseline letter. We interpret these as the
effects of the corresponding messages (audit-statistics, audit-endogeneity, and public-goods)
which are the information we added to the baseline letter.
    Consider the sample of firms assigned to either baseline letter or one of the other letter
types, indexed by j: audit-statistics, audit-endogeneity or public-goods. The main specifica-
tion is given by the following regression:

                                  Yi = α + β · Dij + Xi δ + i                               (1)

    The outcome variable (Yi ) is the total outcome in the 12-month post-treatment period
(i.e., after the delivery of the treatment letter). Dij is a dummy variable that takes the value
0 if i was assigned to the baseline letter, and the value 1 if i was assigned to letter type j.
Finally, Xi is a vector of control variables. When outcomes are persistent over time, which
applies to the case of VAT payments, the use of pre-treatment controls can help reduce the
variance of the error term and thus results in gains in statistical power (McKenzie, 2012).
Specifically, our main specification includes the outcomes during each of the previous 12
pre-treatment months as control variables (Xi ).
    This main specification allows us to test our first set of hypotheses: whether providing
letters with information about enforcement increases tax compliance. The β coefficient cor-
responding to the audit-statistics message reflects the impact of adding the audit-statistics
message to the baseline letter. The findings in the previous literature indicate that this should
have a positive effect on tax collection. Note that as long as the enforcement messages does
not affect true income by taxpayers, then changes in the total amount of VAT paid measure
changes in tax evasion. However, under the presence of real-effects, our estimates provide a
lower-bound to the impact of information about enforcement on tax compliance. Even when

                                               18
real effects are possible in our setting, most of the public finance literature reports evidence
that real-effects are normally zero or small relative to reporting effects (see for example Saez
et al., 2012). The coefficient for the audit-endogeneity message, in turn, provides a benchmark
for the audit-statistics results by capturing the effect of providing other type of information
related to audits. Finally, the public-goods coefficient is a further benchmark, corresponding
to the effect of non-pecuniary incentives.
    We use a log-linear model, also known as Poisson regression, to estimate our main spec-
ification. There are two reasons for the choice of this log-linear model. First and foremost,
the Poisson model allows effects to be proportional – indeed, the coefficients can be readily
interpreted as semi-elasticities.24 Second, the Poisson regression naturally accounts for the
bunching at zero of the dependent variable. Note that the Poisson regression can be used for
continuous non-negative data. And, since we use robust standard errors, it does not depend
on the assumption of equidispersion used in the maximum-likelihood model applied to count
data. In any case, we present robustness checks with alternative regression models, including
OLS and Tobit models. Additionally, we estimate separately the effects on the extensive
margin.
    In the interest of transparency, for each coefficient related to post-treatment effects, we
also present a falsification test based on pre-treatment “effects”; that is, we re-estimate the
model, but with pre-treatment outcomes as the dependent variable. We should expect these
pre-treatment effects to be close to zero and statistically insignificant.


4.2     Effect of the Audit-Statistics Message
We start by describing the effects of our main treatment, the audit-statistics message. We
discuss the benchmark results from the other two sub-treatments in the following subsection.
Figure 2 summarizes the results from our main specification. In each of the three panels, we
plot the difference between the VAT payments of the firms assigned to the baseline letter with
respect to the payments of firms assigned to each of the other three treatment arms, for the
two quarters preceding our mailing campaign and for the eight subsequent quarters.25 The
effects of each of the treatment arms are computed by means of Poisson regressions, so that
the coefficients can be directly interpreted as semi-elasticities. These are simple regressions

  24
      The Poisson model is based on the following specification: log(YX ) = α + βX + ε. The effect of a
unit change in X can be re-expressed in log-units of the dependent variable, β = log(YX=x+1 ) − log(YX=x ).
Provided this coefficient is small enough, it can be approximated accurately as a percent-change effect:
                                 YX=x+1 − YX=x
β = log(YX=x+1 ) − log(YX=x ) ≈                    .
                                       YX=x
   25
      We top-coded all outcomes of interest at the 99.99% percentile to avoid the contamination of the results
by outliers.

                                                     19
with no additional control variables.
    Figure 2.a shows that the audit-statistics message had statistically and economically sig-
nificant effects on VAT payments. For instance, the point coefficient corresponding to the
third post-treatment quarter implies that the audit-statistics message increased the VAT
payments by 8.7% (p-value of 0.012). The effects are similar in magnitude for all the post-
treatment quarters during the first year (e.g, 7.8%, 5.8%, 8,7% and 5.7% in the first through
fourth quarter). During the second year, the effects become smaller and less statistically
significant over time. The coefficients on the pre-treatment VAT payments correspond to
a falsification test for our experiment. As expected by the random assignment of firms to
different treatment arms, the pre-treatment differences in VAT payments are economically
small and not statistically significant.
    Table 2 presents the baseline regression results. These estimates are obtained by means
of Poisson regressions with pre-treatment controls, following the econometric specification
described in Section 4.1. The first column presents the main results: the average effects of
each of the three treatments (audit-statistics in Panel A, audit-endogeneity in Panel B, and
public-goods in Panel C) compared to the outcomes for firms that received the baseline let-
ter. The post-treatment coefficients correspond to regressions with total VAT paid in the 12
months after the delivery of the letter as the dependent variable (October 2015 - September
2016). Additionally, as falsification tests, the pre-treatment coefficients correspond to regres-
sions with total VAT paid in the 12 months prior the delivery of the letter as the dependent
variable (September 2014 - August 2015).
    The post-treatment coefficient of audit-statistics (first column, panel a.) indicates that
firms receiving this message paid 6.3% more VAT in the 12 months after the intervention
on average. This effect is not only statistically significant (p-value of 0.013), it is also eco-
nomically substantial. Using the estimated average evasion rate of 26% from Gomez-Sabaini
and Jimenez (2012), the effect amounts to a reduction in the evasion rate of 24% (= 6.3%      26%
                                                                                                  ).
As expected, the “effect” on pre-treatment outcomes (our falsification test) is close to zero
(−0.8%), statistically insignificant, and even more precisely estimated than the corresponding
post-treatment effect.26
    In terms of previous findings in the literature, the effects of our audit-statistics treatment
are not directly comparable to those of the audit message from Pomeranz (2015) because the
messages differed in content, and because the two studies cover firms from different countries
and with different characteristics. Nevertheless, Table 4 from Pomeranz (2015) indicates that
the deterrence letter in that study led to an increase in VAT payments of 7.6%, which is similar

  26
    The standard error on the pre-treatment coefficient is 0.021, which is smaller than the corresponding
standard error of 0.025 for the post-treatment coefficient.

                                                   20
in magnitude and statistically indistinguishable from the 6.3% effect of our audit-statistics
message. Moreover, our results are consistent with a broader literature that finds effects of
messages about enforcement on tax compliance in a variety of contexts: self-employed income
in the United States (Slemrod et al., 2001), wage income taxes in Denmark (Kleven et al.,
2011), individual public-TV fees in Austria (Fellner et al., 2013), individual municipal taxes
in Argentina (Castro and Scartascini, 2015), an individual church tax in Germany (Dwenger
et al., 2016), and U.S. tax delinquencies in the United States (Perez-Truglia and Troiano,
2018).
    The second column in Table 2 replicates the analysis for the second year after the treat-
ment, i.e. October 2016 - September 2017. For this period, the effect of the treatment is
less than half than that of the first year, and it is not statistically significant, even though
the precision of the estimate is similar in the two time periods. This is consistent with the
pattern of effects by quarter depicted in Figure 2.a, which shows that the effects in the sec-
ond year fall substantially when compared to those of the first year. These results are not
unexpected. Over time, individuals may forget the information conveyed by the letter, or it
may become less salient. Individuals may also update their beliefs and perceptions for other
reasons, for instance because of new events such as audits and information campaigns. This
is consistent with previous evidence on the effects of tax enforcement messages. Figure 2 in
Pomeranz (2015) shows that the effects of the main information campaign in that study were
also substantially higher in the first 12 months after their intervention, and fell substantially
and became virtually zero in the 18th month (the last plotted result in the Figure).
    Table 2 also presents results for complementary outcomes. As discussed in the previous
section, firms in Uruguay make payments for their current liabilities, but also for taxes
that correspond to previous periods — because they revise their accounts and correct past
mistakes, or because they impute invoices that were not available at the time of the original
payment. When firms that engage in tax evasion face a heightened threat of being audited,
we can expect them to increase their tax payments (reduce their evasion) in the future, but
we can also expect them to retroactively revise their payments for previous time periods to
reduce or eliminate their past evasion. We explore this possibility with the results presented
in columns (3) and (4) of Panel a in Table 2, which split the effects of our treatment arms
on retroactive and concurrent payments. These results correspond to the first year after
the treatment. The messages about audits had an economically and statistically significant
effect on retroactive payments. Indeed, because of the much lower baseline rate, the effects
on retroactive payments are larger in magnitude than the effects on the concurrent payments,
but they are similar in magnitude to concurrent payments. For instance, the effect for audit-
statistics message is 38.1% (p-value of 0.004) for the retroactive payments and 4.4% (p-value


                                               21
of 0.087) for the concurrent payments.
    We have so far established that firms in the audit-statistics treatment arms increased
their VAT payments compared to recipients of the baseline letter. Our analysis focuses on
VAT liabilities, which represents the largest fraction of tax payments by firms in our sample.
However, our letters referred to taxes in general and did not mention VAT nor any other
specific tax. Given the presence of other tax liabilities, the effects we reported on VAT may
not represent a net increase in tax payments: firms may increase their evasion (i.e., reduce
their payments) of other taxes they are liable for, crowding out payments or substituting
evasion. The results in columns (5) and (6) of Table 2 shed light on these issues. Column (5)
presents the effect on all other taxes paid (mostly the corporate income tax): the effects on
payments of other taxes are as economically and statistically as significant as those on VAT
payments: the audit-statistics had an effect of 7.7% (p-value of 0.038) on other tax payments.
Column (6) shows that the results are robust if we look at the effects on the sum of VAT and
other taxes: the audit-statistics message increased this outcome by a statistically significant
5.2%.


4.3    Benchmarks to the Audit-Statistics Message
Our research design allows us to compare the effects of the audit-statistics message to the
effects of two alternative messages, one related to audits (audit-endogeneity) and another not
related to audits nor other forms of enforcement (public-goods).
    Figure 2.b shows that the audit-endogeneity treatment arm also induced a significant
change in VAT payments compared to the baseline letter. The quarterly effect of adding the
audit-endogeneity message is positive and statistically significant in the first post-treatment
year, and ranges between 10% and 12.4%. These effects are slightly higher than those of
the audit-statistics treatment arm, but these differences are not statistically significant at
standard levels. As in the case of the audit-statistics message, the effects of the audit-
endogeneity treatment are persistent over the first year, but diminish over the second post-
treatment year. The results of the falsification test are also similar to the ones observed in the
audit-statistics treatment: the differences for the two pre-treatment quarters are economically
small and not statistically significant for the audit-endogeneity treatment arm.
    This overall pattern of results is confirmed by the regression results presented in Panel b
in Table 2. The coefficient in the first column indicates that the audit-endogeneity message
increased subsequent VAT payments by 7.4% (p-value of 0.021), with no “effect” on pre-
treatment outcomes, as expected. The effect during the first post-treatment year is similar in
magnitude to the 6.3% effect of our audit-statistics message (the difference is not statistically


                                               22
significant at standard levels). The effects over the second post-treatment year are also
consistent with those of the audit-statistics message: the coefficients for the second year are
smaller in magnitude than those for the first year, and they are not statistically significant.
The audit-endogeneity message also had an economically and statistically significant effect
on both retroactive (31.4%) and concurrent payments (6.1%), as in the case of the audit-
statistics message. Finally, the results in columns (5) and (6) of Table 2 indicate that, again
as in the case of the audit-statistics message, the audit-endogeneity message did not crowd
out other tax payments: it increased non-VAT tax payments by 8.4%.
    We now turn to the effects of the public-goods treatment arm. Figure 2.c indicates that
adding this message to the baseline letter did not affect VAT payments as consistently as the
two other treatments. While there are differences in post-treatment VAT payments between
firms assigned to the public-goods letters and those assigned to the baseline letter, inspection
of coefficients over time reveals that the differences in the post-treatment period were similar
to the differences in the pre-treatment period.
    Given these pre-treatment differences, the assessment of the effect of the public-goods mes-
sage requires us to control for them. This is presented in Panel c in Table 2. The effect for
the first year of the post-treatment period as a whole for the public-goods message is positive
at 4.3%, and falls to 0.6% in the second year, and neither of these two coefficients are sta-
tistically significant at standard levels (p-values of 0.147 and 0.879 respectively). Compared
to the other two treatment arms, these effects are smaller, but due to the lack of precision
they are statistically indistinguishable. The coefficients are not statistically significant in
any of the alternative specifications. The public-goods message did not have a statistically
significant effect either on retroactive or concurrent VAT payments (p-values of 0.304 and
0.879, respectively). Its effect on other tax payments (column 5 in Panel c in Table 2) is close
to zero (0.1%) and statistically insignificant, and it is also small and statistically insignificant
on total tax payments (1.8%). Due to the lack of precision of our estimates, we cannot rule
out that the public-goods message may have had some effect on tax payments, but overall
our inconclusive results are consistent with the robust finding that moral suasion messages do
not have significant effects on tax evasion in a variety of contexts (Blumenthal et al., 2001;
Fellner et al., 2013; Castro and Scartascini, 2015; Dwenger et al., 2016; Meiselman, 2018;
Perez-Truglia and Troiano, 2018).27
    Appendix B.4.1 presents some additional robustness checks of the results in this section,
including regression results based on alternative specifications such as OLS, Tobit and Probit
models, as well as focusing on the extensive margin, and using an alternative independent

  27
    There are some exceptions in the literature, such as the effect of displaying norms on the timing of tax
payments (Hallsworth et al., 2017).

                                                    23
source of administrative data. We show that the main findings are qualitatively and quanti-
tatively similar to those presented in this section, and thus robust to these alternatives.


5        Tests of A&S
The results presented in the previous section are broadly consistent with the evidence in the
previous literature: providing information about audits significantly increased tax compli-
ance. In this section, we present additional evidence to establish whether the effects of the
audit-statistics treatment are driven by the A&S mechanism. The subsections below present
two different tests of the model based on our experimental design.


5.1      First Test of A&S: Effects on Perceptions
According to A&S, the audit-statistics message should have a positive effect on tax compliance
if it increased the perceived probability of being audited, the perceived value of the evasion
fine, or both. We explore this hypothesis based on data from our post-treatment survey.
This survey data consists of 365 firms in the audit-statistics group and 137 in what we refer
to as the pooled control group with individuals who did not receive information related to
audits.28
     Figure 3.a and 3.b depict the distributions of perceptions about audit probabilities and
penalty rates, respectively, as elicited from the survey. The shallow bars with solid borders
correspond to the perceptions of firms that received the audit-statistics message. The shaded
gray bars depict the distribution of perceptions for individuals from firms in the pooled control
group. The red dashed curve, in turn, corresponds to the distribution of signals sent to firms
in the audit-statistics letters. The comparison between the shaded bars and the red curve
from Figure 3.a suggests that, on average, respondents in the control group substantially
overestimated the probability of being audited. While our administrative data on audits
indicates a probability of about 11.7%, the mean perception for the control group is 40.7%
(p-value < 0.01 for the difference). This finding of overestimation of audit probabilities is
consistent with prior survey evidence (Harris and Associates 1988; Erard and Feinstein 1994;
Scholz and Pinney 1995).29 In contrast, the comparison between the shaded bars and the red

    28
      The survey sample size was substantially smaller than that of our experimental sample. To increase
the statistical power of our test, we defined this control group by pooling subjects from the baseline and
the public-goods groups, since both received messages with no specific information about audit probabilities
or fines. Appendix B.5.1 shows that the results are similar, but less precisely estimated, when we only use
recipients of the baseline letter for the control group.
   29
      However, the prior survey evidence was based on responses from wage earners, for whom the mispercep-
tion of audit probabilities is mostly inconsequential due to widespread third-party reporting (Kleven et al.,

                                                     24
curve from Figure 3.b suggests that the average belief about the penalty rates was unbiased:
the actual average penalty computed from administrative data for the experimental sample
is 30.7%, while the mean perceived penalty is 30.5% in the control group.
    The positive bias in the perceived audit probability could be explained by the availability
heuristic bias (Kahneman and Tversky, 1974). According to this model, individuals judge
the probability of an event by how easily they recall instances of it. Even though audits are
rare, the fact that they may be salient in memory or discussed by colleagues and the media
may induce firms to perceive them to be more frequent than they actually are. Indeed, there
is evidence that individuals overestimate the probabilities of a wide range of rare events of
a similar nature such as the probabilities of dying in a terrorist attack or in a plane crash
(Lichtenstein et al., 1978; Kahneman et al., 1982).
    The systematic upward bias in perceptions of audit probabilities and the results presented
in the previous section, showing that the audit-statistics message increased tax compliance,
are not consistent with A&S. Since our letters provided information about audit probabilities
that was lower than firms’ prior beliefs, the A&S framework would predict a reduction in
tax compliance. Our post-treatment survey allows us to test this hypothesis more directly.
From the assignment of firms to the different treatment groups, we can measure the effect
of the audit-statistics letter on the perceptions of p and θ. The shallow bars with solid
borders in Figures 3.a and 3.b depict the distribution of perceptions for respondents in
the audit-statistics treatment arm. Inspection of Figure 3.a indicates that, compared to
respondents in the treatment group, recipients of the audit-statistics message reported on
average a lower perceived probability of being audited, from an average of 40.7% in the
pooled control group to an average of 35.2% in the audit-statistics group (p-value of the
difference 0.03). Meanwhile, Figure 3.b shows that the audit-statistics message had a small
effect on the perceived penalty rate, decreasing it from an average of 30.5% for the pooled
control group to an average of 29.9% for the audit-statistics group, with this difference being
statistically insignificant (p-value of 0.85).
    To sum up, the evidence suggests that the audit-statistics treatment arm may have re-
duced the average perceived audit probability. This evidence, and the positive effects of this
treatment on tax compliance, are jointly inconsistent with A&S . According to A&S , since
the audit-statistics message increased tax payments, it should have increased (rather than
reduced) perceived audit probabilities.30

2011). On the contrary, the financial stakes of misperceiving audit probabilities can be substantial in our
context.
   30
      Consistent with this evidence, Appendix B.5.2 suggests that the effect of the audit-endogeneity message
is not due to an update of recipients’ beliefs about the degree of endogeneity of audit probabilities, because
recipients were already well aware of this endogeneity.

                                                     25
    One important caveat to keep in mind in the test presented in this section, and also the
test presented in the section below, is that we are estimating the effects on the average firm.
The fact that the average firm does not behave as A&S predicts does not imply that any
of the firms behave as A&S predicts. For instance, it is possible that some firms updated
their perceived probability upwards because of the information contained in the letter and
increased their tax payments as a consequence. However, the fact that the average effects
are so far from the A&S prediction suggests that, if anything, the firms behaving as A&S
must have been a minority.
    This first test relies in survey data, and it is thus subject to some common concerns with
this type of data. We address those concerns below.
    One extreme view of survey data is that, because the questions on audit probabilities
and penalty rates were not incentivized, individuals may have just responded with numbers
at random. The fact that the survey beliefs changed with the information provided in the
letters suggest that these responses contained some truthful information. Moreover, we have
other reasons to believe that the survey responses were meaningful. While there is a large
positive bias in the perception of audit probabilities, the average perception of the penalty
rate (30.5%) is extremely close to the actual probability computed from administrative data
(30.7%). The fact that beliefs are so accurate for penalty rates suggests that individuals
responded honestly and thoughtfully. Additionally, individuals were better informed about
the penalty rates than about the audit probabilities, which is also consistent with the fact
that there is more readily available information about penalty rates: audits are relatively rare
events and their probabilities are not advertised nor common knowledge, whereas penalties
from the tax authorities are more frequent, homogeneous across taxes, and openly disclosed
by the tax agency.
    A less extreme version of the concern with measurement error is that individuals had
biased beliefs, but were aware that they were misinformed, so they would never have acted
on those beliefs anyways. Our survey data provides evidence to the contrary. Even though
their estimates were substantially off, survey participants reported being confident on their
responses. For example, only 16.2% of those in the control group reported being “Not sure
at all” about their perceived probability of audit (on a four point scale, ranging from “Not
sure at all” to “Very confident”); and a similar share (18.1%) reported to be “Not sure at
all” about their guess for the penalty rate. Even for the subgroup of individuals from the
control group who reported to be “Very confident” about the audit probability, their average
belief was, if anything, slightly more biased: 42.1%, still substantially higher than the actual
probability of 11.7%.
    Another concern is that our subjects may be confused about the meaning of an “audit.”


                                              26
However, this possibility can be ruled out with our survey data too. Among the 145 responses
from the pooled control group, 10.3% of firms reported that they were audited in the past
three years. This share (10.3%) is close to the actual share of firms that were audited (11.7%),
thus suggesting that respondents understood the definition of an audit correctly.
    We may also worry that subjects have cognitive limitations when responding to questions
about percentages and probabilities. However, this should be a minor concern in our subject
pool, which is comprised of business owners who should be familiar with fractions and prob-
abilities. While we do not have administrative data to verify this, the anecdotal evidence
indicates that this is a highly educated subgroup of the population. And, at the very least,
these business owners need some rudimentary arithmetic and understanding of percentages
to compute the VAT and other tax liabilities.
    A further concern may be that some respondents reported probabilities of exactly 50%
as a way of expressing their uncertainty (Bruin et al., 2002; Bruine de Bruin and Carman,
2012). Responses of exactly 50% are somewhat common in our data: among individuals
in the pooled control group, 33.3% of responses about the perceived audit probability and
16.4% of responses about the penalty rate are exactly equal to 50%. To assess whether these
responses may be problematic, we follow the standard method from Bruin et al. (2002) and
Bruine de Bruin and Carman (2012). We measure certainty using a 1-4 scale from “Not
sure at all” (1) to “Very confident” (4). If there were large differences in certainty between
individuals who responded exactly 50% and the rest, that would cast doubts on the validity
of the survey responses. On the contrary, we find modest differences in certainty between
the two groups.31 As a complementary robustness check, we conducted our analysis ignoring
50% responses and treating them as missing data. Even with this conservative approach,
individuals in the control group still substantially over-estimate the probability of being
audited: these respondents report an average perception of 31.5%, compared to the actual
probability of 11.7%.
    As an additional validation of the survey data, we can measure the effect of the signals
about p and θ from the audit-statistics sub-treatments. We have limited power for this
exercise, however, due to the small sample size: we count with merely 365 survey responses
in the audit-statistics group. With that caveat in mind, the survey data suggests that a
percentage point increase in the signal about the audit probability provided in the letter
increased the perceived audit probability nine months later by 0.397 (SE 0.288) percentage
points. While imprecisely estimated and thus statistically insignificant at conventional levels,
  31
     In the pooled control group, the average certainty for perceived audit probability is 2.18 for individuals
who responded a value of exactly 50%, and 2.56 for individuals who responded a different value (p-value
of difference 0.09). For the responses about the perceived penalty rate, the average certainty is 2.18 for
individuals who responded 50%, and 2.48 for those who responded another value (p-value of difference 0.35).

                                                      27
the magnitude of this point estimate is consistent with the updating in other information-
provision experiments (discussed in more detail in Section 5.2.1 below). Most important,
the true effects of the signals provided in the letter on beliefs were probably stronger than
what the above estimates suggest. While we are confident that our certified letters reached
firms’ owners, we cannot be as confident about whether the owner was the same person who
received the email invitation to complete the survey. And while we wanted to conduct the
survey soon after the mailing campaign, for reasons out of our control we were not able to roll
out the survey until nine months after the intervention. In this type of information-provision
experiments, the effect of information on beliefs tends to decay substantially in a matter of
a few months – it is feasible for recipients to forget the information provided in the letters,
or to acquire additional information in the meantime. For example, Cavallo et al. (2017)
show that the effect of information on beliefs decays by about half in a matter of just three
months, and similar findings are reported by Bottan and Perez-Truglia (2017) and Fuster
et al. (2018). All these factors will lead to an under-estimation of the effects of the letter on
beliefs.
    We can provide an additional validation test for the data on perceived audit probabilities
using the firms’ audit experience. Among the 145 responses from the pooled control group,
10.3% of firms state that they were audited in the past three years. If firms use their own
audit history to form their beliefs about auditing probabilities, the firms who have been
audited recently should report a higher probability of being audited. Indeed, we found that
to be the case: firms who have been recently audited report a substantially higher average
perceived probability of being audited in the future (63.9%) than firms that were not recently
audited (38.1% – p-value of the difference<0.001).


5.2    Second Test of A&S: Heterogeneity with Respect to Signals
The second test is based on the differential effects of the values of the signals provided in the
letters. According to A&S, the effects of the audit-statistics message should be increasing in
the signals about the audit probability (p) and the penalty rate (θ). The random variation
we introduced in the p and θ conveyed in our audit-statistics letters allow us to test this
hypothesis directly. We first present our estimates of these elasticities, and then compare
them with values obtained from calibrations of the A&S model.




                                               28
5.2.1    Elasticities with respect to p and θ

We start this discussion with a non-parametric look at the data, with results conveyed in
Figure 4. This figure uses the main specification from before,32 looking at the effect of the
audit-statistics message on VAT payments, but broken down by decile of the signals included
in the letter. Figure 4.a presents the effect of the audit-statistics message by decile of the
provided signal of p. In the A&S framework, we should expect that very low signals of p
should reduce tax compliance (since they most likely reduce the firms’ perceived probability
of audits), whereas the effect should become larger, and turn positive at some point, as we
increase the value of the signal about p.
    The coefficients plotted in Figure 4.a, however, indicate that the effect of the audit-
statistics letter is not related to the value of p included in the letter. The coefficients are
similar in magnitude for the whole range of values from p = 2% all the way up to p = 25%.
For example, the effect is 8.8% and statistically significant (p-value of 0.016) for the lowest
decile (p ∈ [2%, 5%]), and it is 5.6% and marginally significant (p-value of 0.065) for firms in
the upper decile (p ∈ [19%, 25%]). Moreover, the resulting slope (in dashed red line), while
positive as predicted by A&S, is economically small and statistically insignificant (p-value of
0.637).
    Figure 4.b provides an analysis similar to that of Figure 4.a, but based on the hetero-
geneity by penalty rates (θ) provided in the letter. According to A&S, we should expect a
positive relationship between the effect of the audits-statistic letter and the provided value
of θ. Figure 4.b shows evidence to the contrary: the coefficients are similar for the whole
range of values from θ = 15% to θ = 68%, and the slope is negative, economically small and
statistically insignificant.
    To complement the results from Figure 4, we can quantify the effects of the audit-statistics
sub-treatments in a more parametric way that can be contrasted to the quantitative predic-
tions of A&S. For the audit-statistics treatment arm, we use the following model:

                                                       5
                       Yi = α + γp · pi + γθ · θi +          πg · I{i∈g} + Xi δ + i               (2)
                                                       X

                                                       g=2

where pi ∈ (0, 1) is the signal about the audit probability included in the letter sent to subject
i, and θi ∈ (0, 1) is the signal about the penalty rate included in the letter sent to the same
firm. The I{i∈g} variables correspond to a set of dummies for quintiles of pre-treatment VAT
payments, which are the groups from which we drew the sample of “similar firms” to calculate
pi and θi . Including these controls ensures that we only exploit the exogenous variation in
  32
    Additionally, we control for dummies for the quintiles of pre-treatment VAT payments, from which we
drew the sample to calculate pi and θi .

                                                  29
pi and θi induced by our experimental design – that is, the heterogeneity due to sampling
variation. Since we are using a Poisson regression model, γp and γθ can be directly interpreted
as elasticities. For instance, an estimate of γp = 1 would imply that a 1 percentage point
increase in the audit probability conveyed in the letters increased VAT payments by 1%.
From A&S , we can expect that γp > 0 and γθ > 0 – i.e., firms tax payments are increasing
in the perceived probability of audit and evasion penalty rates.
    Panel (a) in Table 3 presents the results from the econometric model of equation 2.
Column (1) of Table 3 presents estimates of the elasticities of VAT payments with respect
to the values of p and θ conveyed in the audit-statistics sub-treatments. The elasticity with
respect to the audit probability in the first year after the treatment is 0.030 (p-value of 0.897).
This means that increasing p by 1 percentage point would increase VAT payments by a mere
0.03%. The elasticity with respect to the penalty rate is −0.118 (p-value of 0.304), which
implies that increasing θ by 1 percentage point would reduce VAT payments by 0.118%.
The estimates are close to zero, not statistically significant at standard levels and precisely
estimated. The precision implies that we can rule out even moderate elasticities: the 90%
confidence interval for the audit probability excludes elasticities above 0.418, and the 90%
confidence interval for the penalty rate excludes elasticities above 0.071.
    It should be noted that the pre-treatment falsification test does not yield any statistically
significant effect, and that the results are similar (no statistically significant elasticities) for
the other specifications: for the second year (column (2)), by timing of the payment (columns
(3) and (4)), and by type of tax (columns (5) and (6)). The estimates are always close to
zero and, in most cases, statistically significant.33
    One potential confounding factor for the lack of heterogeneity in signals about p and θ is
that some subjects might have interpreted the audit-statistics message per se as a signal that
their firms were under the IRS radar, above and beyond the factual information conveyed
in the message. We were careful to mitigate this concern in the design of our mailings. For
instance, we highlighted the fact that the letter recipients were randomly selected. Never-
theless, some individuals may have ignored or overlooked this cue. Even if the recipients
learned something from the receipt of the audit-statistics message, there is no reason why
they should not learn about the content of the message as well. In other words, the test
presented above continues to be valid, as A&S would still predict that the audit-statistics
message should have a differential effect depending on the values of p and θ.
    To address this concern more directly, we use the audit-threat treatment arm, in which the

   33
     There are some exceptions, such as the coefficient associated with the audit probability for retroactive
payments, but in this case the differences were statistically significant before the treatment too, and therefore
this result is probably spurious.

                                                       30
tax agency made an explicit threat to every recipient and thus is not subject to this concern.
Figure 2.d depicts the difference in the evolution of VAT payments over time between the
two sub-treatments in the audit-threat arm, corresponding to audit probabilities of 50% and
25%. We mostly find no systematic difference between the two groups in post-treatment
VAT payments, although for some quarters (Q3 and Q7), going from 25 to 50 percent audit
probability has a sizable effect on tax compliance. We can also provide a more parametric
test based on en econometric model similar to that of equation 2 for firms assigned to the
audit-threat letter:

                                        Yi = α + γp · pi + Xi δ + i                                        (3)

where pi ∈ {0.25, 0.50} is the audit probability included in the audit-threat letter sent to
firm i. As in the previous regression, A&S implies a positive estimate of γp . Panel (b) of
Table 3 presents the results of the audit-threat treatment arm in this regression form. While
the audit-threat messages implies an elasticity with respect to p of 0.376, this estimate only
borderline significant at the 10% level (p-value of 0.073) and economically small. Moreover,
the pre-treatment (falsification) coefficient (-0.342) is also borderline statistically significant
at the 10% level (p-value of 0.055), indicating that the small post-treatment effect may be
spurious. Taking into account the precision and power concerns, the evidence from Figure
2.d and Panel (b) of Table 3 further reinforces the result that, contrary to the prediction of
A&S, even with a direct and credible threat of an audit, rather than just information about
audit probabilities, tax compliance seems not to depend on the probability of being audited.
    Taken together, we find robust evidence suggesting that firms did not react to the values
of the parameters conveyed in our letters.34 Since we devoted a large fraction of our subject
pool to this treatment arm, these elasticities are quite precisely estimated. In the following
sections we provide a more quantitative test of the A&S model.

5.2.2    A&S Calibration

While the previous section provided a qualitative test on the effects of signals on audit prob-
abilities and penalty rates (i.e., focusing on sign and statistical significance), it is unclear
whether those predictions are quantitatively far from the predictions of A&S model. Those
predictions depend on the specific model at hand and on the values of the underlying param-

   34
       Appendix B.4.3 present a series of robustness checks (alternative specifications based on OLS, Tobit and
Probit models, and using an alternative data source for the dependent variable), and the results are similar.
An additional robustness check, presented in the same Appendix, shows that results are robust if, instead of
estimating the elasticities with respect to p and θ separately, we estimate the elasticity with respect to p ∗ θ
(i.e., the expected penalty per dollar evaded).

                                                      31
eters. In this section we present results from different calibrations. In the following section,
we compare the calibration results to the experimental results.
    We start with the original A&S model. Let Y be the total value-added and let τ = 0.22
be the value added tax rate. Let E be the amount to be under-reported (so τ · E is the
amount evaded). Each firm has a utility from income given by a Constant Relative Risk
Aversion (CRRA) utility function with risk parameter σ. Let p be the probability that the
tax return for a given year will be audited sometime in the future, and θ as the penalty rate
applied over the amount evaded when caught (both of these parameters are defined as in the
audit-statistics treatment).
    Given any reasonable value for the CRRA parameter, the basic A&S model predicts
100% evasion. As a result, we need to use one of the extensions discussed in the literature to
accommodate the evasion rate of 26% observed in practice (as estimated by Gomez-Sabaini
and Jimenez, 2012). We consider the following extensions: endogenous audit probabilities
(Allingham and Sandmo, 1972; Yitzhaki, 1987), third party reporting and whistle-blowing
(Acemoglu and Jackson, 2017), misperceptions about audit parameters (Alm et al., 1992)
and social preferences (Luttmer and Singhal, 2014).
    The probability of being audited can be broken down as p = p0 + p1 YE .35 The parameter
p1 > 0 represents the endogeneity of the audit process, with firms that evade more being
more likely to be audited (in the original A&S model, the audit probability is exogenous so
p1 = 0). We can also allow firms to be caught evading due to some non-audit technology such
as third-party reporting or whistle-blowing. We represent this with an effective probability of
being caught of p + , where the parameter epsilon represents the additional monitoring tool.
To allow for misperceptions, we can simply calibrate p and θ to take the average perceptions
reported in the survey (instead of the values calculated from the administrative records of
the tax agency). And to allow for social preferences, we assume that individuals get some
direct utility from paying taxes equal to the fraction α of the amount paid. This social
responsibility parameter α can take values from 0 to 1, where a higher value denotes higher
social responsibility (in the original A&S, α = 0).
    The optimal evasion choice is given by maximizing the expected utility:

                                                                 
                          E                                        E
                   1−p    Y    −                 1−σ       p    Y    +                                  1−σ
         max                          Y − ατ (Y − E)      +                    Y − ατ (Y − E) − (1 + θ)τ E
        E∈[0,Y ]     1−σ                                          1−σ

Given a set of parameters, it is straightforward to find the optimal value of E that solves

   35
     Note that we implicitly assume that, conditional on being audited, evasion is detected in full. In practice,
this probability may be smaller than 1. If anything, this would only make the A&S result more puzzling:
firms should be even less worried about being audited.

                                                          32
this maximization problem (see details in Appendix C).
    Table 4 presents the calibration results. Each row corresponds to a different calibration
of A&S. The first seven columns correspond to the parameter values. Most important,
                                                                                            (Y −E))
the last two columns correspond to the corresponding elasticities: the elasticity ∂log(τ∂p
corresponds to the percent change in taxes paid when we increase the audit probability by
                                                   (Y −E))
one percentage point; and the elasticity ∂log(τ∂θ          corresponds to the percent change in
taxes paid when we increase the penalty rate by one percentage point.
    All the parameters are calibrated so that they always predict the estimated average evasion
rate for Uruguay ( YE ) of 26% (Gomez-Sabaini and Jimenez, 2012). As a result, all the
predictions in the column corresponding to YE are the same. In the last columns, we present
the two elasticities discussed in the experimental analysis.
    In the first row, we assume a CRRA of 4 and set the audit probability and penalty rate
equal to those estimated from the administrative records (p0 = 0.117 and θ = 0.306). To
match the 26% evasion rate, we allow for a non-audit detection rate of  = 0.581. The
resulting elasticity with respect to p is 4.55 and the elasticity with respect to θ is 3.48. This
is the simplest extension to the A&S model, and given that its predictions are in the middle
range of all our calibrations, we consider this our preferred specification. The remaining
rows present results under alternative calibrations of the model – even though the models are
quite different, the predicted elasticities are in the same order of magnitude as our preferred
specification.
    In the second row, instead of accommodating the evasion rate of 26% by introducing the
non-audit detection rate, we assume a social responsibility parameter of α = 0.195. This very
different approach yields different predicted elasticities, but they are still in the same order
of magnitude: the elasticity with respect to the audit probability is 9.422, and the elasticity
with respect to the penalty rate is 1.208. The third row follows a similar specification from
the second row, but we augment it by allowing for an endogenous audit probability. We let
p0 = p1 = 0.0896, which accommodates two important features of the audit probabilities: the
effective audit probability turns out to be equal to the observed average probability of 11.7%;
and, consistent with the content of the audit-endogeneity message, if a firm that does not
evade taxes ( YE = 0) would double its audit probability if they decided to evade taxes ( YE = 1).
Since this endogeneity parameter is not enough on its own to fit the observed evasion rate,
we again rely on the social responsibility parameter to fit the data by setting α = 0.229.
This specification shows that introducing the endogenous nature of the audit probabilities
does not change the elasticity with respect to the audit probability much (it is 4.386, similar
to the 4.55 from the first specification), although it does substantially reduce the elasticity
with respect to the penalty rate (to 0.59). The fourth row follows a similar specification as


                                                33
in the second row, but we extend it by allowing individuals to have biased perceptions about
the audits: p0 = 0.367 and θ = 0.31. These biases would not be nearly enough on their
own to fit the observed evasion rate, so we again set the social responsibility parameter to
α = 0.590. Again, we obtain elasticities that are of the same order of magnitude as in the
other specifications: the elasticity with respect to the audit probability is 4.02 and the one
with respect to the penalty rate is 1.64. The specifications in the second set of four rows are
identical to those in the first set of four rows, except that we assume a CRRA parameter of
2 instead of a CRRA of 4. The results indicate that assuming a higher risk aversion provides
more conservative estimates, because the lower risk aversion induces larger elasticities.

5.2.3   Comparison between Experimental Results and the A&S Calibration

We can test the null hypothesis that the elasticities with respect to p and θ in the main
specification of the audit-statistics presented in column (1) of Table 3 (γp = −0.118 and
γθ = 0.03) are equal to those in our preferred A&S calibration. We can reject the null that
the elasticity is 3.48 for the penalty rate and that it is 4.55 for the audit probability (both
tests with p-values<0.001). More precisely, the 95% confidence interval for the estimate of
γp in column (1) of Table 3 is [−0.431, 0.492], and the same interval for γθ is [−0.342, 0.107]:
the calibrated elasticities are substantially above these intervals. These calibrated elasticities
are also well beyond the confidence intervals for the coefficients estimated for the audit-threat
model.
    One potential concern with the above comparison is that it is based on the implicit
assumption that a letter conveying the message of a 1 percentage point higher signal of p or
θ will increase the perception of the parameter by the recipient by 1 percentage point. This is
probably a strong assumption: some individuals may not have read the letter in its entirety,
they may have not entirely believed in the content of our message, or may not have updated
their prior by the full value of the signal. For a benchmark, we can compare our setting
with studies of learning from economic variables, such as the inflation rate (Cavallo et al.,
2017), the cost of living (Bottan and Perez-Truglia, 2017), and housing prices (Fuster et al.,
2018). These studies find that for each percentage point increase in the feedback given to
subjects, the average individual updates beliefs about half a percentage point. If we assume
this rate of learning, then we should double the elasticities estimated in our regressions before
comparing them to the calibrations of A&S. Under this assumption, we can still reject the
null that the estimated and the calibrated elasticities of tax compliance with respect to the
audit probability are equal (p-value<0.001 for each γp and γθ ).
    The effect of the differential values of p and θ in the audit-statistics treatments, presented
in Section 5.1 above, can provide a direct estimate of the learning rate in our context. The

                                               34
survey data suggests that a percentage point increase in the signal about the audit proba-
bility provided in the letter increased the perceived audit probability nine months later by
0.397 (SE 0.288) percentage points. Even if it is imprecisely estimated and thus statistically
insignificant at conventional levels, it is reassuring that this point estimate suggests a learn-
ing rate consistent with other learning studies. Moreover, we must keep in mind that due to
multiple factors discussed in Section 5.1 above (e.g., the survey was conducted nine months
after the treatment), this is probably an under-estimate of the true learning rate.
    Indeed, we can reproduce the analysis under an extremely conservative assumption about
the magnitude of the learning rate. Even if we assumed that for each percentage point
difference in the letter individuals only adjusted their beliefs by one tenth of a percentage
point, we would still fail to reject the null hypothesis that the estimated elasticities are equal
to those in the A&S calibration (p-values of 0.072 and <0.001 for the the audit probability
and for the penalty rate, respectively).

5.2.4    Comparison to Related Studies

We can compare our estimated elasticities to those from other studies. There is a literature
that uses laboratory experiments to study tax evasion. These experiments often randomize
the probability of being audited by the experimenter and the penalties involved. Consistent
with our results, those laboratory studies find evidence of probability neglect. For example,
Alm et al. (1992) find an elasticity with respect to the audit probability of 0.169 (comparable
to our estimate of 0.030), and with respect to the penalty rate of 0.037 (comparable to our
estimate of -0.118). Indeed, these elasticities are statistically indistinguishable from those
obtained in our study (p-values of the differences of 0.557 and 0.289, respectively).
    We can also compare our findings to the results from a couple of related field experiments.
Dwenger et al. (2016) conducted a field experiment in the context of a local church tax in
Germany for which enforcement was extremely lax. While their experiment was not designed
to test the A&S model, it did include one treatment arm where the message mentioned
different audit probabilities (p = 0.1, p = 0.2, or p = 0.5). Their results are qualitatively
consistent with our result of probability neglect: the effects of all these probability messages
are statistically indistinguishable from each other. Another related experiment, Kleven et al.
(2011), included a treatment arm with two different audit probabilities. Consistent with our
results, they find economically negligible differences in tax compliance between individuals
assigned to different audit probabilities.36 However, the evidence from Kleven et al. (2011)

  36
     In one of their treatments, they send letters to individuals stating large audit probabilities of p = 50%
and p = 100%. Compared with a group that did not receive any letter, they find that the letters had a
positive and significant effect on declared income and tax liability. The differential effects between these

                                                     35
is not inconsistent with A&S because their subjects face automatic third party reporting,
which our subjects do not. The authors conducted their experiment with wage earners in a
country where tax evasion is automatically detected through third-party reporting regardless
of audits. As a result, A&S predicts that, consistent with their evidence, wage earners should
report their earnings truthfully regardless of the probability of being audited.

5.2.5    Additional Test of A&S

We conducted an additional test of A&S that exploits heterogeneity by prior beliefs. Accord-
ing to A&S, the compliance effect of a given signal about audit probability should depend
on the firm’s prior belief about that probability. For example, a firm receiving a signal that
the audit probability is higher than its prior belief should increase its tax compliance, while
a firm receiving a signal lower than its prior belief should decrease its tax compliance. To
test that hypothesis, we construct a proxy for prior beliefs about audit probability based on
variation in the firms’ pre-treatment exposure to audits. Take for instance two firms that
have been paying taxes for 10 years and, by chance, one of those firms was audited in the past
while the other was not. As a result, the firm that was audited in the past will have a higher
belief about the probability of being audited in the future. The implicit assumption is that,
due to the scant information on the auditing process, firms may be forming beliefs about the
audit probabilities based on their own exposure to audits. The results from this additional
test, reported in detail in Appendix B.3, are also inconsistent with A&S and suggest the
presence of probability neglect.


6       Discussion
In this section, we summarize the findings and discuss their potential interpretations and
implications. We can summarize the results from the experiment with the following three
findings:
    • Increased compliance: on average, the audit-statistics message had a positive effect on
      tax compliance.

    • Reduced subjective probability: on average, the audit-statistics message decreased the
      perceived probability of being audited.

    • Probability neglect: the effect of the audit-statistics message did not depend on the audit
      probability included in the letter nor on the firm’s prior belief about this probability.
two conditions, while statistically significant, is economically negligible: an increase in the signal about
probability of audit from 50% to 100% increases reported income by 0.025% and taxes paid by 0.05%.

                                                    36
Jointly, these findings are inconsistent with the A&S model. This begs the question of which
framework might provide a better fit for these results.
    There are other models from behavioral economics that could explain some but not all
of our findings. One possibility is to incorporate prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky,
1979) into the A&S model (see for example Dhami and al Nowaihi, 2007). This extension of
the model, however, is unlikely to explain our findings. Most important, prospect theory is
unlikely to explain our finding of probability neglect. Although differences between extremely
low probabilities can be ignored under prospect theory, the range of probabilities in our
context was far from what is normally considered extremely low (e.g., in the audit-threat
arm, the probabilities were 25% versus 50%).
    Alternatively, we could consider the salience model (Chetty et al., 2009). In this frame-
work, firms behave as if the probability of detection and the penalty rate are zero unless
these parameters are made salient to them. This explanation could reconcile the findings
of increased compliance and reduced perceived audit probability: even if those who were
sent the messages adjusted their perceived audit probabilities downwards, they would have
behaved as if those probabilities were zero if they had not received those signals. The mes-
sage made them salient and thus not perceived as zero. However, the salience model fails
to fit other features of our findings. First, by definition, salience models imply short-lived
effects. A reminder about a non-salient tax should affect the behavior of an agent only at the
time of receiving the information, but not days or months later. Effectively, salience models
predict a rapid decay of the effect of the information over time. This prediction contradicts
our evidence about the persistent increased compliance from firms that received our audit-
statistics letter. The effect, while decaying, remained for months after the messages were
transmitted. Salience models are also inconsistent with our finding of probability neglect –
making salient a high audit probability should have a stronger impact than making salient a
low audit probability.
    Our preferred interpretation is based on the model of risk-as-feelings (Loewenstein et al.,
2001). The models used for choice under uncertainty are cognitive in that agents make de-
cisions using some type of expectation-based calculus. The risk-as-feelings model proposes
that responses to fearsome situations may differ substantially from cognitive evaluations of
the same risks (Loewenstein and Lerner, 2003).37 When fear is involved, the responses to
risks are quick, automatic, and intuitive, and they tend to neglect the cost-benefit calculus.
A key prediction of this model is that feelings about risk will be mostly insensitive to changes
  37
     A related concept, the affect heuristic, corresponds to the quick, automatic and intuitive evaluations of
risky situations based in emotions, which might be used as shortcut for more complex evaluations of risk
(Slovic et al., 2004). Borrowing Kahneman’s (2003) terminology for the dual system model of the human
mind, emotions might influence the intuitive system.

                                                     37
in probability, which is known in the literature as probability neglect (Sunstein, 2002; Zeck-
hauser and Sunstein, 2010), or the fear that makes individuals focus on the downside of
outcomes and thus ignore the underlying likelihoods. There is evidence of probability neglect
in a range of fearsome situations involving electric shocks, arsenic, abandoned hazardous
waste dumps, pesticides, and anthrax (Sunstein, 2003; Zeckhauser and Sunstein, 2010).
     This model of risk-as-feelings can reconcile our three key findings. The model can reconcile
the findings of increased compliance and reduced subjective probability: even if the perceived
probability of an audit decreased among the treated subjects, they still may be scared into
paying more taxes because they did not rely on cognitive evaluations of probabilities anyway.
The risk-as-feelings model predicts probability neglect and thus fits out third finding too.
     The model of risk-as-feeling suggests that taxpayers overreact to the threat of audits.
Indeed, this excessive caution has been documented in other applications of the model of
risk-as-feelings (Loewenstein et al., 2001).38 This interpretation can provide an explanation
for the paradox that, despite the low audit probabilities and penalty rates, most taxpayers
still report the threat of audits to be a major reason why they report their taxable income
truthfully. For example, a survey by the United States Internal Revenue Service (2018)
indicates that 61% of U.S. taxpayers consider “fear of an audit” to have significant influence
on their tax compliance decisions.39 In comparison, audits are perceived to be as strong of
a deterrent as third-party reporting: 66% of respondents identified “third party reporting
(e.g., wages, interest, dividends)” as an important factor for their tax compliance.
     Moreover, there is some direct evidence that, consistent with the risk-as-feelings model,
taxpayers have an emotional reaction when thinking of tax audits and, more generally, the tax
authority. Some of the evidence comes from laboratory experiments. For instance, Coricelli
et al. (2010) conducted a tax evasion game in the laboratory and measured how emotional
arousal affected tax evasion decisions. They showed that the intensity of emotional arousal
predicts whether individuals evade and by how much. In a related laboratory study, Dul-
leck et al. (2016) showed a significant correlation between tax compliance and physiological
markers of stress during the tax reporting decision. Instances of fear of tax audits can also
be found in the media. For example, a Washington Post (2016) article claims that “a lot of
people are super scared of the Internal Revenue Service” and that its powers “can instill a lot
of fear,” and The New York Times (2009) reported cases where the fear of the tax authority
is so extreme that it is considered a phobia.

  38
      For example, fear to terrorist attacks can make people choose other, more dangerous forms of transport;
and fear of shark attacks can lead to unnecessary legislation (Sunstein, 2002, 2003; Zeckhauser and Sunstein,
2010).
   39
      More precisely, 32% of respondents claim that “fear of audits” exert “a great deal of an influence” and
29% “somewhat of an influence” in whether they honestly report and pay their taxes.

                                                     38
    In other areas of public policy, the risk-as-feelings heuristic can be a problem, because
it distorts facts and promotes irrational judgment, leading to suboptimal decisions from a
pure risk-assessment perspective. For example, Zeckhauser and Sunstein (2010) and others
discuss cases involving regulation of nuclear power, vaccines, and other emotion-arousing
issues. For tax collection, however, these behavioral biases might have positive implications
for the tax authority’s goals. Indeed, there is anecdotal evidence that tax authorities use these
tactics to foster tax compliance. In the United States, for example, a disproportionately large
number of tax enforcement press releases covering criminal convictions and civil injunctions
are released during the weeks immediately preceding Tax Day, presumably to scare taxpayers
into preparing compliant returns (Morse, 2009; Blank and Levin, 2010). Some tax experts
even claim that the IRS “likes [targeting] celebrities because they get the most bang for their
buck in terms of publicity” to “scare the public into complying” (Forbes, 2008).
    In particular, the risk-as-feelings framework indicates that vivid imagery can be used to
instill fear and bias risk evaluations (Slovic et al., 2004; Zeckhauser and Sunstein, 2010). Coin-
cidentally, tax agencies seem to resort to vivid images in some of their advertising campaigns.
A TV advertisement in the United States showed the IRS as “something like poltergeist com-
ing out of a TV set and the world falling apart,” followed by the phrase, “Have you filed your
income tax?” (United Press International, 1988). The U.K. tax agency used advertisement
campaigns that also rely on fear imagery. One poster (reproduced in Appendix D) features a
pair of eyes peeking threateningly through a gash in the paper and reads, “If you’ve declared
all your income you have nothing to fear.” The tax authority in Formosa, Argentina, was per-
haps less subtle: its ad campaign starred a monster kidnapping tax evaders and individuals
in arrears with their taxes.40 This anecdotal evidence suggest that some tax administrations
may be leveraging fear for tax collection.41


7        Conclusions
The canonical model of Allingham and Sandmo (1972) predicts that firms evade taxes by
optimally trading off between the costs and benefits of evasion, but it is unclear whether
real-world firms react to audits in this way. We designed a large-scale field experiment

    40
      They used an aboriginal mythical monster, the “Pombero,” a sort of boogeyman that according to
folklore took away misbehaving children. In fairness, the tax authority claims that the use of the monster
was supposed to be humorous. However, they may have tried to send a subliminal message (Clarin, 2016).
   41
      Whether these fear tactics should be used by tax agencies or not, however, is outside the scope of
this paper. These tactics may be ethically questionable, for example to the extent to which they rely on
deception. Moreover, actively promoting fear could have unintended negative effects, such as imposing
negative psychological stress on taxpayers. For a discussion on the ethical and practical issues with the use
of communication efforts to increase tax compliance, see for example Morse (2009).

                                                     39
in collaboration with Uruguay’s tax authority to assess the factors behind firms’ evasion
behavior and their reactions to audits. Our findings indicate that firms do increase their tax
compliance when informed about the auditing process. However, we do not find this reaction
to be consistent with the predictions of A&S. For example, the information about audits
decreased (rather than increased) the perceived probability of being audited; also, the effects
of our messages about audit probabilities were independent of the signal we conveyed and
of the firms’ prior beliefs. Models of salience are consistent with the increased compliance
we observed and with the reduced perceived perception of audit probabilities, but they are
not consistent with our findings of probability neglect. We argue that all three findings can
be reconciled by the risk-as-feelings model, which highlights the role of emotions in decision-
making and which predicts that agents might exhibit probability neglect in dreaded or feared
situations, like paying taxes.
    Our findings also contribute to the more general debate about the determinants of tax
compliance. One of the main puzzles in the literature is that evasion rates seem too low.
Third-party reporting can explain high compliance for some sources of income, such as wage
income (Kleven et al., 2011). However, we would expect much higher evasion rates in other
contexts, such as self-employed income, where there is limited third-party reporting and
low detection probabilities and penalty rates. One traditional explanation for this puzzle is
based on tax morale: firms and individuals do not evade taxes because it is the right thing
to do (Luttmer and Singhal, 2014). Our evidence suggests an alternative explanation for the
puzzle: due to the emotional nature of the decision, audits scare taxpayers into compliance
in the same way that scarecrows scare birds.
    We conclude by discussing some policy implications. In the traditional framework of A&S,
the relevant policy lever is the number of audits: the tax agency must find the point at which
the marginal cost of an additional audit equals the expected marginal benefit (i.e., higher
tax revenues). Our findings suggest that small and medium firms face significant information
and optimization frictions when reacting to audits. These frictions introduce new levers
for policy-making. For example, tax agencies can decide whether to be transparent about
the auditing process,42 whether to contact taxpayers to remind them of it, and whether to
make the costs of being a tax cheat salient and vivid through advertisement campaigns.43

  42
       On the one hand, our evidence indicates that increasing transparency about the audit probability would
reduce the average perceived probability of being audited, which could in turn reduce tax compliance. On
the other hand, our finding of probability neglect suggests that, in the end, the reduction in perceived audit
probability may not affect tax compliance.
    43
       For a practical discussion on how to implement this type of policy, including the drawbacks, see Morse
(2009). Furthermore, this same principle can be used to improve compliance with other laws. For instance,
Dur and Vollaard (2019) show experimental evidence that salience of law enforcement can be used to reduce
illegal garbage disposal.

                                                     40
Indeed, we discussed anecdotal evidence that some tax agencies may already have a working
knowledge of these policy levers. For example, some tax agencies seem to avoid transparency
about the auditing process while increasing visibility of enforcement actions around tax day.
Some even refer to fear in their advertisement campaigns. However, there is no direct evidence
on whether these policies effectively increase tax compliance or whether they have unintended
effects, such as instigating enough fear in taxpayers to make them so anxious and unhappy
that it trumps the positive effects of tax revenues. As stated by Alm (2019) in a recent
review of the literature, “the role of emotions in tax compliance decisions remains largely
unexamined.” Our results highlight the need for more research on probability neglect in the
decision to pay taxes. Moreover, additional research should examine the role of emotions on
other important economic choices beyond tax compliance.




                                             41
References
Acemoglu, D. and M. O. Jackson (2017). Social Norms and the Enforcement of Laws. Journal of
  the European Economic Association 15 (2), 245–295.

Allingham, M. G. and A. Sandmo (1972). Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical Analysis. Journal
  of Public Economics 1, 323–338.

Alm, J. (2019). What motivates tax compliance? Journal of Economic Surveys 33 (2), 353–388.

Alm, J., B. Jackson, and M. McKee (1992). Estimating the Determinants of Taxpayer Compliance
  with Experimental Data. National Tax Journal 45 (1), 107–114.

Alm, J., G. H. McClelland, and W. Schulze (1992). Why do people pay taxes? Journal of Public
  Economics 48 (1), 21–38.

Becker, G. S. (1968). Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 76 (2), 169–217.

Bergman, M. and A. Nevarez (2006). Do Audits Enhance Compliance? An Empirical Assessment
  of VAT Enforcement. National Tax Journal 59 (4), 817–832.

Bergolo, M., R. Ceni, G. Cruces, M. Giaccobasso, and R. Perez-Truglia (2018). Misperceptions
  about Tax Audits. AEA Papers and Proceedings 108, 83–87.

Blank, J. D. and D. Z. Levin (2010). When Is Tax Enforcement Publicized? Virginia Tax Review 30.

Blumenthal, M., C. Christian, and J. Slemrod (2001). Do Normative Appeals Affect Tax Com-
  pliance? Evidence From a Controlled Experiment in Minnesota. National Tax Journal 54 (1),
  125–138.

Bottan, N. L. and R. Perez-Truglia (2017). Choosing Your Pond: Location Choices and Relative
  Income. NBER Working Paper (23615).

Bruin, W. J. A. B. d., P. S. Fischbeck, N. A. Stiber, and B. Fischhoff (2002). What number is
  "fifty-fifty"? Redistributing excess 50% responses in risk perception studies. Risk Analysis 22 (4),
  725–735.

Bruine de Bruin, W. and K. G. Carman (2012). Measuring Risk Perceptions: What Does the
  Excessive Use of 50% Mean? Medical Decision Making 32 (2), 232–236.

Castro, L. and C. Scartascini (2015). Tax Compliance and Enforcement in the Pampas Evidence
  From a Field Experiment. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 116, 65–82.

Cavallo, A., G. Cruces, and R. Perez-Truglia (2017, July). Inflation Expectations, Learning, and
  Supermarket Prices: Evidence from Survey Experiments. American Economic Journal: Macroe-
  conomics 9 (3), 1–35.

Chetty, R., A. Looney, and K. Kroft (2009). Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence. The
  American Economic Review 99 (4), 1145–77.

Clarin (2016, September). Polemica campana en formosa al que no paga los impuestos se lo lleva
  el pombero. Clarin.

                                                 42
Coricelli, G., M. Joffily, C. Montmarquette, and M. C. Villeval (2010). Cheating, Emotions, and
  Rationality: An Experiment on Tax Evasion. Experimental Economics 13 (2), 226–247.

Cowell, F. A. and J. P. F. Gordon (1988). Unwillingness to pay: Tax evasion and public good
  provision. Journal of Public Economics 36 (3), 305–321.

DellaVigna, S. and M. Gentzkow (2017). Uniform Pricing in US Retail Chains. Working Paper
  23996, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Dhami, S. and A. al Nowaihi (2007). Prospect theory versus expected utility theory: Why Do
  People Pay Taxes? Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 64 (1), 171–192.

Dulleck, U., J. Fooken, C. Newton, A. Ristl, M. Schaffner, and B. Torgler (2016). Tax compliance
  and psychic costs: Behavioral experimental evidence using a physiological marker. Journal of
  Public Economics 134, 9 – 18.

Dur, R. and B. Vollaard (2019). Salience of law enforcement a field experiment. Journal of Envi-
  ronmental Economics and Management 93 (C), 208–220.

Dwenger, N., H. Kleven, I. Rasul, and J. Rincke (2016). Extrinsic and Intrinsic Motivations for
 Tax Compliance: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Germany. American Economic Journal:
 Economic Policy 8 (3), 203–232.

Erard, B. and J. S. Feinstein (1994). The Role of Moral Sentiment and Audit Perceptions in Tax
  Compliance. Public Finance 49, 70–89.

Fellner, G., R. Sausgruber, and C. Traxler (2013). Testing Enforcement Strategies in the Field:
  Threat, Moral Appeal and Social Information. Journal of the European Economic Associa-
  tion 11 (3), 634–660.

Forbes (2008, July). Pity The Celebrity Taxpayer. Forbes.

Fuster, A., R. Perez-Truglia, and B. Zafar (2018). Expectations with Endogenous Information
  Acquisition: An Experimental Investigation. NBER Working Paper.

Gomez-Sabaini, J. C. and J. P. Jimenez (2012). Tax structure and tax evasion in Latin America.
  Macroeconomics of Development Series 118.

Gomez-Sabaini, J. C. and D. Moran (2014). Tax policy in Latin America Assessment and guidelines
  for a second generation of reforms. Macroeconomics of Development Series 133.

Hallsworth, M., J. A. List, R. D. Metcalfe, and I. Vlaev (2017). The behavioralist as tax collector:
  Using natural field experiments to enhance tax compliance. Journal of Public Economics 148,
  14–31.

Harris, L. and I. Associates (1988). 1987 taxpayer opinion survey. Washington, DC: Internal
  Revenue Service Document.

Kahneman, D. (2003). A Perspective on Judgement and Choice: Mapping Bounded Rationality.
  American Psychologist 58 (9), 697–720.

Kahneman, D., P. Slovic, and A. Tversky (Eds.) (1982). Judgment under uncertainty: heuristics
  and biases. Cambridge ; New York: Cambridge University Press.

                                                43
Kahneman, D. and A. Tversky (1974). Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Sci-
  ence 185 (4157), 1124–1131.

Kahneman, D. and A. Tversky (1979). Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk.
  Econometrica 47 (2), 263–291.

Kleven, H. J., M. B. Knudsen, T. Kreiner, S. Pedersen, and E. Saez (2011). Unwilling or Unable to
  Cheat? Evidence from a Randomized Tax Audit Experiment in Denmark. Econometrica 79 (3),
  651–692.

Konrad, K. A., T. Lohse, and S. Qari (2016). Compliance With Endogenous Audit Probabilities.
  Scandinavian Journal of Economics.

Lichtenstein, S., P. Slovic, B. Fischho, M. Layman, and B. Combs (1978). Judged frequency of
  lethal events. Journal of experimental psychology: Human learning and memory 4 (6), 551.

Loewenstein, G. and S. Lerner (2003). The role of affect in decision making. In R. Davidson,
  K. Scherer, and H. Goldsmith (Eds.), Handbook of Affictive Sciences. Oxford: Oxford University
  Press.

Loewenstein, G. F., E. U. Weber, C. K. Hsee, and N. Welch (2001). Risk as feelings. Psychological
  Bulletin 127 (2), 267–286.

Luttmer, E. F. P. and M. Singhal (2014). Tax Morale. Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (4),
  149–168.

McKenzie, D. (2012). Beyond baseline and follow-up: The case for more T in experiments. Journal
 of Development Economics 99 (2), 210–221.

Meiselman, B. S. (2018). Ghostbusting in detroit: Evidence on nonfilers from a controlled field
 experiment. Journal of Public Economics 158, 180 – 193.

Morse, S. C. (2009). Using Salience and Influence to Narrow the Tax Gap. Loyola University
 Chicago Law Journal 40, 483.

Naritomi, J. (2019, September). Consumers as tax auditors.

New York Times (2009, April). A Paralyzing Fear of Filing Taxes. New York Times.

Perez-Truglia, R. and U. Troiano (2018). Shaming tax delinquents. Journal of Public Economics 167,
  120–137.

Pomeranz, D. (2015). No Taxation Without Information: Deterrence and Self-Enforcement in the
  Value Added Tax. The American Economic Review 105 (8), 2539–2569.

Pomeranz, D. and J. Vila-Belda (2018). Taking State-Capacity Research to the Field: Insights from
  Collaborations with Tax Authorities.

Reinganum, J. F. and L. L. Wilde (1985). Income tax compliance in a principal agent framework.
  Journal of Public Economics 26 (1), 1–18.

Saez, E., J. Slemrod, and S. Giertz (2012). The elasticity of taxable income with respect to marginal
  tax rates: A critical review. Journal of Economic Literature 50 (1), 3–50.

                                                 44
Scholz, J. T. and N. Pinney (1995). Duty, Fear, and Tax Compliance: The heuristic basis of
  citizenship behavior. American Journal of Political Science 39, 2.

Slemrod, J. (2008). Does It Matter Who Writes the Check to the Government? The Economics of
   Tax Remittance. National Tax Journal 61.

Slemrod, J. (2018). Tax Compliance and Enforcement. Journal of Eonomic Literature Forthcoming.

Slemrod, J., M. Blumenthal, and C. Christian (2001). Taxpayer Response to an Increased Prob-
   ability of Audit: Evidence from a Controlled Experiment in Minnesota. Journal of Public Eco-
   nomics 79 (3), 455–483.

Slovic, P., M. L. Finucane, E. Peters, and D. G. MacGregor (2004). Risk as analysis and risk as
   feelings: some thoughts about affect, reason, risk, and rationality. Risk Analysis: An Official
   Publication of the Society for Risk Analysis 24 (2), 311–322.

Srinivasan, T. N. (1973). Tax Evasion: A Model. Journal of Public Economics 2 (4), 339–346.

Sunstein, C. (2002). Probability Neglect: Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law. Yale Law Jour-
  nal 112 (1), 61–107.

Sunstein, C. R. (2003). Terrorism and probability neglect. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 26 (2-3),
  121–136.

United Press International (1988). Psychologist takes issue with irs scare tactic. UPI-United Press
  International.

United States Internal Revenue Service (2018). Comprehensive Taxpayer Attitude Survey (CTAS)
  2017 Executive Report. Publication 5296 (Rev. 3-2018) Catalog Number 71353Y, Department of
  Treasury, Washington, D.C.

Washington Post (2016, August). That is NOT the IRS Calling You! The Washington Post.

Yitzhaki, S. (1987). On the Excess Burden of Tax Evasion. Public Finance Review 15 (2), 123–137.

Zeckhauser, R. and C. R. Sunstein (2010). Dreadful Possibilities, Neglected Probabilities. In
  E. Michel-Kerjan and P. Slovic (Eds.), The Irrational Economist: Making Decisions in a Dan-
  gerous World, pp. 116–123. New York: Public Affairs Press.




                                                45
                                             Table 1: Balance of Firm Characteristics across Treatment Groups
                                                                             Main Sample                                          Secondary Sample

                                                        Audit      Public     Audit                                     Audit            Audit
                                                      Statistics   Goods    Endogeneity    Baseline   p-value test   Threat (25%)     Threat (50%)    p-value test
                                                         (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)              (7)             (8)

     Share paid VAT taxes (3 months pre-mailing)         0.92       0.94        0.93         0.93         0.18            0.90             0.89           0.54
                                                        (0.00)     (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)                       (0.01)           (0.01)
     Amount of VAT paid (3 months pre-mailing)           1.87       1.96        1.93         1.91         0.56            1.74             1.75           0.95
                                                        (0.03)     (0.07)      (0.07)       (0.06)                       (0.10)           (0.09)
     Years registered in tax agency                     15.34      14.75       15.70        15.01         0.27           19.45            19.42           0.94
                                                        (0.17)     (0.22)      (0.54)       (0.22)                       (0.28)           (0.29)
     Share audited between 2013-2015                     0.11       0.10        0.09         0.10         0.30            0.13             0.15           0.38
                                                        (0.00)     (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)                       (0.01)           (0.01)
     Number of employees                                 4.81       4.66        4.88         5.09         0.96            4.83             4.88           0.80
                                                        (0.26)     (0.54)      (0.57)       (0.64)                       (0.13)           (0.12)
     Share retail trade sector                           0.22       0.22        0.21         0.23         0.78            0.33             0.32           0.40
                                                        (0.00)     (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)                       (0.01)           (0.01)
46




     Share Agricultural, forest and others               0.03       0.03        0.03         0.03         0.77            0.03             0.04           0.12
                                                        (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)                       (0.00)           (0.00)
     Share construction sector                           0.03       0.03        0.03         0.03         0.85            0.03             0.03           0.33
                                                        (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)                       (0.00)           (0.00)
     Share other sector                                  0.73       0.73        0.73         0.72         0.95            0.61             0.62           0.54
                                                        (0.00)     (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)                       (0.01)           (0.01)

     Observations                                       10,272     2,017       2,039         2,064                       2,015            2,033

     Notes: Averages for different pre-treatment firm-level characteristics, by treatment group and type of sample (robust standard errors in parentheses). The main
     sample includes all firms selected as described in section 3.2. The secondary sample includes high risk firms selected by the IRS. Standard errors in parentheses.
     The last column of each sample reports the p-value of a test in which the null hypothesis is that the mean is equal for all the treatment groups. Data on
     VAT amount and firm characteristics comes from administrative tax records (including monthly payments, annual tax returns and auditing registers). Robust
     standard errors in parentheses.
     .
Table 2: Average Effects of Audit-Statistics, Audit-Endogeneity and Public-Goods Messages on VAT and
Other Tax Payments by Time Horizon and Payment Timing

                               By Time Horizon              By Payment Timing                        By Tax Type
                          First Year     Second Year      Retroactive     Concurrent     Non - VAT       VAT + Non-VAT
                              (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)            (5)               (6)

 a. Audit - Statitstics (N= 10,272) vs Baseline (N= 2,064)

      Post-Treatment        0.063**          0.032         0.381***         0.044*         0.077**            0.052**
                            (0.025)         (0.031)         (0.131)         (0.026)         (0.037)            (0.026)
      Pre-Treatment          -0.008         -0.003           -0.132          -0.005          0.016              0.037
                            (0.021)         (0.025)         (0.105)         (0.022)         (0.045)            (0.026)

 b. Audit - Endogeneity (N= 2,039) vs Baseline (N= 2,064)

      Post-Treatment        0.074**          0.038          0.314**         0.061*         0.084**            0.079***
                            (0.032)         (0.039)         (0.139)         (0.033)         (0.041)            (0.031)
      Pre-Treatment          -0.006         0.072**          0.008           -0.003          0.006              0.027
                            (0.027)         (0.030)         (0.125)         (0.027)         (0.056)            (0.031)

 c. Public - Goods (N= 2,017) vs Baseline (N= 2,064)

      Post-Treatment         0.043           0.006           0.195           0.032           0.001              0.018
                            (0.030)         (0.036)         (0.134)         (0.031)         (0.048)            (0.029)
      Pre-Treatment          -0.004          0.031           -0.192          0.002          -0.047             -0.004
                            (0.026)         (0.028)         (0.124)         (0.026)         (0.046)            (0.027)


 Notes: * significant at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level, *** at the 1% level. Robust standard errors in parentheses. The
 results are based on Poisson regressions, so coefficients can be interpreted directly as semi-elasticities. Panel a. compares
 the audit-statistics message with the baseline letter, while results in panels b. and c. replicate the comparison for audit-
 endogeneity and public-goods messages. In the first row of each panel, the dependent variable is the amount of VAT
 payments (in dollars) after receiving the letter. The second row presents a falsification test in which we estimate the same
 regression but using the amount contributed before receiving the mailing (pre-treatment) as the dependent variable. All
 regressions are estimated with a set of monthly controls that correspond to the year before the outcome: for the the post-
 treatment outcome regression, we include monthly VAT payment controls from September, 2014 to August, 2015, and for
 the pre-treatment outcome we include the same variables for the September 2013 – August 2014 period. We also restrict the
 analysis to firms that effectively received the letter as reported by the postal service. Columns (1) and (2) report the effect
 of treatment by time horizon. Column (1) presents the estimates of the effect for the first year (October 2015 – September
 2016) while Column (2) reports the effect of the letter in the second year after the treatment (October 2016 – September
 2017). Columns (3) and (4) present the first year effect of treatment on retroactive (3) and concurrent (4) VAT payments.
 Columns (5) and (6) report the first year results by type of tax. Column (5) presents the effect of the treatment on other
 (non-VAT) tax payments, while column (6) reports the effect on the total amount of taxes paid by the firms during the
 same period.
 .




                                                             47
Table 3: Elasticities of Tax Payments with Respect to Audit Probability and Penalty Rate, Audit-
Statistics and Audit-Threat Sub-Treatments


                                          By Time Horizon                    By Payment Timing                             By Tax Type
                                    First Year       Second Year         Retroactive        Concurrent        Non - VAT         VAT + Non-VAT
                                        (1)              (2)                 (3)               (4)               (5)                 (6)

 a. Audit - Statitstics (N= 10,272)

     Audit Probability (%)

          Post-Treatment                0.030             0.170              -2.136**           0.162             0.127                 0.094
                                       (0.236)           (0.236)             (1.040)           (0.246)           (0.440)               (0.266)
          Pre-Treatment                 0.025             -0.041             -1.984**           0.123             0.192                 0.111
                                       (0.115)           (0.069)             (0.806)           (0.121)           (0.388)               (0.169)
     Penalty Size (%)

          Post-Treatment               -0.118            -0.233*              1.044            -0.191*            -0.291                -0.179
                                       (0.115)           (0.122)             (0.742)           (0.112)           (0.180)               (0.112)
          Pre-Treatment                -0.001             0.049               0.032            -0.001           -0.376**                -0.136
                                       (0.088)           (0.034)             (0.470)           (0.093)           (0.168)               (0.086)

 b. Audit - Threat Letters (N= 4,048)

     Audit Probability (%)

          Post-Treatment               0.376*            0.378*               0.831             0.335             0.164                 0.295*
                                       (0.210)           (0.220)             (0.944)           (0.216)           (0.185)               (0.170)
          Pre-Treatment               -0.342*             -0.214              0.013            -0.289             -0.219              -0.308**
                                       (0.178)           (0.162)             (0.647)           (0.182)           (0.163)               (0.142)


 Notes: * significant at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level, *** at the 1% level. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Panel a. presents the
 effect of providing different information regarding p and θ in the audit-statistics message. Panel b. compares the two audit-threat messages, i.e.
 the 50% threat of audit vs. the 25% threat of audit. Rows (1) and (3) of panel a. present the effect of an additional percentage point of p and
 θ (respectively) in the information included in the letters on post-treatment VAT payments. The results are based on Poisson regressions, so
 coefficients can be interpreted directly as semi-elasticities. Regressions are estimated using monthly pre-treatment controls and the stratification
 variable used to randomize the parameters. Rows (2) and (4) present a falsification test in which we estimate the same regression using pre-
 treatment information as the dependent variable. All regressions are estimated with a set of monthly controls that correspond to the year before
 the outcome: for the the post-treatment outcome regression, we include monthly VAT payment controls from September, 2014 to August, 2015,
 and for the pre-treatment outcome we include the same variables for the September 2013 – August 2014 period. We also restrict the analysis to
 firms that effectively received the letter as reported by the postal service. Row (1) in panel b. presents the post-treatment effect of receiving the
 audit-threat letter with a probability of 50% relative to receiving the letter with the 25% probability treatment. Row (2) of panel b. replicates
 the estimates for the pre-treatment outcomes. Columns (1) and (2) report the effect of treatment by time horizon. Column (1) presents the
 estimates of the effect for the first year (October 2015 – September 2016) while Column (2) reports the effect of the letter in the second year after
 the treatment (October 2016 – September 2017). Columns (3) and (4) present the first year effect of treatment on retroactive (3) and concurrent
 (4) VAT payments. Columns (5) and (6) report the first year results by type of tax. Column (5) presents the effect of the treatment on other
 (non-VAT) tax payments, while column (6) reports the effect on the total amount of taxes paid by the firms during the same period.
 .




                                                                        48
                       Table 4: Predicted Elasticities under Different A&S Calibrations

                                     Setup                                           Predictions
                                                                           E     ∂log(τ (Y −E))   ∂log(τ (Y −E))
             σ     τ       p0        p1               θ           α       Y           ∂p               ∂θ
             4   0.22     0.117      0       0.581   0.306         1      0.26      4.548            3.475
             4   0.22     0.117      0         0     0.306        0.195   0.26      9.422            1.208
             4   0.22    0.0896    0.0896      0     0.306        0.229   0.26      4.386            0.592
             4   0.22     0.367      0         0      0.31        0.590   0.26      4.021            1.642
             2   0.22     0.117      0       0.620   0.306         1      0.26      9.854            6.600
             2   0.22     0.117      0         0     0.306        0.169   0.26      18.857           2.111
             2   0.22    0.0896    0.0896      0     0.306        0.202   0.26      5.556            0.664
             2   0.22     0.367      0         0      0.31        0.534   0.26      8.038            2.829


Notes: Each row corresponds to a different calibration of the extended A&S model presented in Section 5.2.2. The first
seven columns correspond to the parameter values. The last three columns correspond to the predictions of the model
under those parameter values. The predicted evasion rate ( YE ) is always 26% because all the specifications were calibrated
to match that rate..




                                                             49
     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Percent
                                                                                                                                                                           Percent                                                                              Percent                                                                               Percent                                                                               Percent                                                                   0        10             20        30
                                                                                                                                                             0        10             20        30                                                 0        10             20        30                                                  0        10             20        30                                                  0        10             20        30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                          0                                                                                    0                                                                                    0                                                                                     0                                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                              −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                                         2.
                                                                                                                                                  2.                                                                                   2.                                                                                   2.                                                                                    2.                                                                                      49
                                                                                                                                                    49                                                                                   49                                                                                   49                                                                                    49                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                      2.                 %                                                                 2.                 %                                                                 2.                 %                                                                  2.                 %                                                                  2.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                                                                                          5                                                                                    5                                                                                  5                                                                                     5                                                                                           −
                                                                                                                                              −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                                         4.
                                                                                                                                                  4.                                                                                   4.                                                                                   4.                                                                                    4.                                                                                         99
                                                                                                                                                    99                                                                                   99                                                                                      99                                                                                    99
                                                                                                                                                         %                                                                                    %                                                                                    %                                                                                     %                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                          5                                                                                    5                                                                                    5                                                                                     5                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                              −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                                     −
                                                                                                                                                  7.                                                                                   7.                                                                                   7.                                                                                    7.                                                                                    7.
                                                                                                                                                    49                                                                                   49                                                                                   49                                                                                    49                                                                                    49
                                                                                                                                      7.                 %                                                                 7.                 %                                                                 7.                 %                                                                  7.                 %                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                          5                                                                                    5                                                                                  5                                                                                     5                                                                                   7.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                                                                                              −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                                     −
                                                                                                                                                  9.                                                                                   9.                                                                                   9.                                                                                    9.                                                                                    9.
                                                                                                                                                    99                                                                                   99                                                                                      99                                                                                    99
                                                                                                                                  10                     %                                                             10                     %                                                             10                     %                                                              10                     %                                                                                   99
                                                                                                                                           −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                            10                        %
                                                                                                                                               12                                                                                   12                                                                                   12                                                                                    12                                                                                −
                                                                                                                                 12                .4                                                                 12                .4                                                                 12                 .4                                                                 12                 .4                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                      .5              9%                                                                   .5              9%                                                                   .5               9%                                                                   .5               9%                                                                                 .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                           −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                                .5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9%
                                                                                                                                               14                                                                                   14                                                                                   14                                                                                    14                                                                                −
                                                                                                                                                    .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                    .9                                                                               14
                                                                                                                                  15                    9%                                                             15                    9%                                                             15                     9%                                                             15                     9%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .9
                                                                                                                                           −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                            15                     9%
                                                                                                                                               17                                                                                   17                                                                                   17                                                                                    17
                                                                                                                                 17                .4                                                                 17                .4                                                                 17                 .4                                                                 17                 .4                                                                           −
                                                                                                                                      .5              9%                                                                   .5              9%                                                                   .5               9%                                                                   .5               9%                                                                            17
                                                                                                                                           −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                           17                 .4
                                                                                                                                               19                                                                                   19                                                                                   19                                                                                    19                                                                                            9%
                                                                                                                                                    .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                    .9                                                                      .5
                                                                                                                                                        9%                                                                                   9%                                                                                    9%                                                                                    9%                                                                      −




                                                                                                                                                                                                    a.5. p: Group 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a.4. p: Group 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a.3. p: Group 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a.2. p: Group 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a.1. p: Group 1




                                                                                                                                  20                                                                                   20                                                                                   20                                                                                    20                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                                                           −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                                              .9
                                                                                                                                               22                                                                                   22                                                                                   22                                                                                    22                                                                       20                     9%
                                                                                                                                 22                .4                                                                 22                .4                                                                 22                 .4                                                                 22                 .4
                                                                                                                                      .5              9%                                                                   .5              9%                                                                   .5               9%                                                                   .5               9%                                                                        −
                                                                                                                                           −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                                         22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                                                                                                                               24                                                                                   24                                                                                   24                                                                                    24                                                                      22                    9%
                                                                                                                                                    .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                    .9                                                                      .5
                                                                                                                                                        9%                                                                                   9%                                                                                    9%                                                                                    9%                                                                      −
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9%




50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0   10         20            30   40
                                                                                                                                                             0   10         20            30   40                                                 0   10         20            30   40                                                  0   10         20            30   40                                                  0   10         20            30   40                     15
                                                                                                                                 15                                                                                   15                                                                                   15                                                                                    15                                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                      −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                                          19
                                                                                                                                           19                                                                                   19                                                                                   19                                                                                    19                                                                                        .9
                                                                                                                                               .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                    .9                                                                      20                9%
                                                                                                                                 20               9  %                                                                20               9   %                                                               20                9%                                                                  20                9%                                                                       −
                                                                                                                                      −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                                          24
                                                                                                                                           24                                                                                   24                                                                                   24                                                                                    24                                                                                        .9
                                                                                                                                               .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                    .9                                                                      25                9%
                                                                                                                                 25               9  %                                                                25               9   %                                                               25                9%                                                                  25                9%                                                                       −
                                                                                                                                      −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                                          29
                                                                                                                                           29                                                                                   29                                                                                   29                                                                                    29                                                                                        .9
                                                                                                                                               .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                    .9                                                                      30                9%
                                                                                                                                 30               9  %                                                                30               9   %                                                               30                9%                                                                  30                9%
                                                                                                                                      −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                                     −
                                                                                                                                           34                                                                                   34                                                                                   34                                                                                    34                                                                                    34
                                                                                                                                               .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                    .9                                                                                    .9
                                                                                                                                 35               9  %                                                                35               9   %                                                               35                9%                                                                  35                9%                                                                  35                9%
                                                                                                                                      −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                                     −
                                                                                                                                           39                                                                                   39                                                                                   39                                                                                    39                                                                                    39
                                                                                                                                               .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                    .9                                                                                    .9
                                                                                                                                 40               9  %                                                                40               9   %                                                               40                9%                                                                  40                9%                                                                  40                9%
                                                                                                                                      −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                                     −
                                                                                                                                           44                                                                                   44                                                                                   44                                                                                    44                                                                                    44
                                                                                                                                               .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                    .9                                                                                    .9
                                                                                                                                 45               9  %                                                                45               9   %                                                               45                9%                                                                  45                9%                                                                  45                9%
                                                                                                                                      −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                                     −
                                                                                                                                           49                                                                                   49                                                                                   49                                                                                    49                                                                                    49
                                                                                                                                               .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                    .9                                                                                    .9
                                                                                                                                 50               9  %                                                                50               9   %                                                               50                9%                                                                  50                9%                                                                  50                9%
                                                                                                                                      −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                                     −
                                                                                                                                           54                                                                                   54                                                                                   54                                                                                    54                                                                                    54
                                                                                                                                               .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                    .9                                                                                    .9
                                                                                                                                 55               9  %                                                                55               9   %                                                               55                9%                                                                  55                9%                                                                  55                9%
                                                                                                                                      −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                                     −
                                                                                                                                           59                                                                                   59                                                                                   59                                                                                    59                                                                                    59
                                                                                                                                               .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                    .9
                                                                                                                                                  9                                                                                    9




                                                                                                                                                                                                    b.5. θ: Group 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         b.4. θ: Group 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               b.3. θ: Group 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     b.2. θ: Group 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             b.1. θ: Group 1




                                                                                                                                 60                  %                                                                60                   %                                                               60                9%                                                                  60                9%                                                                                .9
                                                                                                                                      −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                                60                9%
                                                                                                                                           64                                                                                   64                                                                                   64                                                                                    64                                                                               −
                                                                                                                                               .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                    .9                                                                                64
                                                                                                                                 65               9  %                                                                65               9   %                                                               65                9%                                                                  65                9%                                                                                .9
                                                                                                                                      −                                                                                    −                                                                                    −                                                                                     −                                                                                65                9%
                                                                                                                                           69                                                                                   69                                                                                   69                                                                                    69                                                                               −
                                                                                                                                               .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                   .9                                                                                    .9                                                                                69
                                                                                                                                                  9  %                                                                                 9   %                                                                                 9%                                                                                    9%                                                                                .9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 1: Distribution of Statistics Shown in Audit-Statistics Letters by VAT Payment Quintiles




     and penalty rate (θ, in panel b). Group 1 through 5 correspond to each of the pre-treatment VAT payment quintiles.
     Notes: Notes: N=10,272. Information provided in the audit-statistics letter: probability of being audited (p, in panel a)
Figure 2: Average Effects of Audit-Statistics, Audit-Endogeneity, Public-Goods and Audit-Threat Mes-
sages, By Quarter
                                 a. Audit-Statistics vs. Baseline                                                       b. Audit-Endogeneity vs. Baseline
                     0.2




                                                                                                            0.2
                                                 Point Estimate           90% CI                                                         Point Estimate           90% CI
                     0.1
  Treatment Effect




                                                                                         Treatment Effect

                                                                                                            0.1
                     0.0




                                                                                                            0.0
                     −0.1




                                                                                                            −0.1
                            −2   −1   +1    +2    +3       +4   +5   +6   +7   +8                                  −2     −1   +1   +2    +3       +4   +5   +6   +7   +8
                                                 Quarter                                                                                 Quarter


                                 c. Public-Goods vs. Baseline                                                      d. Audit-Threat: p = 0.50 vs. p = 0.25
                     0.2




                                                                                                            1.0
                                                 Point Estimate           90% CI                                                         Point Estimate           90% CI

                                                                                                            0.5
                     0.1
  Treatment Effect




                                                                                         Treatment Effect

                                                                                                            0.0
                     0.0




                                                                                                            −0.5
                                                                                                            −1.0
                     −0.1




                            −2   −1   +1    +2    +3       +4   +5   +6   +7   +8                                  −2     −1   +1   +2    +3       +4   +5   +6   +7   +8
                                                 Quarter                                                                                 Quarter


 Notes: These figures plot the quarterly effects of eaither, each treatment arm when compared to the baseline letter (Panels
 a. to c.) or across treatments (Panel d.). Panel a. (N=12,336) presents the effect of the audit-statistics message on total
 quarterly VAT payments, while panel b. (N=4,103) represents the effect of the audit-endogeneity message and panel c.
 (N=4,081) depicts the effect of the public-goods message on the same outcome variable. Panel d. (N=4,048) represents the
 effect of the audit-threat message (50% vs 25%). Each point (red circle) in the plot represents the estimate of the effect of
 treatment on VAT payments for a specific quarter from two quarters before treatment up to eight quarters after receiving
 the letter. Regressions do not include monthly pre-treatment controls. The results are based on Poisson regressions, so
 coefficients can be interpreted directly as semi-elasticities. 90% confidence intervals represented by red lines computed with
 robust standard errors.
 .




                                                                                    51
Figure 3: Survey Results: Perception of Audit Probabilities and of Tax Evasion Penalty Rates by Treat-
ment Group
                                                                                       a. Audit Probability (p)                                                                                                                                                      b. Penalty Rate (θ)

                                                                                                                         Perceived (pooled control group)                                                                                                                                        Perceived (pooled control group)
                     60




                                                                                                                                                                                             60
                                                                                                                         Mean = 40.7%                                                                                                                                                            Mean = 30.5%
                                                                                     Letters                             Perceived (audit−statistics)                                                                                                                                            Perceived (audit−statistics)
                                                                                                                         Mean = 35.2%                                                                                                                                                            Mean = 29.9%
                     50




                                                                                                                                                                                             50
                                                                                                                         Diff − p−value: 0.03                                                                                                                                                    Diff − p−value: 0.85
         40




                                                                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Letters
  Percent




                                                                                                                                                                          Percent
   30




                                                                                                                                                                           30
                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                             20
                     10




                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                       %

                                                                                9%


                                                                                          9%


                                                                                                     9%


                                                                                                               9%


                                                                                                                         9%


                                                                                                                                   9%


                                                                                                                                             9%


                                                                                                                                                       9%


                                                                                                                                                                0%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9%


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9%


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9%


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9%


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9%


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           9%


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     9%


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9%


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                     99




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              99
                                                                              .9


                                                                                       .9


                                                                                                 .9


                                                                                                           .9


                                                                                                                     .9


                                                                                                                               .9


                                                                                                                                         .9


                                                                                                                                                   .9

                                                                                                                                                             10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    90
                                                                     9.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              9.
                                                                           19


                                                                                     29


                                                                                                39


                                                                                                          49


                                                                                                                    59


                                                                                                                              69


                                                                                                                                        79


                                                                                                                                                  89




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    19


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              29


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        39


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  49


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            59


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      69


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                79


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          89
                                                                                                                                                            −
                                                        −




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −
                                                                          −


                                                                                   −


                                                                                            −


                                                                                                      −


                                                                                                                −


                                                                                                                          −


                                                                                                                                    −


                                                                                                                                              −




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   −


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            −


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     −


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               −


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  −


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            −


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      −
                                                                                                                                                        90
                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                      10


                                                                                20


                                                                                          30


                                                                                                     40


                                                                                                               50


                                                                                                                         60


                                                                                                                                   70


                                                                                                                                             80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   30


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             40


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       50


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           70


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     80
                                                                                                      Audit Probability (%)                                                                                                                                                       Penalty Size (%)


 Notes: The histograms are based on survey responses from those who reported themselves as owners in the post-treatment
 survey. Perceived (pooled control group, N=137) refers to to survey respondents who received the baseline (N=69) or
 the public-goods (N=68) letters during the experimental stage (none of the two letters contained any information about
 audit probabilities nor penalty rates). Perceived (aud.–statistics) refers to respondents who received audit-statistics letters
 (N=365). In panel a. the x-axis represents the probability of being audited; in panel b. it represents the average penalty
 rate. We report the mean responses and the p-value of the difference between the two groups. The answers correspond to
 questions Q2 and Q4 (see full survey questionnaire in Appendix A.7). The red line represents the density function of the
 information displayed in the audit-statistics letters, measured in the right y-axis (hidden for the sake clarity).
 .

                                                                                          Figure 4: Effect of Audit-Statistics vs. Baseline by Deciles of p and θ
                                                                                       a. Audit Probability (p)                                                                                                                                                      b. Penalty Rate (θ)

                                                                                   Point Estimate                              95% CI                                                                                                                       Point Estimate                             95% CI
                                                                                                                                                                                                  −0.10 −0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25




                                                                                   Linear Fit                                                                                                                                                               Linear Fit
                          −0.10−0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25
  Treatment Effect




                                                                                                                                                                          Treatment Effect




                                                                                                                              Slope = 0.0014 (s.e. = 0.003)                                                                                                                                       Slope = −0.0006 (s.e. = 0.002)

                                                                      0                     5                   10                      15                      20                                                                            10                     20                      30                       40                     50
                                                                                                      Audit Probability (%)                                                                                                                                                       Penalty Size (%)


 Notes: Panel a. plots the first-year effect (October 2015 – September 2016) of the audit-statistics letter on total VAT
 payments by decile of p while panel b. reports the results from the same regressions by decile of θ (N=10,272). In both
 panels, each dot represents the estimated treatment effect for each decile of the parameter considered. Regressions are
 estimated using monthly pre-treatment controls and the stratification variable used to randomize the parameters. All
 effects are depicted with a 95% confidence interval. The results are based on Poisson regressions, so coefficients can be
 interpreted directly as semi-elasticities. Confidence intervals computed with robust standard errors.
 .



                                                                                                                                                                     52
