NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE TAXATION OF RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA:
EVIDENCE FROM WASHINGTON STATE
Benjamin Hansen
Keaton Miller
Caroline Weber
Working Paper 23632
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23632

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2017

The authors would like to thank David Agrawal, Nathan Anderson, David Evans, Michael
Grossman, Donald Kenkel, Michael Kuhn, and Nathan Seegert for helpful comments. We
appreciate comments and feedback from participants at seminars at Cornell, Columbia, Rutgers,
Case Western, Portland State, and conference participants at IHEA, NTA, WEAI, and the IIOC
meetings, as well as industry participants and Cannabis Science and Policy Summit attendees.
Kendall Houghton provided exemplary research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Benjamin Hansen, Keaton Miller, and Caroline Weber. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Taxation of Recreational Marijuana: Evidence from Washington State
Benjamin Hansen, Keaton Miller, and Caroline Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 23632
July 2017
JEL No. H2,H20,H21,H22,H23,H25,H26,H32,H71,I1,I18,K4
ABSTRACT
The median United States voter supports the legalization of marijuana, at least in part due to a
desire to increase state tax revenues. However, states with legal markets have implemented wildly
different regulatory schemes with tax rates ranging from 3.75 to 37 percent, indicating that policy
makers have a range of beliefs about industry responses to taxes and regulation. We examine a
policy reform in Washington: a switch from a 25 percent gross receipts tax collected at every step
in the supply chain to a sole 37 percent excise tax at retail. Using novel, comprehensive
administrative data, we assess responses to the reform throughout the supply and consumption
chain. We find the previous tax regime provided strong incentives for vertical integration. Tax
invariance did not hold, with some types of firms benefiting much more than predicted.
Consumers bear 44 percent of the additional retail tax burden. Finally, we find evidence that
consumer demand for marijuana is price-inelastic in the short-run, but becomes price-elastic
within a few weeks of a price increase.
Benjamin Hansen
University of Oregon
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
and NBER
bchansen@uoregon.edu

Caroline Weber
University of Oregon
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
cweber5@uoregon.edu

Keaton Miller
University of Oregon
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
keatonm@uoregon.edu

A Data Appendix is available at
http://www.keatonmiller.org/s/data-cleaning-appendix.pdf

1

Introduction

The United States reached a tipping point on marijuana in 2015, when, for the first time, the
majority of adults indicated support for legalizing marijuana in some form (Motel, 2015).
Four states, Alaska, Colorado, Oregon, and Washington, currently have legally operating
recreational marijuana markets. During the 2016 elections, residents of California, Maine,
Massachusetts, and Nevada voted for legalization.1
Taxation and revenue generation has been one of the primary political and economic
arguments for legalizing recreational marijuana (Miron and Zwiebel, 1995). However, little
is known about the behavior of participants in legal marijuana markets or, in particular, how
industry participants may respond to alternative policies - particularly given the existence
of readily available substitutes in the form of sophisticated black market goods and legal or
quasi-legal medical marijuana. Policy makers across states have implemented widely different
regulatory regimes: Colorado requires retail firms to grow 80 percent of the product they sell
while Washington forbids retailers from growing at all. Washington’s current tax rate is 37
percent; Massachusetts has a tax rate of 3.75 percent.2 In addition to the difference in tax
rates, states apply taxes at different points in the supply chain. These differences point to
substantial variation in beliefs among policy makers and a need for more information about
the impact of different policy levers.
We offer new evidence concerning key policy-relevant behaviors by examining the market
in Washington where, after a 2012 vote, recreational marijuana became available for purchase
at retail stores on July 8, 2014. Washington’s regulations created a supply chain with three
1

Though marijuana is considered a Schedule I Controlled Substance by the federal government, the
Department of Justice has chosen not to enforce prohibition in the relevant states.
2
See Table 1 for detail on state-level tax rates.

1

types of firms: cultivators, which grow the cannabis plant, processors, which transform the
raw plant material into usable marijuana3 , and retailers, who sell products to end-users. To
comply with state law, firms must provide detailed information on their operations to the
state government. These unique “seed-to-sale” administrative records track the entire supply
chain, and are verified by the government through frequent audits. We obtain this data,
which gives us the unique ability to observe variation in marijuana prices, quality and variety
as firms enter and compete in the marketplace. Previous studies of the marijuana industry
have examined the illegal market through surveys, prices collected from drug seizures, or
crowd-sourced data (Jacobi and Sovinsky, 2016; Miron and Zwiebel, 1995; Pacula et al.,
2000; Clements and Zhao, 2009; Donohue, Ewing, and Peloquin, 2011; Williams, van Ours,
and Grossman, 2011), and some have used this evidence to speculate about legal market
outcomes. We are the first to examine the legal market directly.
To understand the effect of market regulations and taxation on industry outcomes, we
take advantage of a reform to Washingtons marijuana tax policy. Prior to July 1, 2015,
a 25 percent gross receipts tax was assessed at each transfer of marijuana (i.e. between
cultivators and processors, processors and retailers, and retailers and consumers).4 After
July 1, 2015, the only tax collected was a 37 percent excise tax at retail. Crucially, this
change was unexpected by market participants: the reform legislation was passed during a
special session of the Washington Legislature on June 27, 2015, and signed by the Governor

3

Here and throughout, we consider only ‘usable marijuana’, which is defined as dried and cured flowers for
consumption by smoking. Different ‘products’ refer to different strains of marijuana, which are analogous to
the different cultivars of apples commonly available in supermarkets. While other derivatives of the cannabis
plant, such as oils, topical creams, and edible products, are available, usable marijuana comprises the vast
majority of the market by transaction count, and revenue.
4
This was implemented as an excise tax at each transfer of marijuana.

2

on June 30.5 We estimate the effect of these policy changes on key behaviors and decisions
made throughout the production process, while controlling for product quality and other
factors that may impact demand and supply decisions.
We find the original tax regime encouraged vertical integration between cultivators and
processors (Washington bans vertical integration between retailers and other firm types).
Due to the variety of business relationships observed in the data, we define vertically integrated marijuana as product for which the cultivator and processor were the same firm.6
We capture changes in vertical integration by examining two measures: first, we consider
the fraction of wholesale transactions to retailers of vertically integrated marijuana, and
second, we consider the total weight of vertically dis-integrated marijuana sold to retailers.
Before the reform, roughly 94 percent of wholesale transactions comprised vertically integrated marijuana. This drops to about 90 percent following the tax change. The weight of
dis-integrated marijuana sold to retailers increased by 42 percent after the change.
Taken together, these results suggest the original gross receipts tax created inefficiencies
in the supply chain that persisted after the removal of the taxes due to fixed costs. To test
this hypothesis, we restrict the analysis to transactions stemming from producers in their
first week of business – i.e. to capture firms’ decisions about vertical integration before
paying the fixed costs associated with entry. We find the drop in the percentage of vertically
integrated transactions quadruples to 16 percent, and the increase in the weight of disintegrated marijuana more than doubles to 105 percent.
The tax-invariance folk theorem makes the claim that if taxes remain the same, but a tax
5

Contemporaneous media reports suggest that, although the change was supported by the industry, it
was not expected to pass, and market participants did not have confidence in their forecasts of future prices
at the time of the change (La Corte, 2015).
6
Vertically integrated processors may process marijuana produced by other cultivators.

3

reform changes where in the supply chain they are assessed, after-tax prices at each point in
the supply chain will remain the same. Since we find the tax reform eliminated 28 cents of
taxes overall, but the remaining 75 cents of the processor tax were shifted from the processor
to the retailer, the tax-invariance folk theorem suggests that processors would lower their
wholesale prices by 75 cents. However, we find that processors only lower their prices by
an average of 26 cents per gram, suggesting that the tax invariance folk theorem has been
violated in this setting.
While the price elasticity of demand and tax incidence are of first-order concern for
policy-makers tasked with setting taxes, the analysis is complicated by the degree of product
differentiation – the typical retailer has many tens of different products available at any time.
Given the variation in product characteristics, we test for and find a significant decrease in
the potency of marijuana purchased by consumers, as measured by the concentration of the
psychoactive chemical tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), after the reform. We find no change in
the potency of marijuana grown or sold at wholesale. Taken together, these results suggest
consumers reacted to the reform in part by substituting toward lower quality products.
We account for this substitution by estimating the retail price response with a specification that includes fixed effects for the interaction between cultivator, processor, retailer, and
product. We find the tax-inclusive price faced by consumers for identical products increased
by 2.3 percent. Considering the changes in tax rates as well as the adjustment in retailers’
marginal costs due to the change in processor prices in response to their own tax changes,
we find that consumers bear about 44 percent of the retail tax burden. We find the quantity
purchased decreased by 0.95 percent, though estimates are noisy, implying a short term price
elasticity of -0.43. However, over time, the magnitude of the quantity response significantly
4

increases, and our estimates suggest the price elasticity of demand is about negative one
within two weeks of the reform. We conclude that Washington, the state with the highest
marijuana taxes in the country, is near the peak of the Laffer curve: higher taxes on the
margin may not increase revenue.
Our vertical integration findings contribute to several broader long-standing public finance questions. It is theoretically obvious that vertical integration would be a natural
consequence of a gross receipts tax and tax economists frequently come out vehemently
against gross receipts taxes for this and other reasons (e.g., McClure, 2005; Pogue, 2007;
Testa and Mattoon, 2007); however, this is the first paper we are aware of that provides
compelling empirical evidence of this behavior. Gross receipts taxes have begun to proliferate across states in recent years, so this paper provides an important source of empirical
evidence that such taxes do, in fact, lead to inefficient levels of vertical integration.
We also contribute to the discussion on tax-collection invariance along two dimensions
(Kopczuk et al. 2016; Chetty, Looney and Kroft, 2009). First, we highlight that the possibility of vertical integration under a gross receipts tax is another reason tax-collection
invariance will no longer be expected to hold. Second, we document that tax collection at
the retail level has different incidence implications than does tax collection at the processor
level. In contrast to previous work, there is no evidence in this case that the result is driven
by different tax evasion possibilities at different points in the supply chain (Kopczuk et al.
2016), nor is it likely driven by a relative lack of awareness of the tax by one side of the
market (Chetty, Looney, and Kroft, 2009). Instead, media reports and conversations with
industry participants suggest processors took advantage of a unique opportunity to increase
margins.
5

Our incidence results stand in contrast to the literatures on cigarette and gasoline tax
incidence, among others, which generally finds consumers bear the substantial majority of
the tax burden (Kopczuk et al., 2016; Harding, Liebtag, and Lovenheim, 2012) and can
exceed 1 (Kenkel, 2005; Barnett, Keeler, and Hu, 1996). One plausible explanation for the
difference is that our estimated medium-run elasticity of demand for marijuana is higher than
the consensus estimates for cigarettes or gasoline. Alternatively, tight ownership and size
restrictions in Washington’s marijuana market may lead to differential market power effects
or frictions relative to these other markets. This could also be explained by the decline in
federal income taxes some retail firms expected to pay upon the switch from a gross receipts
tax to an excise tax.7
Finally, our findings additionally contribute to broader research on supply side interventions in drug markets, which has included examinations of policies ranging from alcohol’s prohibition (see Miron and Zwiebel, 1991), to limitations on precursors to methamphetamines
(see Dobkin and Nicosia, 2009) and the legalization of marijuana sale and cultivation for
medical purposes (Anderson, Hansen and Rees, 2013). Our research is some of the first
to study legalized marijuana markets for recreational use, and the first to analyze the substantial natural experiment the tax change offers. And while prior papers have focused on
the elasticity of demand for illegal markets, we are the first, to our knowledge to study the
market-level elasticity of demand in a legal marijuana market.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the history
7

The gross receipts tax was defined as part of the price used to calculate other state and local taxes for
recreational marijuana retail firms. Hence, some portion of the retail market expected to be substantially
better off as a result of the tax regime change because they would no longer owe federal income taxes on their
state gross receipts tax. However, on July 31, 2015, the IRS issued a memo clarifying this issue and noted
that these firms never did owe federal income taxes on their state gross receipts tax liability. We provide
more details on this in Section 4.3.

6

of marijuana’s legalization and the associated tax system in Washington. In Section 3 we
discuss the administrative data we utilize and the methods we use to estimate responses
to the policy change. We present our results in Section 4. We conclude in Section 5 by
discussing the policy and economic implications of our findings, such as where Washington’s
tax rate is on the Laffer curve and vertical integration’s role in the efficiency of these newly
legalized markets.

2

Background

Prior to 1938, marijuana was a legal substance in the United States. Indeed, it was listed
in the United States Pharmacopeia as a prescription for labor pains, nausea, and other
conditions. Since the passage of the Marijuana Taxation Act of 1938, the consumption of
marijuana has been illegal. The advent of Scheduled substances via the Controlled Substances Act of 1970 significantly strengthened the prohibition against marijuana, as it was
quickly classified as a Schedule I substance with a ‘high potential for abuse and little known
medical benefit.’8
In 1996, California became the first state to legalize marijuana for medical use. In
1998, Washington voters also legalized medical marijuana through Initiative 692. Currently,
27 states and regions (including Washington D.C and Puerto Rico) permit the cultivation
and use of marijuana for medical reasons. In response to the growing acceptance of the
medical use of marijuana, in October 2009, the United States Department of Justice issued
a memorandum to United States Attorneys (Ogden, 2009) discussing the appropriate way to

8

Other Schedule I substances include heroin and methamphetamine.

7

allocate resources in states with legal medical marijuana markets. In particular, the memo
stated “federal resources in your States [should not be focused] on individuals whose actions
are in clear and unambiguous compliance with existing state laws providing for the medical
use of marijuana.” This was broadly interpreted as an effort to defer to states’ choices in
the absence of federal consensus (Stout and Moore, 2009), though the Department of Justice
emphasized a need to investigate and prosecute “drug traffickers who hide behind claims of
compliance with state law.”
In the November election of 2012, Washington voters approved Initiative 502 which legalized the recreational possession and consumption of small amounts of marijuana for adults
over 21. Three types of licenses were created: producers (who we term ‘cultivators’ in this
paper), who are permitted to grow and harvest cannabis plants, processors, who transform
the harvested plant material into usable marijuana and other products for wholesale, and
retailers, who may sell final products obtained at wholesale to consumers. The Initiative
specified that taxes would be collected with the revenue set aside for education, healthcare,
and substance abuse prevention. The initial tax structure assessed a 25 percent tax on each
marijuana transaction. This includes when grown marijuana is sold to processors who convert the harvested plant material into usable marijuana9 , when processors sell the usable
marijuana to retailers and when retailers sell it to end consumers.
9

‘Usable marijuana’ is defined by Washington state law as “dried marijuana flowers, [excluding]
marijuana-infused products [and] marijuana concentrates.” In practice, usable marijuana is consumed either
through the use of a fixed apparatus or by rolling the flower into a “joint” with paper produced for the purpose. Though the traceability system has a unique code for products that fall into this category, it contains
two types of products: both raw dried flowers and pre-rolled joints, which include some value-add. Pre-rolled
joint products are also listed under a different inventory type code. As we cannot cleanly distinguish between
raw flower and pre-rolled joints in the “usable marijuana” category, our analysis includes the entire “usable
marijuana” category as well as any pre-rolled joint products we can identify across other categories. As
other product categories include different, difficult-to-distinguish levels of value-add at the processor level,
we focus on the “usable marijuana” category exclusively.

8

Cultivator licenses come with capacity constraints – each cultivator is allocated one of
three sizes of plant canopy

10

Firms which grow cannabis plants may also have a license

to process the material into usable marijuana, and vice versa. These vertically integrated
firms did not owe any taxes when they transferred the grown marijuana to their processing
operation. However firms involved in the production or processing of marijuana are forbidden
from owning and operating a retail location. Holders of a retail license were initially limited
to three locations. Broader ownership restrictions exist as well – individuals are not allowed
to have direct or familial financial interests in more than one marijuana license.
The initiative gave regulatory authority to the newly-renamed Washington State Liquor
and Cannabis Board. One of the early actions the new board took was the implementation
of a state-operated traceability system which would track the cultivation, testing, processing, and retail sales of marijuana throughout the state. We provide more details on these
administrative data in Section 3.
The federal Department of Justice responded to the changing environment in Washington
and Colorado11 with an August, 2013 memo – commonly known within the industry as the
Cole Memo (Cole, 2013). As with its response to changing views on medical use, the Department emphasized the prohibition on production and consumption of marijuana under federal
law, but provided guidance as to specific enforcement priorities. These included concerns

10

According to Washington law (WAC 314-55-010), “ ‘Plant canopy’ means the square footage dedicated
to live plant production, such as maintaining mother plants, propagating plants from seed to plant tissue,
clones, vegetative or flowering area. Plant canopy does not include areas such as space used for the storage
of fertilizers, pesticides, or other products, quarantine, office space, etc.”
11
Colorado voters also approved a legalization effort in November, 2012. We focus on Washington in this
paper for two reasons. First, in contrast to Washington’s vertically separated market, Colorado’s system
enforces mandatory vertical integration – each retailer sells product they have grown individually. Secondly,
and perhaps more critically, while both states collect similar traceability data, Washington’s legal framework
requires public disclosure of the data and Colorado’s forbids it.

9

about diversion of products from the legal market to illegal markets or jurisdictions without
legal markets, as well as public health concerns associated with marijuana consumption.
Importantly, the Department set a clear expectation that “states and local governments
... will implement strong and effective regulatory and enforcement mechanisms.” Within
the industry, the traceability system is seen as the implementation of the expectations and
priorities laid out within the Cole Memo.
The tax reform analyzed in this paper was part of House Bill 2136 introduced during
the 2015 Regular Session of the Washington Legislature. As our identification rests on the
assumption that the policy change was effectively a set of exogenous cost shocks throughout
the supply chain, the details of the bill’s history are critical. Table 2 provides a detailed
time line of the bill’s progress through the Washington Legislature. The bill originated in the
House midway through the 2015 Regular Session, and accumulated a number of amendments
and substitutions before being passed by the full House. However, while a Senate committee
recommended passage on the last day of the session, the full Senate declined to consider the
bill during the session. A similar pattern occurred when the bill was reintroduced in the First
Special Session – the House quickly passed the bill, and the Senate chose not to take action.
It wasn’t until the very end of the Second Special Session, June 27, that the bill received a
vote by the full Senate. The Governor signed it on June 30, and the law went into effect
the next day. Contemporaneous media reporting portrayed the industry as unprepared for
the change, with one retail store manager quoted as follows: “This is supposed to happen
tomorrow. You have a few hours to change an entire market’s pricing structure. It is an
exceptionally short window for such a tremendous change.” (La Corte, 2015)
While the tax change is the most relevant part of the bill for our purposes, the bill,
10

along with companion legislation, contained a number of other measures, which arguably
may have played a larger role in the internal political process leading to its eventual passage. Increased funds from recreational market tax collections were made available to local
jurisdictions, on the condition that they allow firms to enter the market within their geography. Local jurisdictions also obtained greater zoning flexibility for marijuana businesses.
Finally, Washington’s medical marijuana market, previously legal though essentially unregulated, was brought into the regulatory framework created by the original initiative legalizing
recreational use.
Today, eight states have legalized marijuana for recreational use. Table 1 delineates the
tax structure within each state. Notably, Washington applies the highest tax rate of 37% –
the next highest is neighboring Oregon, with a 17% tax. Not all states apply taxes at retail –
Nevada applies its tax of 15% at wholesale. California applies a cultivation tax designed as a
fee for each ounce of dried plant flowers and leaves, while Colorado applies a tax at wholesale
based on the average price per gram state-wide. All of these taxes lead to a lower effective
rate than Washington’s – implying that if Washington is on the left side of the Laffer curve,
these other states almost certainly are as well.
In addition to the difference in tax rates and calculation methods, states also differ in regulatory requirements for testing, data collection, zoning, and vertical integration. Washington and Colorado provide extreme examples: Washington bans vertical integration between
retailers and all other firms, whereas Colorado requires retailers to grow a large percentage
of all product they sell.

11

3

Data and Methods

Our data consist of administrative records from the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis
Board (WSLCB). As a part of the legislative effort to legalize and regulate recreational
marijuana production and consumption in Washington, the state implemented a traceability system (also known as a seed-to-sale system) produced by BioTrackTHC. Its purpose is
to track each step in the marijuana supply chain, enabling regulators to collect taxes and
prevent diversion to the black market. Compliance is enforced through random inventory
audits, backed by penalties ranging from fines to inventory seizure and destruction. The
state provides an API to market participants and requires timely reporting of many details
of the production process. Firms generally use one of several commercially available software packages to report data to the traceability system and comply with state data-reporting
requirements. The end result is data that tracks a cannabis plant’s planting, harvest, production into usable goods, the sale of those goods to a retailer, and final retail sale of marijuana
products. Along the way, products are tested for foreign contaminants and moisture content
to ensure quality and safety, as well as for potency via the concentrantration of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), tetrahydrocannabinolic acid (THC-A), and cannabidiol (CBD), the
primary psychoactive components of the cannabis plant.
We utilize an extract of the state’s database that includes all plants and products but removes information about the supply chain that is subject to security and privacy concerns.12
Firms, locations, and production rooms are given unique identifiers. Each plant is registered
at the time of planting. Firms record the provenance of the plant material (e.g. a clone or
12

The raw data come in the form of SQL tables which do not include data on individual employees. Additionally, while firms are required to report itineraries and planned routes for marijuana transfer operations
(e.g. when a wholesaler makes a delivery to a retailer), our extract does not include them.

12

a seed) as well as the strain13 and a log tracks its movement through the growth process.
Once harvested, flowers and other plant material are generally collected and converted into
a new inventory lot which is assigned a unique identifier to represent the homogeneity of
product within an inventory lot. These intermediate products may progress through several
processing steps including conversions, combinations, and divisions before wholesale. Along
the way, the database records these transformations, generating new inventory lot ids as
necessary.
The last step of production is the division of a large wholesale inventory lot into multiple
smaller lots for sale to individual retail stores. Each lot consists of multiple sealed packages
of a specific weight of marijuana (most commonly 1 gram, 2 grams, or 3.5 grams) which
are considered identical. When lots are sold to retail locations, the tracking system records
the date, quantity and price of the transaction and assigns a new id. As a consequence, the
observation of an inventory lot id at the retail store uniquely identifies the retailer, processor,
and cultivator, as well as the strain and package size. Transfer manifest identifiers allow us
to observe wholesale transactions that comprise multiple product lots. Similarly, the system
tracks individual retail transactions, linking the prices and quantity of different items, as
well as the transaction time,14 in a retail transaction to the relevant inventory lots, allowing
us to trace sales back through to a set of original plants.15
13

Strains are defined by the cultivator and consequently are the “dirtiest” field in our data. Additionally,
the system allows cultivators to input the seed-grown offspring of two cloned parents as a member of that
clone strain, even though the offspring may not ‘breed true.’
14
Washington’s regulatory framework does not require retailers to have a constant connection to the
tracking system. Many connect to the system at the end of their business day and upload their transactions
within one session. While the order of transactions is maintained and other information in the system
(specifically the inventory log file) may allow us to track the specific time of each transaction, we choose the
daily level as our most granular view of activity in the industry.
15
Given the details of the production process discussed in this section, it is not possible to precisely
identify which plant or plants a particular retail package of marijuana came from – we can only identify
the set of plants which contributed to the creation of the wholesale lot from which the retail package was

13

We examine both tax-exclusive and tax-inclusive prices. The tax-inclusive prices include
both the marijuana-specific excise tax and Washington’s general and locality-specific sales
taxes.16 Given the retail firms’ inability to access traditional financial services markets,
almost all choose to set tax-exclusive prices that lead to round numbers when taxes are
included (this lowers the cash handling costs for firms). As a consequence, the posted prices
faced by consumers include all taxes and therefore, in contrast to many other settings, the
sales taxes are salient to consumer-level decision making.
We analyze the effects of the tax change on a number of observable behaviors of market
participants through a series of regression exercises. We restrict our analysis at the processor
and retail levels to the “usable marijuana” product category – 74.5% of the total transactions
observed in our data. For each component of the supply chain—cultivators, processors, and
retailers—we collapse the data by firm-day unless otherwise specified after performing minor
cleaning steps, none of which significantly change our results.17 We provide additional details
about data cleaning in the Online Data Cleaning Appendix.18
Our primary target in our regression analyses is the response to the tax change. As the
change took place within the broader context of the market’s non-linear evolution, our estidivided.
16
The tax reform also changed the way firms reported prices in the traceability system. Prior to the
reform, most firms reported fully tax-inclusive prices. Afterwards, most firms reported fully tax-exclusive
prices. To clean the price data, for each firm, we search for a multiplier within the bound created by the
maximum effective tax rate to maximize the percentage of prices with round numbers. We verified the results
of this algorithm using public-facing menu data captured by the Internet Archive. Additional details on our
price-cleaning process are given in the Online Data Cleaning Appendix: http://www.keatonmiller.org/
s/data-cleaning-appendix.pdf
17
We drop a small number of duplicate sales in the processor data and we drop all retail transactions
that were deleted or refunded. We also drop all processor and associated retail transactions in which the
processor price or total transaction amount was less than or equal to one cent. It is our understanding that
these were generally samples given to the retailer by the processor; they were given a price of one cent so
that these movements of marijuana could be tracked within the traceability system.
18
Data cleaning appendix available at http://www.keatonmiller.org/s/data-cleaning-appendix.
pdf

14

mating equations include a polynomial in time. Furthermore, as the change was unexpected
by market participants, we include several dummy variables in the days immediately surrounding the tax change, to account for short-term adjustment effects and the Fourth of July,
which took place just after the reform was implemented. The detail of the data collected by
the traceability system allows us to analyze behaviors at the firm-day level, though cyclical
patterns throughout the course of a week and a month cause us to include additional fixed
effects. Our window of analysis spans the two months before and two months after the tax
change. We examine the robustness of our estimates to this time window.
Our analyses, therefore, use the following template:

log(yit ) =α0 + α1 taxit +

6
X

α3j tax dayj +

j=1

+

5
X

6
X
k=1

α3k dowk +

31
X
l=1

α4l doml
(1)

α5m datem
it + uit .

m=1

where yit is our outcome variable for firm (cultivator, processor, or retailer) i at date t, taxit
is an indicator variable that is one after the tax change took place on July 1, 2015 and zero
before, tax dayj are indicator variables for June 30 - July 5 to absorb local responses to the
tax change and the 4th of July, dowj are day of the week fixed effects, domk are day of the
month fixed effects, and datelit is a polynomial in the date of sale. June 30 is the date the law
was signed, and July 4th is a holiday which resulted in deviations from normal trends. We
explore the sensitivity of our estimates by shrinking our adjustment window to only include
June 30 and July 1, or extending the adjustment window to June 27th (the date the tax
reform was passed by the Washington Legislature). We also explore the sensitivity of our
analysis to the inclusion of day-of-month fixed effects based on the hypothesis that these
15

may not always be very important, but do consume many degrees of freedom. Lastly, we
consider the sensitivity of our estimates to changes in the polynomial we use as well as the
inclusion of county-specific polynomials to allow for county-specific time trends.
We take the logs of all of our outcomes, unless otherwise specified, because the outcomes
we examine are essentially log-normally distributed (with the added benefit of allowing us to
interpret the estimated coefficients on the binary regressors as semi-elasticities). Standard
errors are clustered by firm. Given the details of our estimating equations, we interpret
coefficients on the tax change indicator variable to represent the average short-term response
to the tax reform unless otherwise specified.

4

Results

We report findings as marijuana flows through the supply chain: we first examine cultivators,
then discuss processors, and finish with the retail market. Across markets, we present
tables consisting of point estimates for each of the outcomes we examine, and table and
figures of robustness checks for outcomes of particular significance. For these same important
outcomes, we also provide figures detailing the data and graphically plotting the response.
In the figures, the solid line is a fitted model based on Equation (1), while the hollow circles
represent the raw average daily dependent variable for the days leading up to and after the
tax change. For both the lines and circles, we remove the estimate of the day-of-week, dayof-month, and firm location fixed effects. We also remove the estimates on the indicators for
June 30 - July 5 from the fitted line.

16

4.1

Cultivators

We first focus on cultivators – those firms that plant and harvest raw flowers from the
cannabis plant. Table 3 provides summary statistics for cultivators. On average, firms
harvest plants 116 days after planting. Vertical integration is rampant, as over 95 percent
of growers also have a license to process marijuana. The July 1 policy reform decreased
their transaction tax from 25 percent to zero. However, because of the rampant vertical
integration, most cultivators did not owe this tax – taxes were not due if the cultivator sold
to a vertically integrated processor. The high degree of vertically integrated transactions
has also made the cultivator-to-processor transaction data unreliable.19 We thus focus on
other outcomes, which, while they may not be responding to a meaningful change in the
cultivator tax because of vertical integration, may still respond to a decrease in their vertically
integrated processor’s transaction tax from 25 percent to zero. These outcomes, which
auditors routinely verify among growers, include counts of the number of new plantings, and
the total quantities of marijuana harvested.
Table 4 provides point estimates for three outcomes of interest: the number of plantings,
the number of harvests, and the average number of growth days for plants harvested. For
both plantings and harvests, zeros are included in the analysis when no plantings or harvestings took place that day at that firm. The left panel of Figure 1 illustrates the the counts
of the plants harvested around the July 1 tax change. The harvest rate increases by 7.5
percent, but this change is not statistically significant. However, we may be underpowered

19

The administrative data does not contain meaningful prices for many of the transfers of plant material
between cultivators and processors. In the administrative data, many of the processor prices are missing or
are filled in with prices arbitrarily close to zero. Due to the difficulty of interpreting these values, we focus
on quantity outcomes.

17

to detect effects in the harvesting and planting data because these activities are infrequent
and when they happen occasionally happen in large volumes. We examine the the number of
days from planting until harvesting, and find evidence that the number of days from planting until harvest falls by 6.9 percent. This suggests that cultivator-processors react to the
processor tax decrease by speeding up the harvest of existing plants in order to get more to
market in the medium-run.
We examine the sensitivity of our estimates in Table 5 and Figure 2. The empirical
results are largely insensitive to bandwidth, allowing for an adjustment period from June 27
through July 5, polynomial order, interacting the polynomial with county indicators, and
exclusion of day-of-month indicators.
These estimates suggest that in the short run, firms did not drastically alter their planting
or harvesting in response to the tax shift. In some ways, given the vast amount of vertical
integration and that firms are producing at capacity due to strong demand, this is not
entirely surprising – particularly given the firms did not have a long period to adjust their
production process since the law was only passed days before the tax change went into effect.

4.2

Processors

The tax reform also eliminated the transaction taxes faced by processors – those firms which
take raw marijuana flowers and plant material as inputs and transform them into usable
marijuana and other products. Before the change, the processors paid the taxes after the
transaction, implying the retailers paid the equilibrium price, while processors received the
after-tax price. Table 6 provides summary statistics for processors.

18

In Table 7, we provide point estimates of the effect of the tax change on the following
potential mechanisms through which processors might have altered their behavior: prices
(those charged to retailers), after-tax prices (those received by the processor after taxes),
weight (total weight of marijuana sold in grams), sales (total number of sales), after-tax
revenue, and THC levels.20 The only significant findings are on prices – we find that average
equilibrium prices fell by 8 percent. Simultaneously, the after-tax price (the price received
by processors after taxes) increased by 21 percent.21 We also find the quantity of sales
transactions, total weight of marijuana sold, and THC levels were unchanged.22
Figure 3 provides graphical evidence of the after-tax price and weight responses we estimated in columns (2) and (3) of Table 7. Because equilibrium prices did fall, but the after-tax
price for processors increases dramatically following the tax change, it appears that the elimination of the 25 percent tax was a huge boon to processors, while it simultaneously reduced
the portion of variable costs of retail firms attributable to the cost of goods sold. At the
same time, we find the quantity of marijuana processed and sold to retail firms did not
significantly change around the reform. This suggests two things. First, it provides evidence
the firms did not anticipate the tax reform or its timing. The substantial shift in taxes
should give firms incentives to hold back production and sales to retail firms until after the
processor taxes are eliminated. Only the day before the tax change do we find the quantity
of marijuana substantially decreases (indeed June 30 appears to be a true outlier, consistent
20

The number of observations differ for sales and prices, because days with no transactions still result in
0 sales or weight, while prices were missing on those days.
21
The log change in the tax rate is 29% (i.e. log((1-.75)/1)=0.287).
22
Within the “usable marijuana” product segment, THC levels are effectively fixed by the production
process. However, processors may choose to differentially allocate plant material of varying quality to
different production processes (including processes that result in products that fall outside the “usable
marijuana” category and thus outside our analysis). Our null result here suggests firms did not substitute
in this way.

19

with tax avoidance on the part of processors, albeit extremely short-sighted avoidance).
Table 8 and Figure 4 detail several variations of our preferred specification for the significant after-tax price response observed in column (2) and the insignificant change in weight
observed in column (3) of Table 7. The estimates are quite insensitive to bandwidth, allowing for an adjustment period from June 27 through July 5, polynomial order, interacting the
polynomial with county indicators, and exclusion of day-of-month indicators.
In summary, our findings suggest processors widely benefited from the elimination of
their transaction taxes with retailers. The tax benefits are shared between both the retailers,
whose price paid for marijuana fell by 7 percent on average, and the processors, whose price
received after paying taxes rose by 21 percent. After we estimate the retail response to the tax
regime change in Section 4.3, we will discuss the tax invariance and incidence implications
of these results. We find no significant increase the quantity of marijuana supplied from
processors to retailers, other than a one day anticipation effect and a few days adjustment
period (in which the sales withheld the day before the tax are sold to retail firms after the
tax change). This suggests that in the short run, the tax changes did not fundamentally alter
the supply of marijuana. This altogether suggests that in the short-run window surrounding
the tax change, supply is relatively inelastic – not surprising given the requirements of the
production process.

4.2.1

Vertical Integration of Cultivators and Processors

In this section, we provide the first empirical evidence on how vertical integration behavior
adjusts to an elimination of a gross receipts tax. These estimates inform us about the
potential deadweight loss associated with inefficient vertical integration stemming from the
20

incentives created by a gross receipts tax. This setting is ideal for this analysis because
we have data on each link in the supply chain and it is a closed system (e.g. marijuana
cultivators are not also selling to cigarette companies, which we do not observe).
We define vertical integration in this context at the retailer inventory lot level. An
inventory lot of marijuana is considered ‘vertically integrated’ marijuana if it was cultivated
and processed by the same firm. An inventory lot is considered ‘vertically dis-integrated’
marijuana if it was cultivated and processed by different firms (even if those firms were
formally vertically integrated).
Before the tax reform, cultivators and processors had a strong incentive to vertically
integrate because there was a 25 percent gross receipts tax on cultivators that could be
avoided if the cultivator sold their product to a vertically integrated processor. Anecdotally,
cultivators often wished they did not also have to invest in the equipment to be processors,
but could not generally afford to do otherwise. Moreover, even if a company was both a
cultivator and processor, they would have still liked to sell some of their raw product to
other processors or purchased some raw product from other cultivators, but both were often
made too expensive by the existence of the 25 percent tax. These stories are borne out in
the data as about 93 percent of all inventory lots sold by processors to retailers consisted
of vertically integrated marijuana. Additionally, only about 5 percent of the total weight
of processor sales were of vertically dis-integrated marijuana. However, vertical integration
between cultivators and processors could be efficient and so this alone does not inform us
as to the magnitude of the inefficiency associated with the gross receipts tax system. The
tax reform on July 1, 2015 eliminated the incentive to vertically integrate for tax reasons.
We don’t expect many firms would de-integrate and become only a cultivator or a processor
21

because of the fixed costs already paid, but new firms may be less likely to integrate and
there may be more processors purchasing from cultivators with whom they were not vertically
integrated.
To understand the change in behavior resulting from the tax reform, we examine the
number of transactions of vertically integrated marijuana and the total weight of vertically
dis-integrated marijuana. Neither of these measures should be expected to change immediately in response to the tax change because, on average, it takes roughly six weeks after
processors purchase raw material from cultivators before the resulting products are sold to
retailers. This leads us to make two adjustments to our analysis in this section relative to
our previous processor analysis: (1) we aggregate the analysis at the weekly level, and (2)
we include indicator variables for the six weeks following the tax change to examine the
adjustment period, relative to the long-run effect. In contrast to the rest of the processor
analysis, we also do not drop new firms because these are of particular interest as they may
be the most likely to choose to not be vertically integrated after the tax change.
Figure 5 illustrates the fraction of transactions that are vertically integrated, and the
log weight of transactions which did not originate from a vertically integrated cultivator.
Point estimates are provided in Table 9. The fraction of vertically integrated sales falls by
3.7 percent after the adjustment period (Column 1), which is driven by a 42 percent long
run increase in non-vertically produced marijuana sold (Column 2). This provides evidence
that the gross receipts tax discouraged otherwise efficient trades between cultivators and
processors, thus creating deadweight loss. Table 9 Column (3) shows that there was no
significant increase in the price of these non-vertically integrated sales in the long-run.
We further examine the potential inefficiencies created by the gross receipts tax by con22

sidering the behavior of each firm in its first week in business – i.e. by considering behavior
closer to the firms’ decision to vertically integrate – in Table 9 Columns (4) and (5).23 The
fraction of vertically integrated sales in the first week in business declines by 16 percent
and the weight of vertically dis-integrated marijuana increases by 105 percent after the reform. Table 10 and Figure 6 illustrates the robustness of the results controlling for trends
in a variety of ways, adjusting for shorter or longer adjustment periods, and variation in
bandwidth.
In summary, we find in the long-run, that the volume of non-vertically integrated transactions rose substantially, although vertically integrated transactions continue to dominate
the market in absolute size. Most of the estimates in this section are likely lower bounds
on the true inefficiencies of a gross receipts tax because we are examining the elimination
of a gross receipts tax, and so many firms will have already paid the fixed costs necessary
to become both cultivators and processors, and may not choose to become one or the other
afterwards, even if that would have originally been efficient in the absence of a gross receipts
tax.

4.3

Retail Market

We now examine the consumer retail market. The tax reform converted the tax at the point
of retail sale to an excise tax which, given the way the original law was written, switched the
sales tax from applying to the tax-inclusive price before the tax change to the tax-exclusive
price after the tax change. The reform also increased the tax rate from 25 percent to 37
percent. Given that we can observe a portion of any given retailer’s input prices and those
23

The responses we observe for all firms is not driven by firms in their first week in business.

23

of their nearest competitors, we add some new covariates to our regression analysis relative
to previous sections. In particular, we add the prices paid to processors (their variable
costs), the prices of local24 competitors, and an indicator for whether there were any local
competitors. This has the potential to be valuable for the price estimates because, at the
firm level, the estimated price could change not only due to a change in the prices, but also
due to a change in the composition of goods sold. The inclusion of these variables is intended
to control for these changes. Retailers also have significant weekend patterns in weight sold
and these can vary substantially by firm depending on their location within a city as well
as the days of the week they are open. Hence, we include interactions between each firm
indicator and the indicators for Friday, Saturday, and Sunday in all our baseline estimates;
this increases the precision of our estimates. Summary statistics for the retail market are
provided in Table 11.
Point estimates across a variety of outcomes are detailed in Table 12. We estimate the
response of tax-exclusive and -inclusive prices, weight, the number of sales, tax-exclusive
and -inclusive revenue, and THC content. We find evidence that tax-exclusive prices, the
prices retailers received, fell by 4.8 percent. We find tax-inclusive prices, the prices paid
by consumers, rise by 2.1 percent.25 We find no significant response in weight or sales to
this marginally significant increase in the prices consumers paid. We find a statistically
significant decline in THC content which, when combined with the null results for THC in
the processor analysis, suggests consumers engaged in a degree of product-level substitution
24

We define ‘local’ as ‘within 10 miles.’
The excise tax increased from 25 to 37 percent and simultaneously the sales tax switched from being
assessed on the tax-inclusive price to being assessed on the tax-exclusive price. Together, these amount to a
7 percent increase in the tax rate (1+τ ) as measured by the log change in 1+τ for a firm with the average
sales tax rate, 8.7 percent.
25

24

toward lower quality marijuana in response to the increase in tax-inclusive prices and our
processor price controls are not able to fully control for these substitution patterns. This
biases our price estimates downwards – firms likely increased sticker prices by a larger amount
than a regression using purchases would detect.
We address this bias by collapsing our data by inventory lot-day instead of retail firm-day
and including inventory lot fixed effects rather than retail location fixed effects.26 Because
inventory lots are unique to individual retailers and consist of plausibly identical goods,
quality (including retailer quality) within an inventory lot is fixed. We also anticipate our
estimates will be substantially more efficient when we estimate the response at the inventorylot level because we are able to more effectively control for quality via inventory-lot fixed
effects. We do not estimate the weight response at the inventory lot level because we do
not have the same substitution problem in our firm-level estimates. If individuals shift away
from one product towards another, this will leave our firm-level weight estimates unchanged.
It could, however, become more problematic if we estimated the response by inventory lot
because we are estimating the log change and an increase of one unit and a decrease of
one unit are not equivalent unless the sales volume of the two inventory lots started out
the same.27 Our preferred estimates of the increase in the tax-inclusive price using the
inventory lot-day level data is reported in Table 13 Column (1). We find that tax-inclusive
prices increased by 2.3 percent and this estimate is significant at the one percent level. The
magnitude of the inventory-lot and firm level estimates are quite similar, suggesting that
26

Our analysis at the inventory-lot level is restricted to all inventory lots that sell at least once in the
month prior to the tax change. If we did not impose this restriction, our estimates would still be identified
off of inventory lots that sell both before and after the tax change; however, including this restriction allows
us to more accurately estimate the coefficients for the inventory lots from which our identification comes.
27
The estimates of the weight response when the data are collapsed by inventory lot are qualitatively
similar to the estimates when the data is collapsed by firm.

25

processor prices were, in fact, doing a fairly good job of capturing the substitution patterns
we were concerned about at the firm level.
Combining our preferred estimates on the change in tax-inclusive price (estimated at the
inventory lot-day) and weight (estimated at the retail sales location-day) reported in Table
13 Column (1), the implied average market-level elasticity of demand is -0.43. Figure 7
illustrates these shifts in tax-inclusive price and total weight surrounding the tax reform.
For the regression we report in Table 13, we switch to a linear polynomial in date sold with
an interaction between the tax change and this linear polynomial. The estimates are not
sensitive to this change in polynomial and it allows us to conserve degrees of freedom and
assess whether the tax change also affected the steady decline in prices or increase in weight
in this market over time.28 This short-run price elasticity of demand suggests Washington
is on the part of the Laffer curve where higher taxes on the margin would increase revenue,
and this is consistent with the positive effect on tax-inclusive revenue in Table 12 Column
(6). However, the decrease in tax-exclusive prices leads to a significant decrease in revenue
received by retailers. The long-run elasticity of demand appears higher; there is a significant
negative slope on the weight interaction term, which means that weight is continuing to
decline over time; in fact the implied elasticity of demand is about negative one within two
weeks of the tax change. Although we don’t have the power to detect this in our estimation,
our visual inspection of the raw data in Figure 7 suggests that the decline in the growth rate
of marijuana demand seems to slow down several weeks after the tax change, suggesting that
this is about when we hit the medium-run elasticity of demand after the tax change, holding
all else constant. This larger medium-run elasticity of demand suggests that Washington is
28

See Figure 9 for evidence that the estimates are not sensitive to polynomial choice.

26

near the peak of the Laffer Curve in the medium-run.
We consider sensitivity of our main price and weight estimates in Table 13 Columns (2)
to (7) and Figures 8 and 9. Our estimates are insensitive to bandwidth, allowing for an
adjustment period from June 27 through July 5, decreasing the adjustment period to June
30 - July 1, interacting the polynomial with county indicators. We also show the weight
estimates are insensitive to dropping the inclusion of processor price covariates, which is
not surprising given that the weight estimates should not be influenced by substitution
decisions on the part of consumers as discussed above. We report the baseline price estimate
again in this column because we never control for processor prices in the inventory lot-day
analysis (these covariates would be collinear with the inventory lot fixed effects). The weight
estimates are sensitive to the exclusion of the day-of-month indicators in Column (4), which
is not surprising as there are systematic fluctuations in demand within a month. There is no
noticeable effect on the price estimates when we drop the interactions of Friday, Saturday,
and Sunday with each retail firm location in Column (5). The weight estimates get slightly
smaller and less precise.
With estimates of the changes in prices for both the processor and retailer markets in
hand, we summarize the components of the tax-inclusive price charged by the average firm
for a gram of marijuana in Figure 10. The left and right bars, respectively, present the
components of the retail price before and after the tax change. Starting with the average
dollar amount spent to purchase a gram of marijuana from the retailer, we consider how
much goes to processor and retail taxes as well as how much the firms keep. Before the
tax change, all prices and taxes (in dollars) are based on the average prices across all firms
the month prior to the tax change. The post-reform numbers are calculated by applying
27

our estimated price responses to the pre-reform numbers. This holds the composition of
the market constant and eliminates any secular trends in prices as well as changes in the
consumption patterns of consumers.
The tax changes that were implemented on July 1, 2015 were intended to be approximately revenue neutral, and, in practice, they were not too far off from this. We calculate
that the average excise taxes collected on a gram of marijuana before the tax change was
$3.46 ($1.03 collected and paid by the processor and $2.43 paid by the retailer) and the
average taxes paid on a gram of marijuana after the tax change was $3.42 (all collected and
paid by the retailer).29 When we add sales taxes into this mix, which switched from being
applied on the tax-inclusive price before the tax change to tax-exclusive price after the tax
change, the total excise and sales taxes collected before the tax change were $4.51 per gram
of marijuana and were $4.23 afterwards, a decrease of 28 cents. Total retail taxes (leaving
the processor tax change out of the mix) went up by 75 cents.
Processors paid an average of $1.03 in taxes for each gram sold prior to the change (and
nothing afterwards). The tax reform eliminated 28 cents of taxes overall, but the rest were
shifted from the processor to the retailer. The tax-invariance folk theorem suggests that, in
light of the fact that incidence is fixed and already accounted for in pre-reform prices, this
shift in taxes from the processor to the retailer should be reflected in the processor price
falling by the full amount of the tax shifting, 75 cents. However, we find that processors
only lower their price by an average of 26 cents per gram, suggesting that tax invariance has
been violated in this setting.
29

We ignore the taxes applied to cultivators in this discussion because over 90 percent of the market was
vertically integrated, and thus did not have to pay the tax and our price data for the remaining cultivators
is not of high-enough quality to consider this part of the tax change directly.

28

We now consider the retail incidence implications of our results. If we were only considering a retail tax change (i.e the excise tax rate increased from 25 to 37 percent and the
sales tax switched from being on the tax-inclusive to the tax-exclusive price), the incidence
calculations would be straightforward. The retail tax rate increased by 7 percent30 , and
prices faced by consumers went up by 2.33 percent, so tax pass-through to the consumer
would be 33 percent.
However, the processor tax also changed and this led to a decline in processor prices (i.e.
retailers’ marginal costs went down). We expect marginal cost changes will be passed through
to consumers in the same way as tax changes, so our calculation of consumer incidence that
ignores this processor price change is biased downwards. In fact, if the tax change was
entirely revenue neutral and tax-invariance had held, we would expect no change at all in
retail prices, not because there was no pass-through, but because there was no change in
taxes to be passed-through. We see from Figure 10 that processor prices fell by 26 cents for an
average gram of marijuana. This amounts to a 1.94 percent decrease from the equilibrium
tax-inclusive price, $13.49.31 . Hence, the net change in taxes and marginal costs is 5.06
percent, so consumers bear 44 percent of the tax burden (=.0233/.0506).
We would be remiss to not mention the federal income tax in the discussion of incidence,
though appreciating exactly how it changed in expectation in response to the tax change is
challenging. The wording of the original Washington law suggested that retail firms may
owe federal income taxes on the tax-inclusive price.32 This was part of the instigation for
30

The tax changes amount to a 7 percent increase in the tax rate (1+τ ) as measured by the log change
in 1+τ for a firm with the average sales tax rate, 8.7 percent (= log((1 + .37 + .087)/(1.25 ∗ 1.087)).
31
We calculate this as the log change, 0.0194 = log((13.49 − .26)/13.49).
32
Here is the original language of the bill: “This tax is the obligation of the licensed marijuana retailer, is
separate and in addition to general state and local sales and use taxes that apply to retail sales of tangible
personal property, and is part of the total retail price to which general state and local sales and use taxes

29

the reform of the tax system on July 1, 2015. An IRS memo was eventually written, which
clarified that taxes were not owed on taxes paid to the state and this memo was retroactive
to the previous year’s taxes, but this memo was not issued until July 31, 2015, after the tax
reform had taken place.
If retailers anticipated this decision by the IRS, then there was no change in the amount
of federal income taxes owed other than due to the change in retail and processor prices in
response to the tax change. If they did not, the tax change on July 1, 2015 would have
appeared to provide a large federal tax break to retailers – before the tax change, they
owed federal taxes on the tax-inclusive price and after the tax change, they owed federal
taxes on the tax-exclusive price. If firms believed that that the federal income tax always
applied to the tax-exclusive price, we find that incidence is split approximately 42-68 between
consumers and retailers – the only difference from the baseline incidence estimate is that
firms can deduct processor prices from their federal income taxes and these went down in
response to the tax change. As another benchmark, we would have found that taxes were
completely passed through to consumers if 70 percent of firms believed there would be no
federal income tax break due to the reform and 30 percent believed that there would be a
tax break (or equivalently if all firms believed there was a 30 percent chance there would be
a federal income tax break associated with the tax reform). For additional details on our
incidence calculations that include the federal income tax, please see Appendix A.

apply.” Because of the last part of this sentence, retail firms were concerned/believed that they owed federal
income taxes on their tax-inclusive price, too.

30

5

Conclusion

After the ballot measures passed during the 2016 elections are fully implemented, recreational
marijuana will be legal for 21 percent of the United States’ population. Given the broad
society-wide shift in support for legalization, driven in part by the desire to increase state
revenues, it is crucial to accurately gauge how industry participants, and, ultimately, revenue,
will respond to alternative regulatory and taxation systems. Internationally, countries that
have chosen to legalize marijuana, such as Canada and Uruguay, have had robust public
debates about the design of the regulatory and taxation scheme in the face of black market
availability.
We contribute to this debate by analyzing a unique natural experiment in Washington
wherein the tax regime was reformed from a three-tiered structure of gross receipts taxes
throughout the supply chain to a single excise tax at retail. We use novel, comprehensive
administrative data on the universe of marijuana production and transactions within the
state to understand how cultivators, processors, retailers, and consumers responded to the
reform.
We find gross receipts taxes increased vertical integration, which decreased the efficiency
of the market, given that non-vertically integrated transactions increased substantially, and
newly entering firms were far less likely to vertically integrate after the tax system moved
away from a gross receipts tax. This suggests that the deadweight loss of these gross receipts
taxes may be larger than other taxes with similar collected amounts given their effects on
decreasing the efficiency of production. This finding is particularly relevant given the diverse
regulations present in the nascent marijuana markets across the United States. Colorado

31

requires vertical integration (retail firms must produce at least 80 percent of the marijuana
they sell) and Washington allows some types of vertical integration (between cultivators
and processors) and forbids integration between retailers with firms involved in marijuana’s
production. Our findings suggest that requiring vertical integration, as Colorado does, will
decrease market efficiency.
While the previous literature has studied the elasticity of demand for marijuana within
the black market, ours is the first to focus exclusively on the legal market for recreational
marijuana. Some recent studies, notably Jacobi and Sovinksy (2016), have estimated the
elasticity of marijuana to be -.2, our findings suggest demand is inelastic (-.4) in the days
surrounding the price increase driven by the exogenous tax reform. However, we find that
that the quantity of marijuana purchased kinks downward from its prior upward trend.
This suggests the medium-run response to a price increase is elastic, which in turn suggests
Washington is close to the peak of the Laffer curve. Given that the tax rates that were
passed in California (15 percent), Maine (10 percent), Massachusetts (3.75 percent), and
Nevada (15 percent), are considerably lower than Washington’s rate, our findings suggest
considerable state revenue may be left on the table.
Though seven of the eight states with legal marijuana have a sales or excise tax, several
states have also imposed cultivation taxes. Our findings suggest cultivation taxes can directly
affect incentives to vertically integrate. Additionally, Alaska and California’s cultivation
taxes are based on weight alone and Colorado’s wholesale tax is based on the average priceper-gram of marijuana sold in the state. As the amount taxed in those states does not change
in response to the price of the wholesale marijuana sold, these taxes are relatively higher for
cheaper marijuana, which tends to be of lower quality and potency. Thus, the tax regimes
32

in Alaska, California, and Colorado may incentivize suppliers to produce higher priced and
higher potency marijuana.
While our results suggest significant tax revenue may be left on the table in many jurisdictions, evaluating the impact of marijuana policy (and constructing optimal policy) in
a broader social sense requires additional considerations. For one, the public health externalities of marijuana consumption are not well established. Nor is the relationship between
legal marijuana consumption and the consumption of other ‘sin’ goods such as alcohol or
tobacco. If it is indeed true, as many advocates claim, that marijuana consumption is ‘better’ in a public health sense than alcohol or tobacco consumption, the optimal regulation of
marijuana should be designed to take into account responses in these other markets as well.
We leave such analysis to future authors.

33

References
[1] Anderson, D. Mark, Benjamin Hansen, and Daniel I. Rees. (2013). “Medical Marijuana
laws, traffic fatalities, and alcohol consumption.”Journal of Law and Economics. 56.2 :
333-369.
[2] Anderson, D.M., B. Hansen and D.I. Rees. (2015). “Medical Marijuana Laws and
Teenage Marijuana Use.” American Law and Economics Review. 17 (2): 495-528.
[3] Barnett, P. G., Keeler, T. E., & Hu, T. W. (1995). “Oligopoly Structure and the
Incidence of Cigarette Excise Taxes.”Journal of Public Economics, 57(3), 457-470.
[4] Chetty, R., Looney, A. and Kroft, K (2009). “Salience and Taxation: Theory and
Evidence.”American Economic Review, 99(4), 1145-1177.
[5] Chaloupka, F. J., Grossman, M., & Tauras, J. A. (1999). “The Demand for Cocaine and
Marijuana by Youth. In The Economic Analysis of Substance Use and Abuse: An Integration of Econometrics and Behavioral Economic Research”(pp. 133-156). University
of Chicago Press.
[6] Clements, K. W., & Zhao, X. (2009). Economics and Marijuana: Consumption, Pricing
and Legalization. Cambridge University Press.
[7] Cole, J. (2013). Memorandum for all United States attorneys. accessed from
https://www.justice.gov/iso/opa/resources/3052013829132756857467.pdf
on
07/20/2016
[8] Dobkin, C., & Nicosia, N. (2009). “The war on drugs: methamphetamine, public health,
and crime.”The American Economic Review, 99(1), 324-349
[9] Donohue III, J. J. (2013). “Drug Prohibition and Its Alternatives. Lessons from the Economics of Crime: What Reduces Offending? ”Lessons from the Economics of Crime’in
Lessons from the Economics of Crime, edited by PJ Cook, SJ Machin, O. Marie, and
G. Mastrobuoni, MIT Press.
[10] Farrelly, M. C., Bray, J. W., Zarkin, G. A., Wendling, B. W., & Pacula, R. L. (1999).
The effects of prices and policies on the demand for marijuana: Evidence from the
National Household Surveys on Drug Abuse (No. w6940). National Bureau of Economic
Research.
[11] Harding, M., Leibtag, E., & Lovenheim, M. F. (2012). “The Heterogeneous Geographic
and Socioeconomic Incidence of Cigarette Taxes: Evidence from Nielsen Homescan
Data. ”American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(4), 169-198.
[12] Hall, W., & Lynskey, M. (2016). “Evaluating the Public Health Impacts of Legalizing
Recreational Cannabis Use in the United States. ”Addiction, 111: 1764
961773.

34

[13] Jacobi, L. & M. Sovinsky. (2016). “Marijuana on Main Street? Estimating Demand in
Markets with Limited Access.”American Economic Review. 106(8): 2009-45.
[14] Kenkel, D. S. (2005). “Are Alcohol Tax Hikes Fully Passed through to Prices? Evidence
from Alaska. ”The American Economic Review, 95(2), 273-277.
[15] Kopczuk, W., Marion, J., Muehlegger, E., & Slemrod, J. (2016). “Does Tax-Collection
Invariance Hold? Evasion and the Pass-through of State Diesel Taxes. ”American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8(2), 1-36.
[16] Laffer, A. (2004). “The Laffer Curve: Past, Present, and Future.”
[17] La Corte, R. (2015) “Gov. Inslee signs recreational marijuana reform bill. ”ap.org. Associated Press, 30 Jun. 2015.
[18] McLure, C., (2005). “Why Ohio Should Not Introduce a Gross Receipts Tax Testimony
on the Proposed Commercial Activity Tax.”State Tax Notes, Apr. 18, 2005, p. 213.
[19] Miron, J., & Zwiebel, J. (1991). “Alcohol Consumption During Prohibition.”American
Economic Review, 81(2), 242-247.
[20] Miron, J. A., & Zwiebel, J. (1995). “The Economic Case Against Drug Prohibition. The
Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(4), 175-192.
[21] Motel,
S.
(2015).
Six
Facts
about
Marjuana.
accessed
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/04/14/6-facts-about-marijuana/
10/22/2016.

from
on

[22] Ogden, D. (2009). Memorandum for selected United States Attorneys. accessed
from https://www.justice.gov/archives/opa/blog/memorandum-selected-united-stateattorneys-investigations-and-prosecutions-states on 07/20/2017
[23] Pogue, T. (2007). “The Gross Receipts Tax: A New Approach to Business Taxation,”National Tax Journal, 60(4), 799-819.
[24] Poterba, J. (1996). “Retail Price Reactions to Changes in State and Local Taxes. National Tax Journal, 49, pp. 165-176.
[25] Testa, W. & R. Mattoon (2007). “Is There a Role for Gross Receipts Taxation?”National
Tax Journal, 60(4), 821-840.
[26] Williams, J., Van Ours, J. C., & M. Grossman. (2011). “Why Do Some People Want to
Legalize Cannabis Use?”(No. w16795). National Bureau of Economic Research.

35

6

Figures and Tables
Figure 1: Cultivator Harvests and Days-to-Harvest

These figures are based on the estimates in Column (1) of Table 5. The solid line plots the estimated response to the tax
change plus the polynomial. The scatterplot is the corresponding daily average of the dependent variable with estimates of the
day-of-week, day-of-month, and cultivator fixed effects removed. The vertical dashed line marks the day of the tax change, July
1, 2015.

Figure 2: Cultivator Harvests and Days-to-Harvest Bandwidth Sensitivity

These figures consider the sensitivity of the estimates in Column (1) of Table 5 to the number of weeks of data we include
on either side of the tax change. The dots mark the estimates for each bandwidth choice and the lines mark the 95 percent
confidence intervals around these estimates.

36

Figure 3: Processor After-Tax Prices and Revenue

These figures are based on the estimates in Column (1) of Table 8. The solid line plots the estimated response to the tax
change plus the polynomial. The scatterplot is the corresponding daily average of the dependent variable with estimates of the
processor fixed effects removed. The vertical dashed line marks the day of the tax change, July 1, 2015.

Figure 4: Processor After-Tax Prices and Revenue Bandwidth Sensitivity

These figures consider the sensitivity of the estimates in Column (1) of Table 8 to the number of weeks of data we include
on either side of the tax change. The dots mark the estimates for each bandwidth choice and the lines mark the 95 percent
confidence intervals around these estimates.

37

Figure 5: Vertical Integration

These figures are based on the estimates in Column (1) of Table 10. The solid line plots the estimated response to the tax
change plus the polynomial. The scatterplot is the corresponding weekly average of the dependent variable with estimates of
the processor fixed effects removed. The vertical dashed line marks the day of the tax change, July 1, 2015.

Figure 6: Vertical Integration Bandwidth Sensitivity

These figures consider the sensitivity of the estimates in Column (1) of Table 8 to the number of weeks of data we include
on either side of the tax change. The dots mark the estimates for each bandwidth choice and the lines mark the 95 percent
confidence intervals around these estimates.

38

Figure 7: Retail Tax-Inclusive Prices and Weight

These figures are based on the estimates in Column (1) of Table 13. The solid line plots the estimated response to the tax
change plus the date polynomial. The scatterplot is the corresponding daily average of the dependent variable with estimates
of the day-of-week, day-of-month, and retail fixed effects removed. The vertical dashed line marks the day of the tax change,
July 1, 2015.

Figure 8: Retail Tax-Inclusive Prices and Weight Bandwidth Sensitivity

d
These figures consider the sensitivity of the estimates in Column (1) of Table 13 to the number of weeks of data we include
on either side of the tax change. The dots mark the estimates for each bandwidth choice and the lines mark the 95 percent
confidence intervals around these estimates.

39

Figure 9: Retail Tax-Inclusive Prices and Weight Polynomial Choice Sensitivity

These figures consider the sensitivity of the estimates in Column (1) of Table 13 to the polynomial order chosen. We consider
linear, quadratic, cubic, quintic, and linear interacted with the tax change indicator. The dots mark the estimates for each
polynomial choice and the lines mark the 95 percent confidence intervals around these estimates.

Figure 10: The Average Price of One Gram of Marijuana and Tax Incidence
across Markets

In this figure, we plot the average retail firm’s price of one gram of marijuana both before and after the tax change. We then
consider how much goes to processor and retail taxes as well as how much is spent to purchase a gram, on average, from the
firm. Before the tax change, all prices and taxes (in dollars) are based on the average prices the month prior to the tax change.
After the tax change, these numbers are the pre-tax change prices adjusted by our estimated changes caused by the tax changes.
This holds constant the composition of the market and eliminates any secular trends in prices.

40

Table 1: Marijuana taxes by state

State
Alaska

Tax rate
None

California

15%

Colorado

10%
10%
3.75%
15%
17%
37%

Maine
Massachusetts
Nevada
Oregon
Washington

Notes
Cultivation tax of $50/oz on dried flowers
and $15/oz on for other plant material. Localities may impose additional retail taxes.
Cultivation tax of $9.25/oz on dried flowers
and $2.75/oz on dried leaves.
Additional 15% tax applied at wholesale
based on average market rate in the state.
Localities may impose additional 2% tax.
Tax applied at wholesale.
Localities may impose additional 3% tax.

Note: All taxes applied to retail sales unless otherwise noted

Table 2: House Bill 2136 legislative history summary

Date
February 17
February - March
April 10
April 24

April 29
May 1
May 28

Activity
Regular Session
Introduced in WA House, referred to committee
Passed by committees, substituted twice
Passed by House 67-28, referred to Senate
Accepted by Senate Committee, referred back to House,
Regular Session Ends
First Special Session
House passes 70-25, referred to Senate
Referred to Senate committee
Referred back to House, First Special Session Ends

Second Special Session
May 29
Reintroduced in House, referred to committee
June 26
Removed from committee, passed by House 59-38
June 27
Passed by Senate 36-7
June 30
Signed by Governor
Source: http://app.leg.wa.gov/billsummary?BillNumber=2136&Year=2015

41

Table 3: Cultivator Summary Statistics

Plantings
Harvesting
Plant to Harvest Days
Firm has Processor License?

Obs.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Mean>0

Min.

Max.

45,401
30,477
3,739
250

8.94
7.78
116.20
0.96

66.69
66.70
40.61
0.19

93.59
63.39
116.20
0.96

0
0
2
0

3,646
4,153
292
1

Table 4: Cultivator Response to Tax Change
(1)
Plantings

(2)
Harvests

(3)
Days-to-Harvest

−0.005
(0.035)

0.075
(0.051)

−0.069∗
(0.036)

Tax Change

Observations
45,401
30,477
3,739
R-squared
0.106
0.104
0.569
Months Pre-Post
2
2
2
Polynomial Order
3rd
3rd
3rd
Cultivators
374
250
250
The following variables are included, but not reported in these regressions:
day indicator variables for June 30 - July 5, day of the week and day of the
month indicator variables, and cultivator location fixed effects. All dependent variables are in logs; the dependent variable is listed directly below the
column number. Standard errors clustered by cultivator are in parentheses.

Table 5: Robustness Checks for Cultivator Response to Tax Change

Harvests

Days-to-Harvest

Harvests Observations
Days-to-Harvest Observations
Cultivators

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.075
(0.051)

0.068
(0.057)

0.057
(0.045)

0.087∗
(0.048)

0.084
(0.066)

0.074
(0.051)

−0.069∗
(0.036)

−0.085∗∗
(0.037)

−0.058∗
(0.031)

−0.048
(0.032)

0.003
(0.050)

−0.074∗∗
(0.036)

30,477
3,739
250

30,477
3,739
250

30,477
3,739
250

30,477
3,739
250

30,477
3,739
250

30,477
3,739
250

Indicators for June 27-29
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Indicators for July 2-5
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Day of Month Indicators
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Polynomial Order
3rd
3rd
3rd
3rd
5th
3rd
County x Polynomial Trend
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
The top row reports an estimate for the dependent variable log of the tax-inclusive price per gram. The next
row reports an estimate for the dependent variable log weight. Dependent variables are logged (or the log of 1
plus the variable if there are zeros). The following variables are included, but not reported in these regressions:
day indicator variables for June 30 - July 5, day of the week and day of the month indicator variables, and
cultivator location fixed effects. All dependent variables are in logs. Standard errors clustered by cultivator are
in parentheses.

42

Table 6: Processor Summary Statistics

Price per Gram
Weight (in grams)
Number of Sales
Firm Revenue
Fraction of Vertically Integrated Firms

Obs.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Mean>0

Min.

Max.

6,522
27,424
27,424
27,424
6,514

3.65
358.55
3.34
1319.62
0.93

1.12
1,179.40
10.47
4274.30
0.22

3.65
1,507.66
14.06
5,548.81
0.93

0.01
0
0
0
0

10.62
26,558.50
270
100,622.17
1

Table 7: Processor Response to Tax Change
(1)
Price
−0.076∗∗
(0.034)

Tax Change

(2)
AT Price
0.212∗∗∗
(0.034)

(3)
Weight

(4)
Sales

(5)
Rev.

(6)
AT Rev.

(7)
THC

0.009
(0.085)

0.009
(0.030)

−0.009
(0.102)

0.054
(0.100)

−0.036
(0.093)

Observations
6,522
6,522
27,424
27,424
27,424
27,424
6,399
R-squared
0.269
0.301
0.233
0.271
0.232
0.233
0.832
Months Pre-Post
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
Polynomial Order
3rd
3rd
3rd
3rd
3rd
3rd
3rd
Processors
225
225
225
225
225
225
224
The following variables are included, but not reported in these regressions: day indicator variables for June 30 - July 5,
day of the week and day of the month indicator variables, and processor location fixed effects. All dependent variables
are in logs; the dependent variable is listed directly below the column number. AT stands for after-tax. Standard errors
clustered by processor are in parentheses.

Table 8: Robustness Checks for Processor Response to Tax Change
(1)

After-Tax Price
Weight

After-Tax Price Observations
Weight Observations
Processors

0.212∗∗∗
(0.034)
0.009
(0.085)
6,522
27,424
225

(2)

(3)

0.209∗∗∗
(0.035)
−0.018
(0.095)
6,522
27,424
225

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.221∗∗∗
(0.030)
0.047
(0.078)

0.238∗∗∗
(0.032)
0.014
(0.079)

0.189∗∗∗
(0.054)
0.129
(0.114)

0.213∗∗∗
(0.034)
0.006
(0.085)

6,522
27,424
225

6,522
27,424
225

6,522
27,424
225

6,522
27,424
225

Indicators for June 27-29
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Indicators for July 2-5
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Day of Month Indicators
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Polynomial Order
3rd
3rd
3rd
3rd
5th
3rd
County x Polynomial
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
The top row reports an estimate for the dependent variable log of the tax-inclusive price per gram. The next row
reports an estimate for the dependent variable log after-tax revenue. The following variables are included, but not
reported in these regressions: day indicator variables for June 30 - July 5, day of the week and day of the month
indicator variables, and processor location fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by processor are in parentheses.

43

Table 9: Vertical Integration Response to Tax Change
(1)
Vertical
Tax Change
One Week Post
Two Weeks Post
Three Weeks Post
Four Weeks Post
Five Weeks Post
Six Weeks Post

−0.037∗∗
(0.018)
0.041∗∗∗
(0.015)
0.037∗∗
(0.016)
0.031∗∗
(0.013)
0.028∗∗
(0.011)
0.012
(0.010)
0.017
(0.011)

(2)
NVWeight

(3)
NVPrice

(4)
Vertical

0.418∗∗∗
(0.147)
−0.378∗∗∗
(0.138)
−0.342∗∗∗
(0.122)
−0.272∗∗∗
(0.104)
−0.192∗
(0.108)
−0.163∗
(0.094)
−0.189∗
(0.097)

0.047
(0.036)
−0.079∗∗
(0.037)
−0.007
(0.053)
−0.050
(0.036)
0.018
(0.039)
−0.063∗∗
(0.030)
−0.048
(0.039)

−0.162∗∗
(0.081)
0.199∗∗∗
(0.056)
0.195∗∗∗
(0.054)
−0.059
(0.225)
0.186∗∗∗
(0.050)
0.182∗∗∗
(0.048)
0.178∗∗∗
(0.046)

(5)
NVWeight
1.046∗∗
(0.517)
−1.298∗∗∗
(0.359)
−1.271∗∗∗
(0.347)
0.083
(1.208)
−1.215∗∗∗
(0.322)
−1.188∗∗∗
(0.310)
−1.160∗∗∗
(0.299)

Observations
16,422
23,940
2,549
523
523
R-squared
0.652
0.497
0.214
0.015
0.013
First Week Only
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Weeks Pre-Post
45
45
45
45
45
Polynomial Order
3rd
3rd
3rd
3rd
3rd
Processor Locations
525
525
155
510
510
Processor location fixed effects (Columns (1) to (3) only) and a polynomial in the processor sale month
are included, but not reported. All dependent variables are in logs; the dependent variable is listed
directly below the column number. NVWeight stands for non-vertical weight. NVPrice stands for the
ratio of the average vertical wholesale price over the average price for each processor location. Standard
errors clustered by processor location are in parentheses for Columns (1) to (3) and heteroskedastic
robust standard errors are in parentheses for Columns (4) and (5).

Table 10: Robustness Checks for Vertical Integration Response to Tax Change
(1)

Fraction Vertically Integrated
Non-Vertical Weight

Fraction Vertically Integrated Observations
Non-Vertical Weight Observations
Processors

(2)

−0.037∗∗
(0.018)
0.418∗∗∗
(0.147)

−0.038∗∗
(0.019)
0.427∗∗∗
(0.154)

23,940
16,422
525

23,940
16,422
525

(3)

−0.031∗
(0.017)
0.351∗∗∗
(0.133)
23,940
16,422
525

(4)

−0.040∗∗
(0.019)
0.406∗∗∗
(0.156)
23,940
16,422
525

(5)

−0.039∗
(0.021)
0.488∗∗∗
(0.159)
23,940
16,422
525

(6)

−0.034∗∗
(0.017)
0.407∗∗∗
(0.145)
23,940
16,422
525

Number of Post-Reform Week Indicators
6
6
4
8
6
6
Number of Pre-Reform Week Indicators
0
1
0
0
0
0
Polynomial Order
3rd
3rd
3rd
3rd
5th
3rd
County x Polynomial
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
The top row reports an estimate for the dependent variable fraction of vertically integrated transactions by firm. The
next row reports an estimate for the dependent variable log non-vertical weight. Processor location fixed effects and a
polynomial in the week are included. All dependent variables are in logs. Standard errors clustered by processor are in
parentheses.

44

Table 11: Retail Summary Statistics

Price per Gram
Weight (in grams)
Number of Sales
Firm Revenue
Days from Wholesale
THC Potency
CBD Potency
Number of Competitors

Obs.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Median

Min.

Max.

15,893
15,893
15,893
15,893
15,893
15,893
15,893
15,893

9.39
511.89
239.07
4479.69
21.23
19.66
0.40
5.28

1.5
381.41
215.26
4,043.55
15.82
1.45
0.26
4

9.30
464.44
181
3,335.62
17.2
19.73
0.34
5

0.31
1
1
4
-9
9.05
0
1

16.60
7,434.61
2,017
36,854.39
189
32.76
3.90
18

Table 12: Retail Response to Tax Change
(1)
Price
Tax Change

−0.048∗∗∗
(0.012)

(2)
TI Price

(3)
Weight

(4)
Sales

(5)
Rev.

(6)
TI Rev.

0.021∗
(0.012)

0.007
(0.027)

0.022
(0.029)

−0.036
(0.030)

0.034
(0.030)

(7)
THC
−0.018∗∗∗
(0.006)

Observations
15,893
15,893
15,893
15,893
15,893
15,893
15,893
Retailers
135
135
135
135
135
135
135
R-squared
0.794
0.778
0.885
0.897
0.887
0.888
0.494
Months Pre-Post
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
Polynomial Order
5th
5th
5th
5th
5th
5th
5th
The following variables are included, but not reported in these regressions: log processor price, whether any competitors,
log competitors’ processor price, day indicator variables for June 30 - July 5, day of the week and day of the month
indicator variables, and retail location fixed effects. All dependent variables are in logs; the dependent variable is listed
directly below the column number. TI stands for tax-inclusive. Standard errors clustered by retailer are in parentheses.

45

Table 13: Robustness Checks for Retail Response to Tax Change
(1)

Inventory Lot TI Price
Inventory Lot TI Price Interaction

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.0233∗∗∗ 0.0228∗∗∗ 0.0220∗∗∗ 0.0237∗∗∗ 0.0233∗∗∗ 0.0233∗∗∗ 0.0229∗∗∗ 0.0241∗∗∗
(0.0066) (0.0068) (0.0062) (0.0064) (0.0066) (0.0066) (0.0066) (0.0068)
−0.0001 −0.0001 −0.0000 −0.0001 −0.0001 −0.0001 −0.0001
(0.0002) (0.0002) (0.0002) (0.0002) (0.0002) (0.0002) (0.0002)
−0.0095 −0.0038
(0.0228) (0.0229)
−0.0010∗ −0.0008
(0.0006) (0.0006)

−0.0079
0.0135
(0.0207) (0.0215)
−0.0010∗ −0.0005
(0.0005) (0.0006)

−0.0085
(0.0220)
−0.0009
(0.0006)

−0.0092
(0.0222)
−0.0009
(0.0006)

−0.0096 −0.0072
(0.0228) (0.0228)
−0.0010∗
(0.0006)

Implied Elasticity

−0.4260

−0.1666

−0.3591

0.5696

−0.3812

−0.3948

−0.4192

−0.2988

Observations
Inventory Lot Observations
Retailers

15,893
567,425
135

15,893
567,425
135

15,893
567,425
135

15,893
567,425
135

15,893
567,425
135

15,893
567,425
135

15,893
567,425
135

15,893
567,425
135

Weight
Weight Interaction

Indicators for June 27-29
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Indicators for July 2-5
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Day of Month Indicators
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Weekend Days x Retail Location
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Processor Prices Included?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
# Competitors Included?
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
County x Polynomial
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
The top two rows report estimates for the dependent variable log of the tax-inclusive price per gram where the data are
aggregated by retail location-inventory lot-day instead of retail location-day. The first reports the estimate on the Tax
Change indicator variable. The second row reports the estimate on the interaction between the running variable and the
Tax Change. The next two rows report the same estimates for the dependent variable log weight. The elasticity of demand
implied by these estimates is calculated by dividing the weight estimate by the price estimates in the second row. The
following variables are included, but not reported in these regressions unless otherwise specified: log processor price, log
competitors’ processor price, whether any competitors (these first three covariates are included only for the first and third
rows), day indicator variables for June 30 - July 5, day of the week and day of the month indicator variables, retail location
fixed effects, and a linear running variable/polynomial in date. All dependent variables are in logs. Standard errors clustered
by retailer are in parentheses.

46

Appendices
A

Federal Income Tax Incidence Calculations

In this appendix, we consider how our incidence results would be affected if we incorporated
the federal income tax into our calculations. Without considering the federal income tax,
we found that consumers bore about 44 percent of the increased taxes due to the tax reform
on July 1, 2015. Understanding exactly how federal income taxes changed in expectation in
response to the tax reform is challenging and, as we described in the main text, depends on
whether firms believed that they always owed taxes on the tax-exclusive price of marijuana
or whether they believed that they owed taxes on the tax-inclusive price before the tax
reform and on the tax-exclusive price after the tax reform. While we can’t say exactly what
incidence looks like when we incorporate federal income taxes without knowing all firms’
expectations, we examine two benchmark cases. First, we consider what incidence would
look like if firms always believed that federal taxes would apply to the tax-exclusive price. We
then consider what beliefs would have needed to look like in order for taxes to be completely
passed-through to consumers as an alternative benchmark.33
We don’t directly observe federal income taxes owed in our administrative data, so we
must estimate them. Section 280E – the federal tax code that governs the taxation of illegal
substances – and subsequent Chief Counsel Advice (CCA 201504011) specifies that retailers
are only allowed to deduct the costs of goods sold (as opposed to, say, labor and capital
costs), which in this case consists of the price paid to the processor and any transportation
costs of obtaining the inventory. We thus calculate a retail firm’s federal income tax liability
assuming the following: (1) their only income source is their marijuana business, (2) their
33

We do not consider processor federal income tax liability in this section for two reasons: (1) it is much
less likely that processors thought they were subject to a federal income tax on their tax-inclusive price
before the tax change, so there would be no real change in the amount of federal income tax owed as a result
of the reform except due to changes in the processor price, and (2) cultivators and processors are allowed
more deductions under federal law, many of which we don’t see, so our calculations of the federal income
tax liability would be much less accurate.

47

only cost of goods sold is the marijuana purchased, (3) they do not itemize, and (4) they are
married with one child. We recognize these assumptions are not perfect, but they are the
best we can do given what we observe and reasonable variations in any one of these would
not substantially change the estimated tax liability on a gram of marijuana.
When all firms believe federal income taxes are always assessed on the tax-exclusive
price, we calculate how federal income taxes changed on a dollar of marijuana at the new
equilibrium price, $13.49, but we allow the processor price to change with the tax reform.
We find that at the new processor price, federal income taxes on a dollar of marijuana are
$1.54 and at the old processor price are $1.48; that is, federal income taxes on a dollar of
marijuana rose by 6 cents, which amounts to a 0.44 percent increase from the equilibrium
tax-inclusive price, $13.49.34 . Hence, the net change in taxes and marginal costs is 5.50
percent, so consumers bear 42 percent of the tax burden (=.0233/.0550).
As an alternative benchmark, we consider what happens when 70 percent of firms believe that federal income taxes are always assessed on the tax-exclusive price and 30 percent of firms believe that federal income taxes are assessed on tax-inclusive prices before
the tax reform and tax-exclusive prices after the reform. We calculate how federal income
taxes changed on a dollar of marijuana at the new equilibrium price, $13.49, but we allow
taxation to switch between tax-inclusive and tax-exclusive prices and we allow the processor price to change with the tax reform. In this scenario, federal income taxes are $1.90
(=.3*$2.74+0.7*$1.54) on average before the tax reform. Federal income taxes on a dollar
of marijuana declined by 36 cents, which amounts to a 2.7 percent increase from the equilibrium tax-inclusive price, $13.49.35 . Hence, the net change in taxes and marginal costs is 2.33
percent, so consumers bear 100 percent of the tax burden (=.0233/.0233). As the fraction of
firms that expected to pay taxes on the tax-inclusive price before the tax change increases
above 30 percent, pass-through to consumers would be more than 100 percent. And, as it
decreases below 30 percent, pass-through to consumers would be less than 100 percent.
34
35

We calculate this as the log change, 0.0044 = log((13.49 + .06)/13.49).
We calculate this as the log change, 0.027 = log((13.49 − 0.36)/13.49).

48

