                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         GENDER: AN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE

                                         Paola Giuliano

                                      Working Paper 23635
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23635


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2017




I thank Susan Averett and Saul Hoffman for comments that substantially improved the chapter.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Paola Giuliano. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Gender: An Historical Perspective
Paola Giuliano
NBER Working Paper No. 23635
July 2017
JEL No. N0,Z1

                                           ABSTRACT

Social attitudes toward women vary significantly across societies. This chapter reviews recent
empirical research on various historical determinants of contemporary differences in gender roles
and gender gaps across societies, and how these differences are transmitted from parents to
children and therefore persist until today. We review work on the historical origin of differences
in female labor-force participation, fertility, education, marriage arrangements, competitive
attitudes, domestic violence, and other forms of difference in gender norms. Most of the research
illustrates that differences in cultural norms regarding gender roles emerge in response to specific
historical situations, but tend to persist even after the historical conditions have changed. We also
discuss the conditions under which gender norms either tend to be stable or change more quickly.


Paola Giuliano
Anderson School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
C517 Entrepreneurs Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and IZA
and also NBER
paola.giuliano@anderson.ucla.edu
    1. Introduction
           Social attitudes toward women and their role in society show remarkable differences across
countries, including those with similar institutions or economic development. Standard economic
variables such as the level of development, women’s education, fertility and marriage/divorce
prospects, and the expansion of the service sector have been widely studied (see Goldin, 1990, for
a review). Some scholars have emphasized the role played by market prices, such as the decline in
child care costs (Attanasio, Low, and Sanchez-Marcos, 2008), and by technological factors such as the
invention of baby formula (Albanesi and Olivetti, 2016). A recent literature has emphasized how this
large variation could be the result of differences in cultural beliefs about the appropriate role of women
in society (Fernandez, 2007; Fernandez and Fogli, 2009; Bertrand et al., 2015). Several new
contributions have started to study the deep historical roots of these cultural differences (see Nunn,
2009, for a review).
           This chapter will review the literature on the long-term historical origins of the differences in
gender roles and gender gaps across societies and how they are transmitted from parents to children
and therefore persist until today. We will review work on the historical origin of differences in female
labor-force participation, fertility, education, marriage arrangements, competitive attitudes, domestic
violence, and other forms of difference in gender norms (such as the presence of the dowry versus
the bride price and differences in inheritance rules favoring women),
           We will also discuss how relatively short-term historical shocks can help in understanding
differences in gender roles across societies. Finally, we will discuss the conditions under which gender
norms either tend to be stable or change more quickly.


    2. Historical origin of gender roles
           In this section, we will look at seven important long-term historical determinants of
gender roles: agricultural technology, language, geography, pre-industrial societal characteristics, family
structures, religion, and historical shocks.
    2.1.       Agriculture and agricultural technology
           A recent literature has emphasized how differences in agricultural technology or, more simply,
a long history of agriculture can have long-lasting effects on the evolution of gender-role attitudes.
Alesina, Giuliano, and Nunn (2013) study the historical persistence of differences in female labor-
force participation. The hypothesis for their empirical analysis comes from the seminal work of
Ester Boserup (1970), in which she argued that differences in the role of women in societies
originate in the different types of agricultural technology, particularly the differences between
                                                 2
shifting and plough agriculture. Shifting agriculture, which uses hand-held tools like the hoe and the
digging stick, is labor-intensive, with women actively participating in farm work, while using a
plough to prepare the soil is more capital-intensive. Unlike the hoe or digging stick, the plough
requires significant upper-body strength, grip strength, and bursts of power to either pull the
plough or control the animal that pulls it. Farming with the plough is also less compatible with
childcare, which is almost always the responsibility of women. As a result, men i n societies
characterized by plough agriculture tended to specialize in agricultural work outside the home,
while women specialized in activities within the home. In turn, this division of labor generated a
norm that the natural place for women is in the home. This belief tends to persist even if the economy
moves out of agriculture, affecting the participation of women in activities performed outside
the home, including market employment, entrepreneurship, and politics.
        The authors document a very strong negative correlation between traditional use of the
plough and female participation in agriculture in pre-industrial societies, using the Ethnographic Atlas,
a dataset assembled by George Peter Murdock in 1967 and containing ethnographic information
for 1,265 ethnic groups covering the whole world. To investigate whether plough-based agriculture
correlates with lower female participation in all agricultural tasks or only in a few (such as soil
preparation), the authors report results on specific activities carried out in the field or outside the
home: land clearance, soil preparation, planting, crop tending, harvesting, caring for small and large
animals, milking, cooking, fuel gathering, water fetching, burden carrying, handicraft production,
and trading. Their empirical analysis carefully controls for other variables that could be correlated
with plough use and gender roles: the presence of large domesticated animals, a measure of economic
development, the fraction of land on which the ethnic group lives defined as tropical or subtropical,
and the fraction of land that is defined as suitable for agriculture. Overall, the authors find that
plough use is associated with less female participation in all agricultural tasks, with the largest
declines in soil preparation, planting, crop tending, and burden carrying. But they find that plough
use tends not to be significantly correlated with female participation in other activities. This
interpretation of the correlations is fully consistent with Boserup’s hypothesis.
        After looking at the correlation between agricultural technology and female participation in
agriculture in pre-industrial societies, Alesina et al. (2013) study whether differences in agriculture
technology still have an impact on female labor- force participation today. A correlation between
female labor-force participation in agriculture and agricultural technology in the past does not
necessarily imply that differences in historical agriculture technology affect female labor-force
participation today. Goldin and Sokoloff (1984), for example, document that within the northeastern
                                                  3
United States, the low relative productivity of women and children in agriculture (and their low
participation in this sector) allowed them to participate in the manufacturing sector. In this
setting, initial female labor- force participation in agriculture is inversely related to subsequent
participation in manufacturing, resulting in a lack of continuity of female labor- force participation
over time as industrialization occurred. An interpretation based on social norms could, however, help
explain long-term persistence.
         At the country level2, the authors look at differences in female labor-force participation but
also at two other measures that could reflect cultural attitudes and beliefs about the role of women
in society: a measure of entrepreneurship (the share of firms with a woman among the principal
owners) and o f the presence of women in national politics (the proportion of parliamentary
seats held by women). In countries with a tradition of plough use, women are less likely to
participate in the labor market, own firms, and participate in national politics.3
         To further limit endogeneity concerns, the authors also provide instrumental variable estimates.
To construct their instrument, they exploit the variation in historic plough use that arose from
differences in societies’ geo-climatic conditions, which affected whether crops that potentially
benefitted from the plough were cultivated. As Pryor (1985) explains, because of differences in the
length of the cropping season, the amount of land required for cultivation, and the characteristics of
the soil (slope, depth, rockiness, etc.), crops differ significantly in the extent to which the use of the
plough improves productivity. In his study, Pryor identifies crops as being either plough-positive
(cultivation greatly benefits from the plough) or plough-negative (cultivation benefits less from the
plough).4 The identification strategy relies on the assumption that, holding constant overall crop
productivity (for which they control for) the distinction between plough-positive and plough-negative
geo-climatic environments only impact gender roles through the plough). The primary concern with
this strategy is that the difference between plough-positive and plough-negative environments may be
correlated with geographic features that affect gender attitudes today through channels other than the


2 To show long- term persistence, Alesina, Giuliano, and Nunn (2013) look at differences in female labor-force
participation, but also at beliefs about the role of women in society in 2000. To analyze contemporary female labor-force
participation, they match ethnographic data to current populations using the global distribution of 7,612 language groups
from the fifteenth edition of the Ethnologue and the global distribution of population densities from the 2000 Landscan
database, generating a measure of the fraction of a country’s ancestors who traditionally engaged in plough agriculture.
3
  In a companion paper (Alesina et al., 2013), the authors examine the impact of agricultural technology on fertility. They
find that societies with historic plough use had lower level of fertility. The finding is consistent with the explanation that
plough agriculture reduced the benefit of having children, since they were less useful in the field.
4 Plough-positive crops, which typically require extensive land preparation over a large surface area and in a very short

period of time, include wet rice, barley, wheat, rye, and teff. Plough-negative crops, which include crops that require little
land to produce a sufficient amount of food, crops that can be grown in rocky or sloped land, and crops with seeds that
easily take root (even in shallow soils), include three crops, root crops, maize, millet, and sorghum (Pryor, 1985).
                                                              4
plough. The authors check the robustness of their results to this concern by controlling for geographic
characteristics that are potentially correlated with the suitability of the environment for plough-
positive and plough-negative crops (terrain slope, soil depth, average temperature and average
precipitation of locations inhabited by each country’s ancestors). The IV estimates confirm the OLS
results.
           In addition to determining labor-force participation, differences in agricultural technology can
influence social norms more broadly. Boserup (1970) indeed hints at the possibility that plough
societies developed different social norms and marital arrangements compatible with a different value
of women in society. Her idea was not new, as anthropologists have long posited that the origins of
household formation rules relate to both technology and productivity. According to Aberle (1961),
“the origins of matrilineal systems are probably to be sought in technology, division of labour, types
of subsistence activities and the ecological niches in which these activities occur.” (p. 725). Goody
(1976) has linked the demand for wives to the productivity of women in agriculture: in female farming
communities, a man with more than one wife can cultivate more land than a man with only one wife.
Therefore polygamy is expected to be more common in societies with shifting cultivation. Finally, in
societies in which women do most of the agricultural work, it is the bridegroom who must pay bride-
wealth, while in societies in which women are less engaged in agriculture, marriage payments usually
come from the bride’s family.
           To explore this hypothesis, Giuliano (2015) looks at the correlation between historical plough
use and whether the dowry is the most prevalent mode of marriage, whether the inheritance rule in a
society is matrilineal, and if polygamy is prevalent5. She finds that in societies that used the plough, (a)
inheritance rules appear to be less favorable to women—as indicated by the fact that matrilineality is
less common, (b) there is less polygamy, and (c) a dowry is paid by the bride’s family. After establishing
a correlation for the past, the author shows that differences in agricultural technology have a persistent
effect on social norms, lasting until today. Using data from the OECD Gender, Institutions and
Development Database, she finds that societies that historically used the plough are characterized by
higher parental authority granted to the father, by inheritance rules that favor male heirs, and by less
freedom for women to move outside the house. She also finds that, in these societies, women are
more likely to wear a veil in public and polygamy is less accepted or illegal.6


5 Boserup (1970) explains the lack of polygamy in plough-farming societies in terms of access to land, saying that polygamy
occurs in long-fallow agricultural societies with communal land tenure and land available for expansion, where “an
additional wife is an additional economic asset which helps the family to expand its production” (p. 38).
6
  Giuliano also looks at differences in gender attitudes using the Global Gender Gap Index, a comprehensive indicator
introduced by the World Economic Forum. The index benchmarks national gender gaps on economic, political, education,
                                                            5
         Various reasons could explain the persistent effect of differences in agricultural technology on
gender outcomes today. For example, underlying cultural traits may be reinforced by policies, laws,
and institutions which affect the benefits of beliefs about gender inequality. A society with traditional
beliefs about gender inequality may perpetuate these beliefs by institutionalizing unequal property
rights, voting rights, and so on. Beliefs about gender inequality may also cause a society to specialize
in capital-intensive industries, which in turn decreases the relative cost of gender inequality norms,
thereby perpetuating them. A third explanation is that cultural beliefs are inherently sticky. Alesina,
Giuliano, and Nunn (2011, 2013) present evidence consistent with this last interpretation. Looking at
children of immigrants in the United States and Europe, they test for a relationship between traditional
plough agriculture and cultural beliefs while holding constant the external environment. They do find
a high degree of persistence in cultural traits.
         Additional evidence on how variation in agriculture could affect labor productivity and,
subsequently, gender differences comes from Qian (2008). She studies economic reforms in China in
the late 1970s that made growing cash crops more lucrative. During the Maoist era, centrally planned
production targets focused on staple crops. In the early reform era (1978-1980), reforms increased the
return to cash crops, which included tea and orchards. Men and women specialize in the production
of different crops: women have a comparative advantage in picking tea leaves, which are delicate and
grow on short bushes, whereas men, due to their height and strength, specialize in picking fruit from
trees. Qian (2008) compares the impact of the economic reforms in tea-growing regions, where female
labor productivity, especially, should have risen, and in regions specializing in fruit orchards, where
male labor productivity should have risen most. In tea-growing regions, the reforms led to fewer so-
called “missing girls,” consistent with families having fewer sex-selective abortions of female fetuses
or engaging in less neglect and infanticide of girls. The mechanism Qian puts forward is that when
women’s share of household income increases, their gender preferences have a higher weight in
household decision making.
         Rather than looking at differences in type of agriculture, Hansen et al. (2015) make a more
general point about the relevance of agriculture, hypothesizing that societies with long histories of
agriculture have less g e n d e r equality as a consequence of more patriarchal values and beliefs
regarding the proper role of women in society. Their research is motivated by the idea that patriarchy
originated in the Neolithic Revolution—the prehistoric transition from a hunter-gatherer to an


and health criteria and is designed to measure gender-based gaps in access to resources and opportunities in individual
countries rather than the actual level of the available resources and opportunities in those countries. Differences in
historical agricultural practices are strongly correlated with a global measure of gender gap, as summarized by this index.
                                                            6
agricultural society—and that patriarchal values and beliefs have persisted and become more
ingrained in countries with long histories of agriculture. Agricultural societies were more gender-
biased than hunter-gatherer societies. Population growth and land scarcity made cultivation of food
more labor-intensive, which created “a premium on male brawn in plowing and other heavy farm
work” (Iversen and Rosenbluth, 2010, p. 32). This led to a division of labor within the family, in
which the man used his physical strength in food production and the woman took care of child
rearing, cooking, and other family-related duties. This increased the male’s bargaining power within
the family, which, over generations, translated into norms and behavior which shaped cultural
beliefs about gender roles.
           An alternative mechanism builds on the work by Iversen and Rosenbluth (2010), who
emphasize the task division within the household. They note that evidence suggests that hunter-
gatherers societies were characterized by more independent women as compared to agricultural
societies. First, some evidence from present-day hunter-gatherers indicates that the gathering activity
of women provides more than half of the daily caloric intake of their communities. Second, meat, as
provided by male hunting activity, may not have been strictly necessary for survival; gathered food
served as an independent and more secure source of calories.
           Using a world sample, a European regional sample, and a sample of children of immigrants
living in the United States, the authors find a negative association between the number of years that
a country had been an agrarian society in 1500 CE and contemporary measures of gender-equality,
including female labor-force participation, number of years since women gained suffrage, and
percentage of seats in parliament held by women.
    2.2.      Language
           Another interesting aspect of the long-term persistence of gender roles is the relation
between grammatical gender-marking and female participation in the labor market, the credit
market, land ownership, and politics (Gay et al., 2013). The grammatical features of a language are
inherited from the distant past and the gender system is one of the most stable linguistic features,
surviving for thousands of years. Gay et al. (2013) broadly follow Whorf (1956): “[One is] inclined
to think of language simply as a technique of expression, and not to realize that language first
of all is a classification and arrangement of the stream of sensory experience which results in a
certain world-order, a certain segment of the world that is easily expressible by the type of symbolic
means that language employs.” (p. 55).
           In linguistics, a grammatical gender system is defined as a set of rules for agreement that


                                                    7
depends on nouns of different types.7 Gay et al. (2013) rely on the World Atlas of Linguistic Structures,
the most comprehensive data source of grammatical structures, and use four very stable grammatical
variables related to gender: the number of genders in the language, whether the gender system is
sex-based, rules for gender assignment, and gender distinctions in pronouns. The authors construct
the Gender Intensity Index by summing these features for the most commonly spoken language in
a country.
         Using cross-country and individual-level data, they find that women speaking languages that
more pervasively mark gender distinctions are less likely to participate in economic and political
activities and more likely to encounter barriers in their access to land and credit. The authors also
investigate a sample of immigrants living in the United States—that is, all facing the same institutional
and labor-market environment—and find consistent results.
         Galor et al. (2016) also study the emergence of sex-based gender systems in languages and
their effects on behavior. They advance the hypothesis and establish empirically that variation in
caloric suitability for plough-positive/negative crops affects the emergence of grammatical gender in
a language.8 They also explore the relationship between linguistic and cultural traits and test whether
their coevolution contributed to the stability and persistence of cultural characteristics and their lasting
effect on gender differences. Their hypothesis is that pre-industrial characteristics that were conducive
to the emergence and progression of complementary cultural traits triggered an evolutionary process
in language structures that has fostered the transmission of these cultural traits. In a society
characterized by distinct gender roles and by gender biases, grammatical gender that fortified the
existing social structure and cultural norms may have emerged and persisted over time. Moreover,
agricultural characteristics that were complementary to the use of the plough and therefore to distinct
gender roles in society may have fostered the emergence and prevalence of grammatical gender. Galor
et al. (2016) test this hypothesis in two stages. In the initial stage, the empirical analysis explores the
origins of language structures, focusing on the geographical roots of sex-based grammatical gender
systems. In the second stage, the empirical analysis examines the effects of language structures on
contemporary economic outcomes. The authors show that second-generation female immigrants who
speak a language that has grammatical gender have a lower probability of attending college. Although
the authors look at immigrants to show that there is cultural persistence over time, their identification
strategy is an improvement over previous papers. Since they identify immigrants using the language


7These are normally based on biological sex, but can also be based on social constructs such as age or social status.
8Historical caloric suitability measures the potential daily calories from cultivating the crop with maximal caloric yield
during the pre-1500CE era in that specific location.
                                                            8
spoken at home, they can control not only for country-of-destination fixed effects but also for
country-of-origin fixed effects, allowing a better identification of the importance of historical
characteristics (as represented by language) to female outcomes today.
    2.3.      Geography
           A long-term determinant of differences in gender roles can be found in geography. In a
fascinating paper, Carranza (2014), having pointed out that soil texture, which varies exogenously,
determines the workability of the soil and the technology used in land preparation, uses this as a lens
to look at differences in female labor-force participation in India. She distinguishes between
loamy and clayey soil textures 9. Deep tillage, possible in loamy but not in clayey soil
textures, reduces the need for transplanting, fertilizing, and weeding, activities typically performed
by women (Basant, 1987).10 In areas where deep tillage is required, the lower demand for female
labor relative to the demand for male labor is expected to have a negative impact on the perceived
relative value of girls to a household (Boserup, 1970).
           Carranza (2014) finds that soil texture explains a large part of the variation in women’s
relative participation in agriculture. The author goes further and examines the impact of
geography on the infant sex ratio, perhaps the most extreme indicator of gender-based
discrimination. Because relatively smaller female labor contributions in loamy areas make girls relatively
more costly, the ratio of girls to boys will be negatively related to the difference between the fractions
of loamy and clayey soils. Sex ratios and female labor-force participation in India today show a
large geographical heterogeneity, even within the same state and cultural region. These differences
within the same state are not driven by alternative mechanisms, including cultural, social, economic,
or policy variables (Dyson and Moore, 1983; Agnihotri, 1996).
           Carranza (2014) estimates that soil texture explains 62 percent of the within-state variation in
female agricultural labor-force participation and 70 percent of the variation in the sex ratio for zero-
to six-year-olds. A 10-percentage-point greater fraction of loamy relative to clayey soils is associated
with a 5.1-percent lower share of female agricultural laborers and a 2.7-percent lower ratio of female
to male children. The relationship between soil texture, relative female labor-force participation, and
the ratio of female to male children did not change significantly between 1961 and 2001.


9 According to the proportion in which small, medium, and large particles are combined in the soil, soil texture can range
from very fine clay to medium loam to very coarse sand. Finer soils have higher particle density and lower pore space than
coarser soils. For that reason, they are heavier, tighter and more difficult to work.
10 It is interesting to note that the depth of tillage does not determine the gender-based division of labor. The strength

required in land preparation is a function of the depth of tillage and the resistance offered by the soil, which are inversely
related. Deep and shallow tillage have similar strength requirements. Men always prepare the land.
                                                              9
    2.4.       Pre-industrial societal characteristics
           Pre-industrial social characteristics can have persistent effect on gender roles. Among the most
studied are the practice of matrilineality, modes of residence after marriage, and the dowry versus the
bride price.
    2.4.1. Matrilineality
           Matrilineality refers to the fact that lineage and inheritance are traced through female members.
This can affect the residential patterns of married couples (in matrilineal societies, it is more common
for the married couple to reside in the wife’s natal home with her mother) and the inheritance of
property (with property handed down from women to their daughters and granddaughters and from
men to their sister’s sons).
           Matrilineality can improve women’s outcomes for a variety of reasons. Women in matrilineal
societies have greater access to land and other assets, either through direct inheritance and ownership
or through greater access to the possessions of the large matriclan. This makes them less reliant on
their husbands and less vulnerable in the case of a husband’s death. Women in matrilineal systems
have continued kin support, either by living with or near their own family after marriage or through
ongoing connections maintained by matrilineal kinship. They are also likely to have greater intra-
household bargaining power vis-à-vis their husbands and have greater exit options than patrilineal
women. These differences are amplified when a couple resides matrilocally and a woman is surrounded
by her family.
           The difference between matrilineal and patrilineal kinship systems have wide implications for
gender roles, including differences in competition (Gneezy et al., 2009), spatial ability (Hoffman et al.,
2010), risk aversion and contribution in dictator games (Gong, Yan, and Yang, 2012, 2015), political
participation (Gottlieb et al., 2016), and social interactions between family members (Lowes, 2016).
           Gneezy et al. (2009) study how competitiveness among women varies between a patriarchal
society—the Maasai in Tanzania—and a matrilineal and matrilocal society—the Khasi in northeast
India. Amongst the Maasai, the most important distinctions between men are age-based and almost
all wealth is in cattle. The age structure prevents men from marrying until they are roughly 30 and
polygamy is the most common form of marriage. Therefore, the average Maasai woman is married to
a much older man who has multiple wives.
           For the Khasi, inheritance and clan membership always follow the female lineage. Family life
is organized around the mother’s house, which is headed by the grandmother, who lives with her
unmarried daughters, her youngest daughter, her youngest daughter’s children, and any unmarried,
divorced, or widowed brothers and sons. The youngest daughter never leaves and eventually becomes
                                               10
the head of the household; older daughters usually form separate households adjacent to their
mother’s household. Furthermore, a woman never joins the household of her husband’s family and a
man usually leaves his mother’s household to join his wife’s household. Sometimes a man practices
duolocal marriage, living in both his mother’s and his wife’s households, but even when residing with
his wife’s family, he spends much of his time in his mother’s or sisters’ households.
         These two societies’ differences in societal structure are reflected in substantial differences in
gender competition in an experimental setting. Maasai and Khasi subjects were given a choice to either
partake in a ball-throwing game without competition or to compete with an anonymous person from
the same village playing the same game, with the winner receiving all the benefits.11 Among the Maasai,
50 percent of men chose to compete versus only 26 percent of women, a result similar to that in
Western cultures, where patrilineal systems were historically more common. The result is reversed in
the matrilineal society, where women were more competitive than men: 54 percent of Khasi women
chose to compete versus only 39 percent of Khasi men.
         These results shed light on the debate on whether the underlying sources of the observed
gender differences in competition are attributable to nature or nurture or some combination of both.
One possibility is that differences in competition are primarily attributable to the genetic differences
between the sexes. An alternative hypothesis is that gender differences are culture-specific—
determined by the different social and economic functions of men and women in a society. The fact
that women in different environments show different propensities to compete rules out the possibility
that women are naturally less competitive. Gneezy et al. (2009) consider their results broadly in line
with the importance of nurture. This explanation is consistent with Boyd and Richerson (2005), who
argued that social learning is the most important channel of cultural transmission compared to explicit
training or socialization; individuals choose to copy successful individuals as much, if not more, than
common individuals. This type of learning is called prestige-based learning. Khasi women would
therefore decide to imitate older women in their household or successful women in their village. The
Khasi institutions of matrilocal residence and matrilineal inheritance, in other words, could carry out
the role of prestige-based learning in generating cultural transmission of differences in gender roles.
         Hoffman et al. (2011) use a research approach similar to Gneezy et al. (2009) to study how
differences in societal structure can influence a gender gap in spatial reasoning (measured by the time
needed to solve a puzzle), a skill that has been shown to correlate with success in engineering courses
as well as the decision to major in physical sciences (Humphreys et al., 1993). Spatial reasoning is

11In the game without competition, subjects had 10 attempts and received one dollar for each basket scored. In the game
with competition, subjects received three dollars for each basket in a win, but no money at all in a loss.
                                                         11
measured by the time needed to solve a puzzle. Hoffman et al. (2010) show that women’s disadvantage
disappears when they move from a patrilineal society (the Karbi) to a matrilineal society (the Khasi).
Men take 36.4 percent less time than women in the patrilineal society, but are no faster than women
in the matrilineal society.
         Gong et al. (2012, 2015) study the importance of belonging to a matrilineal society in
contributions in a dictator game and in risk aversion. The authors collect evidence on behavior for the
matrilineal Mosuo and the patrilineal Yi societies.12 The authors find that among the Mosuo, men
contribute more in dictator games than women do—a pattern opposite to that observed in Western
societies—whereas there are no gender differences in the Yi society. Men are less risk-averse in both
the matrilineal Mosuo and the patriarchal Yi, with the gender gap being smaller among the Mosuo,
and the Mosuo are less risk-averse than the Yi in general. These differences, according to the authors,
could be the result of different family structures. The Mosuo have bigger families with more adult
members; in case of disability, a Mosuo woman has her sisters, brothers, mother, and mother’s siblings
all living in the same household to take care of her children. A Yi woman, on the other hand, does
not have such security; in case of invalidity, the next female caretakers in line for one’s children will
be her sisters-in-law, who are biologically unrelated to her children and live in a separate household.
Such differences in family structure can be important to explaining the ethnic difference in gender
differences. The ranking of education exactly mimics the ranking in risk aversion. Yi women have the
least education and the gender difference in education is bigger for the Yi than for the Mosuo. Mosuo
men take the least economic responsibility for the household and also are the least risk-averse.
         Gottlieb et al. (2016) compare the civic and political behavior of men and women in matrilineal
groups to those in patrilineal groups. They match data on political opinions from the Afrobarometer to
information about the historical social structure of each ethnicity from the Ethnographic Atlas. Their
cross-country analysis finds that the gender gap in political engagement, political participation, and
civic participation is significantly smaller in matrilineal groups than in patrilineal ones.
         In order to understand the mechanisms driving the results, the authors use data on Malawi, a
country with both patrilineal (Mpezeni Ngoni and Tumbuka) and matrilineal ethnicities (Chewa,

12 In the Mosuo society, agriculture is the main form of subsistence, the head of the household is traditionally female, and

women are in charge of economic decision-making in the household, while men engage more in activities beyond
agriculture and the household. The Mosuo have the unique feature of “walking marriage,” in which the man and the
woman in a relationship stay at their mothers’ households aside from night visits at the woman’s, without any economic
obligation to each other. Children are raised collectively by the woman’s household without the father. The Yi people were
traditionally slash-and-burn farmers and their society is structured by a patrilineal exogamous lineage called jiazhi. Men
start their own households once married, except for the youngest son. Women have no right to inherit any property, but
they are the primary work force and thus share the everyday decision-making responsibility with men in the household.
Men are in charge of the most important household decisions.
                                                            12
Lomwe, Mapeza Ngoni, and Yao) and which presents variation in access to land and matrilocal
residence, allowing the authors to investigate whether it is the short-term access to resources or the
long-term expectation of resource entitlements that mostly determines female empowerment.13
         After documenting differences in matrilocality and land inheritance, the authors study the
effects of these factors on women’s outcomes. They use three indicators for women’s empowerment:
marriage exit options, social independence, and financial autonomy. Marriage exit options are
measured by the probability that a woman can say that she can leave her husband for a variety of
reasons. Social independence is measured using two questions asking whether it is acceptable for a
woman to go to the market or to the clinic without her husband’s permission. Financial autonomy is
measured by a question asking whether the respondent had money of her own that she could spend
without her husband’s knowledge. Matrilineal women were more likely to support women leaving
their husbands and having financial autonomy, but they were less likely to support women’s social
independence.
         The authors examined two aspects of matrilineality: land inheritance and matrilocal residence.
Both are associated with more support for women leaving their husbands and greater financial
autonomy for women, but less support for women’s social independence. Between the two, however,
land inheritance appears to be the main determinant of women’s empowerment. In addition, the
negative results on social independence disappear when the authors control for wealth and education,
variables that vary substantially between the two groups.
         As a final step, the authors investigate whether it is short-term access to resources or longer-
term expectation of resource entitlements that most affects female empowerment. The authors find
that long-term expectation of land entitlement and security has a stronger effect than simply owning
land. Therefore, a history of less gender disparity in access to resources over generations may affect
present outcomes, having reduced gender differences over time.
         While the study constitutes a systematic, cross-national study on the importance of matrilineal
kinship on the status of women, its nature remains descriptive. The identification relies on the


13 The survey did not ask respondents whether they observed matrilineal or patrilineal descent, but collected information

about where they lived after marriage (in the wife’s home village, the husband’s home village, or another village) and
whether a respondent personally owned land and, if so, how he or she had received it (inherited from own kin, inherited
from spouse’s kin, purchased, or received from a chief). In terms of land ownership, men report owning land at
significantly higher rates than women among both the Tumbuka and the Mpenezi Ngoni. Women in matrilineal and
patrilineal ethnic groups were equally likely to receive land from the chief or to have bought land, but in matrilineal groups,
women were more likely to receive land from their own kin than from their husband’s kin. The pattern was reversed for
women in patrilineal groups. In terms of residence after marriage, a majority of the matrilineal Yao and Lomwe practices
matrilocal residence, but only 41 percent of the Mapezo Ngoni and 25 percent of the Chewa do. Of the patrilineal
Tumbuka and Mpezeni Ngoni, only a small fraction (around 10 percent) practices matrilocal residence.
                                                             13
assumption that matrilineality kinship are exogenous to the outcomes of interest. However, it may be
that more gender equitable ethnic groups were more likely to adopt or retain matrilineality.
        Lowes (2016) compares how matrilineal and patrilineal kinship systems affect intra-household
cooperation. In matrilineal societies, the wife maintains close relations with her own lineage, rather
than being incorporated into her husband’s lineage. This can translate into less altruism as a result of
conflicting allegiances within the household. In addition, in matrilineal societies, women maintain
greater control over their children since they belong to her lineage, not to her husband’s lineage.
Having the children as part of a woman’s lineage may increase the value of her outside option, increase
her relative bargaining power, and reduce spousal cooperation. To test these hypotheses, Lowes (2016)
collects data from 320 matrilineal and patrilineal couples in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
approximately 40 percent of whom were from a matrilineal ethnic group. She finds that matrilineal
individuals (both men and women) cooperate less with their spouses in a household public goods
game and that these results are driven by opportunities to hide income. She also finds that when
matrilineal individuals are paired with their spouses, they experience greater stress responses than
patrilineal individuals do, as measured by an increase in skin conductance. In addition, she also finds
that matrilineal women are better able to enact their preferences. Children of matrilineal women are
healthier and better educated than children of patrilineal women. Finally, matrilineal individuals give
less money to their spouses than patrilineal individuals do in a dictator game. Whereas patrilineal
individuals are more generous with their spouses than they are with strangers, matrilineal individuals
treat their spouses much as they treat strangers. Overall, matrilineal individuals are less altruistic toward
their spouses because they maintain strong allegiances to their own lineage.
    2.4.2. Matrilocality
        Whereas most studies look at matrilineal systems in terms of inheritance along with residence
choices after marriage, others investigate patrilocality in isolation, showing that alone it can give rise
to differences in gender roles. In northern India, where the social structure is more patrilocal than in
the south, gender inequality is more pronounced (Jayachandran, 2015). The mechanism behind it is
that when a woman gets married, she ceases to be a member of her birth family and joins her husband’s
family. Under this system, parents gain more returns to investment in a son’s health and education
because he will remain a part of their family, whereas a daughter will physically and financially leave
the household upon marriage.
        Levine et al. (2003) study how investment in daughters varies based on residence after
marriage. When parents know that their daughters will leave to live in other villages, their private
return to investment in their daughters’ health or education might be expected to be lower than their
                                                  14
private return to investment in their sons. Levine et al. (2003) study the virilocality hypothesis using
data from Indonesia, a country where there is considerable variation in post-marriage residence.
Indonesian groups can practice virilocality, ambilocality (residence with either set of parents),
uxorilocality (residence with bride’s family), and neolocality (residence with neither set of parents).
The authors did not find a strong correlation between virilocality and differential investment in
daughters. They attribute that lack of results to the fact that residential norms are not very tight in
Indonesia. The other interpretation is that it is a combination of norms—of which virilocality is only
one—that reduces investment in daughters.
       Bau (2016) studies the interaction of residential practices with policies and how this can affect
gender differences. She shows that the complementarity between the transmission of culture and the
education of one’s child means that the introduction and expansion of pension plans will crowd out
both educating children targeted by the norm and the transmission of the norm to the next generation.
She finds that the establishment of pension plans in Ghana and Indonesia and the expansion of a plan
in Indonesia confirm this hypothesis. In Indonesia, matrilocal daughters who are exposed to the
pension plan for longer receive less education and are less likely to live with their parents after
marriage. In Ghana, patrilocal sons show the same pattern.
   2.4.3. The dowry versus the bride price
       Another factor that can vary substantially across cultures and have important effects on gender
differences in social preferences is the presence of the dowry versus the bride price. Dowry is a
payment that a bride’s parents make to the couple at the time of marriage. A bride price is a transfer
at the time of marriage from the groom and/or his family to the bride’s family. According to Boserup
(1970), these social norms emerged in societies based on their type of agriculture: where women played
a lesser role in agriculture, the dowry prevailed. Evidence on the impacts of the dowry system on
women’s welfare is mostly anecdotal and points to a pro-male bias. In India, the prospect of paying
dowry is often cited as a key factor in parents’ desire to have sons rather than daughters (Das Gupta
et al., 2003). The presence of dowry also reduces investment in human capital and results in newly
married women sometimes being the victims of violence or, worse, dowry deaths as punishment for
the dowry being deemed inadequate by the groom (Bloch and Rao, 2002).
       Ashraf et al. (2016) study how the cultural practice of bride price influences the efficacy of
policies aimed at increasing education. Using the Sekolah Dasar Inpres school building program in
Indonesia, where 61,807 primary schools were constructed between 1974 and 1980, the authors study
its impact on girls’ schooling. They first confirm (similarly to Breierova and Duflo (2004)) that the
program had no overall effect on education. However, they uncover an important heterogeneity: a
                                              15
positive impact of the program on female education among girls from ethnic groups that traditionally
engaged in bride price payments. The authors find similar effects when studying a similar school
expansion program in Zambia. The bride price provides an additional reward to parental investment
in a daughter’s education, a reward that is absent for cultures lacking the bride price. A higher bride
price is therefore a moral obligation on the part of the groom’s family to compensate the bride’s family
for their greater educational investment in their daughters.
    2.4.4. Other pre-industrial societal characteristics
        Many of the studies on the relevance of historical societal characteristics are based on
experimental evidence, therefore raising the question of external validity. To what extent can results
from games played with small groups be used to derive general conclusions about these important
gender issues? A different approach is then to look at survey evidence and control for other
determinants of women’s outcomes. Alesina et al. (2016) follow this second approach and use
comprehensive evidence from Africa to study the role of pre-industrial societal characteristics on
violence against women. To study the long-term determinants of domestic violence, they link
individual-level data from contemporary Africa to historical pre-industrial characteristics obtained by
Murdock’s Ethnographic Atlas. More specifically, the authors look at productive activities prior to
industrialization (agriculture, gathering, hunting, fishing, and animal husbandry); alternative types of
settlement (sedentary, nomadic, compact, and isolated); modes of marriage (the dowry versus the
bride-price) and living arrangements after marriage (such as virilocality); the presence of endogamy
(the custom of marrying exclusively within a specific ethnic or social group); the prevalence of the
stem family (an arrangement in which two generations cohabit); polygyny (a form of plural marriage
in which a man is allowed to have more than one wife); and differences in land inheritance (societies
in which gender equality in land inheritance was more prevalent versus matrilineal descent systems, in
which a person’s descent was traced through the mother and her maternal ancestors and a man’s
property was inherited by his sister’s sons rather than by his own children and primogeniture).
        The authors find that ancestral characteristics which led to different economic roles for
women determine cultural attitudes that persist even today, when the initial conditions which
generated them have evolved or disappeared. In societies in which women were actively involved in
subsistence activities (for example, gathering), women’s role is more highly regarded and violence
against women is lower today. On the contrary, plough-based societies, or societies whose form of
subsistence was fishing or hunting, have a higher level of violence against women today; in these
societies women have less bargaining power because they do not contribute to the family income.
Regarding the role of different types of settlement, the authors find that women whose ancestors lived
                                                   16
in nomadic and isolated settlements are exposed to a higher probability of violence today and are more
prone to justify it. Men whose ancestors lived in compact settlements are less likely to justify abuses
against their wives. One interpretation of these findings is that nomadic and isolated settlements were
less economically-developed communities; another is that societal protection of women is more
difficult within these types of living arrangements.
           Past societal norms, too, are related to domestic violence today: women in societies formerly
characterized by bride-price have a lower probability and lower intensity of violence today. Alesina et
al.’s (2016) interpretation is that when men had to pay to marry their wives, they attributed a greater
value and cared more about them, which is reflected in less domestic violence. They also find that
endogamous societies (in which members marry within the same ethnic group) have more domestic
violence, perhaps because beating a wife from a different ethnic group may bring about retaliation
across ethnicities. They also find that when the stem family was prevalent, both men and women tend
to be less favorable to violence. They do not find any effect of polygynous marriage on violence. On
the one hand, to the extent that having more than one wife indicates a lower consideration of women’s
status, one would expect to see polygyny associated with more violence. On the other hand, some of
the motives that typically instigate violence against one’s wife may be alleviated by the presence of
other wives. For example, if the inability of the first wife to deliver a son is compensated for by a
second wife who delivers one, the husband may be less likely to beat the first wife. Virilocal residence
does not have any effect on domestic violence.
    2.5.      Differences in historical family structures
           Among the historical societal characteristics, family structure has been very important in
determining gender roles. Alesina and Giuliano (2014) show the historical persistence of family
structures from medieval times until today and the impact of differences in family structure on various
economic outcomes, including differences in gender roles.
           In societies with strong family ties (Castles, 1995; Ferrera, 1996; Esping-Andersen, 1999;
Korpi, 2000), family solidarity is based on an unequal division of family work between men and
women—what has been called the “male-breadwinner hypothesis,” with men working full-time and
women dedicating themselves to housework. Weak family ties, in contrast, will foster egalitarian
gender roles with men and women participating equally in employment and housework.
           Alesina and Giuliano (2010) measure the strength of family ties by combining three questions
from the World Values Survey, capturing beliefs on the importance of the family in a person’s life, the
duties and responsibilities of parents and children, and the importance of love and respect for one’s
parents. This combined measure is used to study the effect of the strength of family ties on a variety
                                               17
of outcomes, including female labor-force participation and household production. They find that
societies with strong family ties have greater home production, mostly done by women, and lower
female labor-force participation. They are also more traditional in terms of gender roles.
        Similarly, Algan and Cahuc (2007) show that differences in family culture can explain lower
female employment and Giavazzi et al. (2013) find that culture matters for women’s employment rates
and for hours worked. Alesina and Ichino (2009) provide an in-depth analysis of the relevance of
family ties on economic outcomes with respect to Italy. Bertocchi and Bozzano (2015) investigate the
determinants of the educational gender gap in Italy with a primary focus on the potential influence of
family structures. They use data from the 1861-1901 period immediately following the country’s
unification. Their main dependent variable is the ratio of female to male enrollment rate in upper
primary schools. They measure two aspects of family structure: residential habits (nuclear versus
complex families) and inheritance rules (equal division versus primogeniture). They find that the most
robust driver of the education gender gap was family structure, with a higher female-to-male
enrollment ratio being associated with nuclear residential habits and equal division of inheritance.
        Tur-Prats (2016) looks at the relationship between traditional family patterns (stem versus
nuclear) and intimate-partner violence. Stem families are those in which one child stays in the parental
household with spouse and children so that at least two generations live together. In these families,
one son inherits all the land and remains in the parental home with his wife to continue the family
line. In nuclear families, all children receive an equal share of the inheritance when leaving the parental
home to start their own independent households.
        Territories where the stem family was prevalent currently exhibit lower rates of domestic
violence and of gender equality. The relationship between family structure and domestic violence or
gender roles could be explained by the fact that the co-residence of the wife with other women reduced
the burden of household work, freeing up her time for non-domestic work. This allowed a more
productive role and a larger contribution to family subsistence.
        To measure intimate-partner violence, the author uses data from three cross-sectional surveys
of violence against women in Spain, conducted in 1999, 2002, and 2006. Women were asked whether
they had encountered any of 26 situations which are related to domestic violence. To further explore
the cultural transmission channel, Tur-Prats (2016) uses data from the World Values Survey for Spain,
finding that territories that had a stem-family tradition in the past currently exhibit more gender-equal
attitudes than those with a nuclear-family tradition.
        Data on intimate-partner violence are linked to historical measures of family type, given by
the average number of married and widowed women per household at the province level in 1860. A
                                            18
unique source of exogenous variation based on the Christian conquest of the Iberian Peninsula is used
as an instrument for family types. The so-called Reconquista was an almost-eight-century-long period
(722-1492) during which several Christian kingdoms took control of significant parts of the Iberian
Peninsula from Islamic rulers and repopulated them. Because the stronger and more centralized
monarchies in the west of Spain had an interest in restricting the development of powerful landholding
families, they introduced compulsory sharing of inheritance among all children, which led to nuclear
families. The eastern kingdoms, on the other hand, had a more powerful feudal nobility, which wanted
to maintain its landholdings intact through indivisible inheritance, which led to stem families. The
instrumental variables results are consistent with the original findings.
    2.6.      Religion
           Since Max Weber, there has been debate on the impact of religion on people’s economic
attitudes. Religion has, in particular, a profound impact on attitudes toward gender roles. Guiso,
Sapienza, and Zingales (2003) study the relevance of religion using individual-level data from the World
Values Survey. As measures of attitudes toward women, they use responses to a variety of questions
ranging from who should get a job first—a man or a woman—when jobs are scarce; whether men
should have priority in obtaining university education; and whether both men and women should
contribute to household income. Religious people and active churchgoers are less sympathetic to
women’s rights and the effect is twice as strong for Muslims as for any other religion.
           The influence of religion on gender roles has also been explored by Algan and Cahuc (2006),
who show that Catholics, Orthodox Christians, and Muslims are more prone to embrace the
traditional male breadwinner conception than Protestants and atheists. Esping-Andersen (1990) also
associates a conservative view of women and the family with Catholic countries, while Bertocchi
(2011) shows that Catholicism was negatively associated with the introduction of woman suffrage in
Italy from 1870 to 1930.
           Two interesting papers take a historical perspective in looking at the effect of religion on
gender differences: one in the context of the Protestant Reformation (Becker and Woessmann, 2008)
and one in the context of missionary activity in Africa (Nunn, 2014).
           Becker and Woessmann (2008) provide evidence that Protestantism was a distinctive driving
force in the advancement of female education in Prussia. Martin Luther explicitly urged, solely for
religious reasons, that girls as well as boys be able to read the Gospel. The authors use data on school
enrollment from the Prussian Population Census in 1816 at the level of counties and towns to show
that a larger share of Protestants in a county or town was indeed associated with a larger share of girls
in the total school population. Instrumental variable estimates, in which each county’s and town’s
                                                19
share of Protestants is instrumented by its distance to Wittenberg, also suggest that the effect of
Protestantism can be causally interpreted. The finding that Protestantism was one factor that helped
to reduce the educational gender gap in Prussia is confirmed when using county-level data on the
gender gap in adult literacy in 1871. The effect of Protestantism is still visible as recently as 1970: a
higher share of Protestants in the population is associated with a higher gender parity index in years
of education in 1970.
           Nunn (2014) uses information on the location of Catholic and Protestant missions during
Africa’s colonial period to investigate whether Protestant and Catholic missionaries differentially
promoted the education of males and females. He uses data on 17 countries from the Afrobarometer
and links the reported information about the ethnicity of each respondent to test whether having
ancestors living closer to missions during the colonial period increased that ethnicity’s educational
level.
           While he finds that both Catholicism and Protestantism had a long-run impact on educational
attainment, the impact by gender was very different. Protestant missions had a large positive long-run
impact on the education of females and a very small impact on the long-run education of males. In
contrast, Catholic missions had no long-run impact on the education of females, but a large positive
impact on the education of males. These finding are consistent with the Protestant belief that both
men and women had to read the Bible to go to heaven. The evidence is also consistent with the
arguments of Woodberry and Shah (2004) and Woodberry (2009) that because Protestant missionary
activity was open to educating minorities and women, it had a particularly positive effect for these
groups.
    2.7.      Natural experiments in history
           Historical shocks can alter the relative position of women in a society (for example, by
increasing their relative income due to the appearance of a specific economic activity or by altering
the sex ratio in the population). These shocks can therefore alter the prevailing views about the natural
role of women in society. If new beliefs about the role of women persist and are transmitted across
generations, a temporary shock can affect gender outcomes in the long run.
           Teso (2016) exploits the demographic shock generated by the transatlantic slave trade in Africa
between the fifteenth and ninenteenth centuries. Male slaves outnumbered females, as they were
preferred by plantation owners in the New World for their strength. This led to abnormal sex ratios
in the areas from which slaves were taken: in those most affected, historical estimates suggest the
presence of as few as 40-50 men per 100 women (Thorton, 1980). This demographic shock had an
impact on the role of women, who had to take up traditionally male work (Manning, 1990). Although
                                               20
sex ratios reverted back to the natural level shortly after the end of the slave trade, the impact of this
historical event on the role of women was long-lasting because cultural beliefs and societal norms had
been affected by it. To test this theory, Teso (2016) matches Demographic and Health Surveys data on 21
sub-Saharan countries with ethnicity-level data from Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) on the number of
slaves taken during the slave trade. Exploiting variation in the degree to which different ethnic groups
were affected by the trade, he shows that women whose ancestors were more exposed to the slave
trade are today significantly more likely to be in the labor force and to be employed in a higher-ranked
occupation. The author also finds that women belonging to ethnic groups that were more severely hit
by the slave trade are today more likely to participate in household decisions and to have lower
fertility.14
          The slave trade also affected other types of social norms. Dalton and Leung (2011) and Edlund
and Ku (2011) examine the hypothesis that the severe imbalance in sex ratio caused by the transatlantic
slave trade altered beliefs about the acceptability of polygyny. Examining variation across ethnicities
(Dalton and Leung, 2011) and countries (Edlund and Ku, 2011), these studies show that a history of
the transatlantic slave trade is associated with a greater prevalence of polygyny today.
          Wars are another shock that could permanently change gender roles in socieities. Historians
have suggested that, during World War II, the high mobilization of men in the United States had a
strong impact on gender roles (Chafe, 1972). Goldin and Olivetti (2003), Acemoglu et al. (2004), and
Fernandez, Fogli, and Olivetti (2004) use exogenous variation in mobilization rates across states and
find a persistent effect of the war on female labor-force participation. Fernandez, Fogli, and Olivetti
(2004) find that this effect operates through the marriage market.
          Campa and Serafinelli (2016) document how more equal gender-role attitudes emerged in
state-socialist regimes. They exploit the postwar imposition across Central and Eastern Europe of
state-socialist regimes that promoted women’s economic inclusion. The authors use two sets of
evidence. In the first part of the paper, they use data from Germany15 and compare attitudes toward
work in the sample of women who, before German reunification, had lived in East Germany with


14
   To show that the effect of the slave trade on gender roles was the result of the biased sex ratio, the author looks at the
effect of the Indian Ocean slave trade (which was not biased toward men) and find no effect. To rule out another
possibility—that places that were more affected by the transatlantic slave trade developed markets and local institutions
that led to higher female labor-force participation—the author compares individuals of different ethnicity who currently
live in the same village or in the same city neighborhood, finding that ancestral exposure to the slave trade still has an
effect, although smaller.
15
   Before 1945, the politico-economic system was the same in East and West Germany. After 1945, the country was split
in two, with women in the East and West exposed to very different institutions and policies. East Germany focused on
policies that favoured female full-time employment, while West Germany encouraged a system in which women either
stayed home after they had children or were funneled into part-time employment after an extended break.
                                                            21
those of women who had lived in West Germany.16 In 1990, the likelihood of reporting that career
success is important was approximately 11 percentage points higher for women in the East than for
women in the West. The authors do not find a significant difference in men’s attitudes towards work
between the East and the West. The results are very similar when attitudes are measured in 2004. The
positive attitudes toward work in the East show that increased female access to higher education and
full-time employment can act as mediating channels.
           The authors then extend the analysis using a difference-in-differences strategy that compares
gender-role attittudes formed in Central and Eastern Europe to those formed in Western Europe
before and after the imposition of state socialism in Central and Eastern Europe. To obtain time
variation, they use measures of attitudes of immigrants who arrived in the United States at different
times. The authors show that gender-role attitudes have become much less traditional in Central and
Eastern Europe than in Western Europe.
           Grosjean and Khattar (2016) study the long-run effect of the male-biased sex ratio that
emerged in Australia by the late eighteenth century as a consequence of the British policy of sending
convicts to Australia. Male convicts outnumbered female convicts by a ratio of 6 to 1. The sex ratio
amongst immigrants continued to be very biased into the 20th century, as they were mostly men
seeking out Australia’s economic opportunities in mining and pastoralism. The authors use spatial and
time variation in the sex ratio and study the short- and long-term effects of male-biased sex ratio on
female outcomes at home and in the workplace. Since their identification relies on within-state
variation, the results cannot be driven by institutional differences.
           They find that gender imbalance was associated historically with women being more likely to
get married, participating less in the labor force, and being less likely to work in high-ranking
occupations. They then study the long-term implications. In areas that were more biased historically,
people today have more conservative attitudes towards women working, women are less likely to have
high-ranking occupations, and they work less and earn less. A one-unit increase in the historical sex
ratio moves the average Australian today towards conservative attitudes by eight percentage points at
the mean. It is also associated with a one-percentage-point decrease in the share of women employed
as professionals (5 percent of the population mean and 12 percent of its standard deviation). There
does not seem to be a welfare effect as measured by self-reported marital and overall life satisfaction.
The authors explain this persistence as a result of cultural tranmission.




16
     Attitudes towards work are measured using a question about the importance of carreer success for the respondent.
                                                            22
         Xue (2016) studies the impact of China’s cotton revolution—the adoption of spinning and
weaving technologies from 1300 until 1840—on gender roles. This revolution allowed women to
produce cotton texiles at home and sell clothing. Women living in regions suitable for the production
of cotton textiles experienced a huge increase in their economic earning power, which became similar
to or greater than that of their husbands. To identify the causal effect of the cotton revolution on
modern outcomes, Xue collects information about premodern cotton textiles from county and
prefecture gazetteers. Data on 1,489 counties are then linked to the contemporary sex ratio at birth.
She finds a strong and negative relationship between premodern cotton textile production and sex
ratio at birth. The reduction is substantial: one quarter of the standard deviation of the sex ratio
variable.
         The effect of the cotton revolution on gender roles is also observed in other historical periods
in China: immediately after the shock but also during the period of state socialism. The author finds
that cotton textile production prevented suicides of widows in the Ming dynasty: widows in areas
suitable to cotton textile production generally maintained a decent standard of living and had relatively
high social status. Xue also finds that female labor-force participation in pre-socialist China and the
probability of a wife’s heading the household under state socialism were both higher in regions suitable
to cotton production.


    3. Heterogeneity in historical persistence
         In this chapter, we reviewed evidence of historical persistence in gender roles. It is, however,
important to note that while there is a high degree of persistence, gender norms have also sometimes
changed quickly over time.17 When do gender-role differences persist and when do they not? What
factors affect their persistence? What determines the speed of their evolution when they change?
         Giuliano and Nunn (2016) examine these questions by testing an insight that has been
developed in the evolutionary anthropology literature (Boyd and Richerson, 1985, 2005; Rogers, 1988).
The idea is very simple: First consider a population living in a stable environment. In such a setting, the
actions of one’s ancestors are particularly informative about which of many possible actions are optimal.
The fact that these actions have evolved in this environment is important information. Thus, there are
important benefits to a cultural belief in the importance of tradition. We would therefore expect



17 Among the factors responsible for the change are the increase in marital bargaining power due to the reduction in time

spent on household chores (Greenwood et al., 2005), a changing social atmosphere (Fernandez et al., 2004), the
introduction of the Pill (Goldin and Katz, 2002), and the diffusion of knowledge about the effects of female labor-force
participation (Fogli and Veldkamp, 2011; Fernandez, 2013).
                                                          23
societies that live in a stable environment to strongly value tradition and to be reluctant to deviate from
it. Next, consider a population living in a very unstable environment. The setting of each generation
changes sufficiently that the optimal actions of the previous generation may no longer be optimal. In
such an environment, the traditions of one’s ancestors are less informative and cultural traits that
strongly value tradition are thus less beneficial. We would therefore expect these societies to be less
strongly tied to tradition and more likely to adopt new cultural practices and beliefs. The authors take
this hypothesis to the data and test whether societies that historically lived in environments with more
climate variability value tradition less, are more likely to adopt new cultural values, and exhibit less
cultural persistence. They test this mechanism for gender differences by looking at female participation
in agriculture in pre-industrial societies and female labor-force participation today. They also look at
the relationship between the traditional practice of polygamy and the practice of polygamy today.
           To measure a location’s historical environmental stability, they use paleo-climatic data from
Mann et al. (2009) that measures the average annual temperature of 0.5-degree-by-0.5-degree grid cells
globally, beginning in 500 AD. Data on pre-industrial societies are taken from the Ethnographic Atlas.
The authors first document a strong relationship between traditional participation of women in
agriculture and female labor-force participation rates today and a strong relationship between traditional
practice of polygamy and the practice of polygamy today. (Although average female labor-force
participation has been increasing and the practice of polygamy decreasing for decades or centuries, we
still see a high degree of persistence of both practices today.) They then show that the persistence is
weaker in countries with more historical variability in the environment. The paper is the first attempt
in trying to provide a better understanding of when culture persists and when does it change. The
findings also comprise a test of a prediction that is common in a class of model from evolutionary
anthropology. The core assumption of the models is that culture evolves systematically based on
relative costs and benefits of the different cultural traits. Testing these models is important since the
current models of cultural evolution within economics share many of the same assumptions and
features as the model from evolutionary anthropology.18 More research needs to be done on how much
other sources of instability (such as international trade, migration or economic and political instability)
could also contributes to the evolution of gender norms or cultural values more generally.


       4. Conclusion
           History matters in explaining the differences in gender roles observed today. What aspects of


18   See for example Bisin and Verdier (2000, 2001), Hauk and Saez-Marti (2002), or Tabellini (2008)
                                                            24
history should we look at? In this chapter, we reviewed recent empirical research on various historical
determinants of contemporary differences in gender roles. Most of the research illustrates that
differences in cultural norms regarding gender roles emerge in response to specific historical
situations, but tend to persist even after the historical conditions have changed. Thus, even the distant
past affects gender norms today. Research also finds that persistence tend to be stronger when the
environment is very stable and therefore experimenting with new norms is less necessary.


References
Aberle, D. F., 1961, “Matrilineal Descent in Cross Cultural Perspective” in D. M. Schneider and K.
        Gough (eds.), Matrilineal Kinship, University of California, Berkeley.
Acemoglu, D., Autor, D. And D. Lyle, 2004, “Women, War and Wages: The Effect of Female Labor
        Supply of the Wage Structure at Midcentury”, Journal of Political Economy, 112 (3): 497-550.
Agnihotri, S . , 1996, “Juvenile Sex Ratios in India: A Disaggregated Analysis”, Economic and
        Political Weekly, 31 (52): 3369-3382.
Albanesi, S. And C. Olivetti, 2016, “Gender Roles and Medical Progress”, Journal of Political
        Economy, 124 (3), 650-695
Alesina, A., Brioschi, B. and E. La Ferrara, 2016, “Violence Against Women: A Cross-Cultural Analysis for
        Africa”, Harvard Mimeo.
Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano, 2010, “The Power of the Family”, Journal of Economic Growth, 15, 93-125.
Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano, 2014, “Family Ties” in Aghion, P. and S. Durlauf (eds.), Handbook of
        Economic Growth, Vol. 2A, The Netherlands: North Holland, 177-215.
Alesina, A., Giuliano, P. and N. Nunn, 2011, “Fertility and the Plough”, American Economic Review Papers
        and Proceedings, 101 (3), 499-503.
Alesina, A., Giuliano, P. and N. Nunn, 2013, “On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the
        Plough”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128 (2): 469-530.
Alesina, A. and A. Ichino, 2009, L’Italia Fatta in Casa, Mondadori, Milano.
Algan, Y. and P. Cahuc, 2006, “Job Protection: The Macho Hypothesis”, 2006, Oxford Review of
        Economic Policy, 22, 3, 390-410
Algan, Y. and P. Cahuc, 2007, “The Roots of Low European Employment: Family Culture?”, NBER
        Macroeconomic Annual, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Ashraf, N., Bau, N., Nunn, N. and A. Voena, 2016, “Bride Price and Female Education”, Harvard
        University, mimeo.
Attanasio, O., Low, H. and V. Sanchez-Marcos, 2008, “Explaining Changes in Female Labor Supply
                                              25
       in a Life-Cycle Model”, American Economic Review, 98, 1517-1552.
Basant, R., 1987, “Agricultural Technology and Employment in India: A Survey of Recent
       Research”, Economic and Political Weekly, 22 (32): 1348-1364.
Bau, N., 2016, “Can Policy Crow Out Culture?”, Harvard University, mimeo.
Becker, S. and L. Woessmann, 2008. “Luther and the Girls: Religious Denomination and the Female
       Education Gap in Nineteenth-Century Prussia”, Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 110 (4), 777-
       805.
Bertocchi, G., 2011, “The Enfranchisement of Women and the Welfare State”, European Economic
       Review, 55, 535-553.
Bertocchi, G. and M. Bozzano, 2015, “Family Structure and the Education Gender Gap: Evidence
       from Italian Provinces”, CESifo Economic Studies, 61 (1), 263-300
Bertrand, M., E. Kamenica and J. Pan, 2015, “Gender Identity and Relative Income within
       Households”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130 (2): 571-614.
Bisin, A. and T. Verdier, 2000, “Beyond the Melting Pot: Cultural Transmission, Marriage and the
       Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 955-988.
Bisin, A. and T. Verdier, 2001, ‘The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Dynamics of
       Preferences”, Journal of Economic Theory, 97, 298-319
Bloch, F. and V. Rao, 2002, “Terror as Bargaining Instrument: A Case Study of Dowry Violence in
       Rural India”, American Economic Review, 92, 1029-1043
Boserup, E., 1970, Woman’s Role in Economic Development, London, George allen and Unwin Ltd.
Boyd, R. and P.J. Richerson, 2005, Culture and the Evolutionary Process, London: University of Chicago
       Press, 1985.
Boyd, R. and P.J. Richerson, 2005, The Origin and Evolution of Culture, Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University
       Press.
Breierova, L. and E. Duflo, 2004 “The Impact of Education on Fertility and Child Mortality: Do
       Fathers Really Matter Less than Mothers?”, NBER WP 10513.
Campa, P. and M. Serafinelli, 2016, “Politico-Economic Regimes and Attitudes: Female Workers
       Under State-Socialism”, Dondena Working Paper WP 89
Carranza, E., 2014, “Soil Endowments, Female Labor Force Participation, and the Demographic
       Deficitof Women in India”, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6 (4), 197-225.
Castles, F., 1995, “Welfare State Development in Southern Europe”, Western European Politics, 18, 201-
       213
Chafe, W. H., 1972, The American Woman: Her Changing Social, Economic, and Political Roles, 1920-1970,
                                             26
        New York, Oxford University Press
Dalton, J. T. and T. C. Leung, 2014, “Why is Polygyny More Prevalent in Western Africa? An African
        Slave Trade Perspective”, Economic Development and Cultural Change, 62 (4): 599-632
Das Gupta, M., Zhenghua J., Bohua L., Zhenming X., Chung W. and B. Hwaok, 2003, “Why is Son
        Preference So Persistent in East and South Asia? A Cross-Country Study of China, India and
        the Republic of Korea”, Journal of Development Studies, 40, 153-187.
Dyson, T. and M. Moore, 1983, “On Kinship Structure, Female Autonomy and Demographic
        Behavior in India”, Population and Development Review, 9 (1): 35-60.
Edlund, L. and H. Ku, 2013, “The African Slave Trade and the Curious Case of General Polygyny”,
        MPRA Paper 52735, University Library of Munich, Germany
Esping-Andersen, G., 1990, Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Esping-Andersen, G., 1999, Social Foundation of Post-Industrial Economies, Oxford University Press,
        Oxford
Fernandez, R., 2007, “Women, Work and Culture”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 5 (2-3):
        305-332.
Fernandez, R., 2013, “Cultural Change as Learning: The evolution of female labor force
        participation over a century”, American Economic Review, 103 (1): 472-500.
Fernandez, R. and A. Fogli, 2010, “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work and Fertility”,
        American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1), 146-177.
Fernandez, R., Fogli, A. and C. Olivetti, 2004, “Mothers and Sons: Preference Formation and
        Female Labor Force Dynamics”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (4), 1249-1299.
Ferrera, M., 1996, “The Southern Model of Welfare in Social Europe”, Journal of the European Social Policy,
        1, 17-37
Fogli, A. and L. Veldkamp, 2011, “Nature or Nurture? Learning and the Geography of Female
        Labor Force Participation”, Econometrica, 79 (4), 1103-1138.
Galor, O., Ozak, O. and A. Sarid, 2016, “Geographical Origins and Economic Consequences of
        Language Structures”, CESIFO Working Paper No 6149.
Gay, V., E. Santacreu-Vasut and A. Shoham, “The Grammatical Origins of Gender Roles”, 2013,
        Berkeley Economic History Laboratory, WP2013-03.
Giavazzi, F., Schiantarelli, F. and M. Serafinelli, 2013, “Attitudes, Policies, and Work”, Journal of the
        European Economic Association, 1256-1289.
Giuliano, P., 2015, “The Role of Women in Society: from Pre-Industrial to Modern Times”, CESifo
        Economic Studies, 61 (1), 33-52.
                                                    27
Giuliano, P. and N. Nunn, 2016, “Understanding Cultural Persistence and Change”, Harvard
       University, mimeo
Gneezy, U., Leonard, K. L. and J. List, 2009, “Gender Differences in Competition: Evidence from a
       Matrilineal and a Patriarchal Society”, Econometrica, 77 (5), 1637-1664.
Goldin, C., 1990, Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American Women, New York:
       Oxford University Press
Goldin, C. and L. Katz, 2002, “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Women’s Career and
       Marriage Decisions”, Journal of Political Economy, 110 (4), 730-770.
Goldin, C. and C. Olivetti, 2013, “Shocking Labor Supply: A Reassessment of the Role of World War
       II on Women’s Labor Supply,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 103 (3): 257-
       262
Goldin, C. and K. Sokoloff, 1984, “The Relative Productivity Hypothesis of Industrialization: The
       American Case, 1820 to 1850,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 99 (3), 461-487.
Gong, B., Yan, H. and C. Yang, 2015, “Gender Differences in the Dictator Experiment: Evidence
       from the Matrilineal Mosuo and the Patriarchal Yi”, Experimental Economics, 18 (2), 302-313.
Gong, B. and C. Yang, 2012, “Gender Differences in Risk Attitudes: Field Experiments on the
       Matrilineal Mosuo and the Patriarchal Yi”, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 83 (1),
       59-65.
Gottlieb, J. and A. L. Robinson, 2016, “The Effects of Matrilineality on Gender Differences in
       Political Behavior Across Africa”, University of California, Berkeley, mimeo.
Greenwood, J., A. Seshadri and M. Yorukoglu, 2005, “Engines of Liberation”, Review of Economic
       Studies, 72 (1), 109-133.
Grosjean, P. and R. Khattar, 2015, “It’s Raining Men! Hallelujah?”, UNSW Business School Research
       Paper No. 2014 ECON29C.
Goody, J., 1976, Production and Reproduction, Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press.
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P. and L. Zingales, 2003, “People’s Opium? Religion and Economic Attitudes”,
       Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 225-282.
Hansen, C. W., Jensen, P. and C. Skovsgaard, 2015, “Modern Gender Roles and Agricultural
       History: The Neolithic Inheritance”, Journal of Economic Growth, 4, 365-404.
Hauk, E. and M. Saez-Marti, 2002, “On the Cultural Transmission of Corruption”, Journal of Economic
       Theory, 107, 311-335.
Hoffman, M., Gneezy, U. and J. List, 2011, “Nurture Affects Gender Differences in Spatial Abilities”,
       Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 108, 36, 14786-14788.
                                                      28
Humphreys, L.F., Lubinski, D., Yao, G., 1993, “Utility of Predicting Group Membership and the Role
        of Spatial Visualization in Becoming an Engineer, Physical Scientist, or Artist”, Journal of
        Applied Psychology, 78, 250–261.
Jayachandran, S., 2015, “The Roots of Gender Inequality in Developing Countries”, Annual Review of
        Economics, 7, 63-88.
Korpi, W., 2000, “Faces of Inequality: Gender, Class and Patterns of Inequalities in Different Types
        of Welfare States”, Social Politics, 7, 127-191
Iversen, T. and F. Rosenbluth, 2010, Women, Work and Politics: The Political Economy of Gender Inequality,
        New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Levine, D. and M. Kevane, “Are Investments in Daughters Lower When Daughters Move Away?”,
        World Development, 31 (6), 1065-1084.
Lowes, S., 2016, “Kinship Systems, Gender Norms, and Household Bargaining: Evidence from the
        Matrilineal Belt”, Harvard mimeo.
Mann, M. E., Zhang Z., Rutherford S., Bradley R.S., Hughes M. K., Shindell D., Ammann C., Faluvegi
        G. and F. Ni, “Global Signatures and Dynamical Origins of the Little Ice Age and Medieval
        Climate Anomaly,” Science, 2009, 326, 1256-1260.
Manning, P., 1990, Slavery and African Life: Occidental, Oriental and African Slave Trades, Cambridge, UK:
        Cambridge University Press.
Murdock, G., 1967, Ethnographic Atlas, University of Pittsburg, Pittsburgh, PA.
Murdock, G. P. and D.R. White, 1969, “Standard Cross-Cultural Sample”, Ethnology, 8 4, 329-369.
Nunn, N., 2009, “The Importance of History for Economic Development”, Annual Review of Economics,
        1, 65-92.
Nunn, N., 2014, “Gender and Missionary Influence in Colonial Africa”, in Akyeampong, E., Bates R.,
        Nunn, N., Robinson, J. A. Africa’s Development in Historical Perspective, New York: Cambridge
        University Press, 489-512
Nunn, N. and L. Wantchekon, 2011, “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in Africa”, American
        Economic Review, 101(7): 3221-3352.
Pryor, F., 1985, “The Invention of the Plow”, Comparative Studies in Society and History, 27 (4), 727-
        743.
Qian, N., 2008, “Missing Women and the Price of Tea in China: The Effect of Sex-Specific Earnings
        on Sex Imbalance”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123: 1251-1285.
Rogers, A., 1988, “Does Biology Constrain Culture?”, American Anthropologist, 198, 90 (4), 819-831.

                                                     29
Tabellini, G., 2008, “The Scope of cooperation: Values and Incentives”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
       123 (3), 905-950.
Teso, E., 2016, “The Long-Term Effect of Demographic Shocks on the Evolution of Gender Roles:
       Evidence from the Transatlantic Slave Trade”, Harvard University, mimeo
Thorton, J., 1980, “The Slave Trade in Eighteenth-Century Angola: Effects on Demographic
       Structures”, Canadian Journal of African Studies, 4: 417-427
Tur-Prats, A., 2016, “Family Types and Intimate-Partner Violence: A Historical Perspective”,
       Universitat Pompeu Fabra, mimeo
Xue, M., 2016, “High-Value Work and the Rise of Women: The Cotton Revolution and Gender
       Equality in China”, UCLA mimeo
Whorf, B. L. 1956, “The punctual and segmentative aspects of verbs in Hopi”, in Language, Thought
       and Reality: Selected Writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf, MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Woodberry, R., 2009, “Dividing Elites: Religious Liberty, Protestant Competition, and Democracy in
       the Global South”, WP 002, Project on Religion and Economic Change
Woodberry, R. and T.S. Shah, 2004, “The Pioneering Protestant”, Journal of Democracy, 15 (2), 47-61.
World Economic Forum, 2013, The Global Gender Gap Report 2013




                                                   30
