NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WOMEN, WORK, AND FAMILY
Francine D. Blau
Anne E. Winkler
Working Paper 23644
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23644
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017

Prepared for the Oxford Handbook of Women and the Economy, Susan L. Averett, Laura M.
Argys and Saul D. Hoffman, eds, Oxford University Press (forthcoming). The authors thank
Andrew Tipping for his careful research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Francine D. Blau and Anne E. Winkler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Women, Work, and Family
Francine D. Blau and Anne E. Winkler
NBER Working Paper No. 23644
August 2017, Revised September 2017
JEL No. J1,J12,J13,J16,J22
ABSTRACT
This chapter focuses on women, work, and family, with a particular focus on differences by
educational attainment. First, we review long-term trends regarding family structure, participation
in the labor market, and time spent in household production, including time with children. In
looking at family, we focus on mothers with children. Next we examine key challenges faced by
mothers as they seek to combine motherhood and paid work: workforce interruptions associated
with childbearing, the impact of home and family responsibilities, and constraints posed by
workplace culture. We also consider the role that gendered norms play in shaping outcomes for
mothers. We conclude by discussing policies that have the potential to increase gender equality in
the workplace and mitigate the considerable conflicts faced by many women as they seek to
balance work and family.
Francine D. Blau
ILR School
Cornell University
268 Ives Hall
Ithaca, New York 14853-3901
and NBER
fdb4@cornell.edu
Anne E. Winkler
Department of Economics
University of Missouri-St. Louis
One University Blvd.
St. Louis, MO 63121
awinkler@umsl.edu

I.

Introduction

Over the last half century sweeping changes have occurred in women’s and men’s roles in
the household and in their participation in the labor market. These changes have a strong
educational gradient. For instance, marriage has declined for all groups but especially among
those with less education, while women’s labor force participation rates have risen, but most
markedly among those with more education. In this chapter, we begin by documenting major
transformations in the family and labor market, with a particular focus on differences by
educational attainment. In looking at family, we mainly focus on mothers with children –
principally those who are married or single, though we recognize the growing number of
cohabitors. Also, given space limitations, we focus on opposite-sex couples. However, there is
an important and growing literature on the allocation of time in the household and labor market
by gay and lesbian couples with children.1
Next, we examine key challenges faced by women as they seek to combine motherhood and
work: workforce interruptions due to childbearing, the impact of home and family
responsibilities, and constraints posed by workplace culture and “how business is done.” A
particular contribution of this discussion is that we pay close attention to the very different
experiences of women at the top and bottom of the educational distribution. We also look at
persistent gendered norms about appropriate roles in the family and how they impact labor
market and family outcomes. Finally, we consider possible changes in employer and government

1

See, for instance, Black, Sanders, Taylor (2007) and Giddings, Nunley, Schneebaum, and

Zietz (2014).

2

policies and in how the workplace is structured that have the potential to benefit individuals,
families, and society at large.
II.

Work and Family: Then and Now

In this section, our focus is on major transformations in the family, in mothers’ employment
and earnings, and in their allocation of time between the household and the market. While our
focus is on major, long-term shifts we also note that many dimensions of this transformation
have stalled in more recent decades.
A. Sweeping Changes in the American Family
The most dramatic change in the family since the 1960s and 70s, has been the decline in
married couple families – what has been termed a “retreat” from marriage (see for instance,
Andrew Cherlin, 2009; Ellwood and Jencks, 2004, and Lundberg and Pollak, 2016). This
decline can be seen in Figure 1, which provides data on the percentage of currently married
adults for 1970 to 2014.2 Over that period, the percentage declined from 72 to 55 percent for all
race/ethnic groups. This figure also shows that while a majority of white non-Hispanic and
Hispanic women were married in 2014 (59 and 52 percent, respectively), this was true for just 38
percent of African-American women. As discussed at length in Blau and Winkler (2018), the
move away from marriage is related to a host of forces: economic (increases in women’s labor
force participation, educational attainment, career commitment, and wages combined with
declining real wages for less skilled men); technological (reproductive technology such as the
pill and household technology such as the microwave); social (attitudes about premarital sex and

2

U.S. Census Bureau data on all women ages 15+ indicate that the percentage married was 66
percent in both 1950 and 1960, fell to 62 percent in 1970, and stood at 51 percent in 2015. See
U.S. Census Bureau, Table MS-1, “ Marital Status of the Population 15 Years Old and Over, by
Sex, Race and Hispanic Origin: 1950 to Present,” www.census.gov, accessed April 21, 2017.
3

unmarried fertility), and legal (changing divorce laws).3 The decline in married-couple families
was accompanied by a considerable increase in single-parent families and, especially in more
recent decades, many more cohabiting families.
Figure 2 provides data on the rise in single-mother families. By 2015, they comprised 26
percent of all families with children (and 75 percent of all single-parent families), up from just
under 12 percent in 1970. Notably most of this increase had occurred by 1990. The figure also
points to substantial and persistent differences across race/ethnicity groups; in 2015 mother-only
families comprised 54 percent of all African-American families with children as compared to 19
percent of white, non-Hispanic families and 29 percent of Hispanic families.
Trends in family structure also diverge by educational attainment and this divergence is
growing as observed by Blau (1998) and McLanahan (2004) and more recently by Isen and
Stevenson (2010) and Lundberg and Pollak (2016). This is illustrated in Figure 3, which
provides data on the percentage of women aged 30-50 currently married by educational
attainment for 1970 and 2015. In 1970, differences across education groups were not very large,
ranging from 78 to 85 percent, with the higher figure for women with a high school education.
Between 1970 and 2015, marriage declined for all educational groups, but most dramatically for
those with less education. By 2015, the share currently married was 71 percent for college
graduates versus 54 to 56 percent for the other education groups.4
B. Trends in Labor Force Participation, Work Experience, and Hours Worked
Dramatic changes have similarly occurred in women’s labor force participation rates and
3

Goldin and Katz (2002) first pointed to the pivotal role of the birth control pill in family
decisions. However, in recent research Caitlyn Myers (forthcoming) finds that access to abortion
played a larger role.
4

There is also a strong educational gradient in rates of cohabitation and unmarried births; both
outcomes are substantially higher among those with less education as discussed in Fletcher and
Polos, this volume, Lundberg and Pollak (2015), and Blau and Winkler (2018).
4

their broader presence in the labor market, especially since the 1960s, what Claudia Goldin
(2006) has called a “quiet revolution.” Key factors behind these changes are women’s rising
levels of educational attainment and wages, greater availability of market substitutes for
household production and improvements in household technology, the development and
dissemination of the birth control pill, and demand shifts that favored occupations like clerical
work where women were well represented, as well as changes in the family (see, for instance,
Blau and Winkler, 2018; Bailey and DiPrete, 2016; Blau and Kahn, 2007; and Blau and Kahn,
forthcoming). The labor force participation rate of women (ages 16+) rose from 37.7 percent in
1960 to 60 percent in the mid-1990s and remained at roughly that level through the first decade
of the 2000s. It subsequently declined to 57 percent as of 2015. In contrast to the experience for
women, men’s labor force participation rate has steadily declined since WWII, albeit at a more
modest rate. It stood at 83.3 percent in 1960 and subsequently declined to 69 percent in 2015.
Thus, from 1960 to 2015, the gender difference in the overall labor force participation rate fell
from 45.6 percentage points to just a 12 percentage point difference.5
Again, there is a strong educational gradient. Figure 4 shows trends in the labor force
participation rates of women and men (ages 25-64) by educational attainment for 1970 and 2015.
Over this period, while women’s labor force participation rates increased for all groups, they rose
most sharply for college-educated women and hardly at all for women who did not complete
high school. As just one point of comparison, panel a shows that the participation rate for women
5

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Labor Force Statistics from the Current Population Survey,

Table A-1, Employment Status of the Civilian Population by Sex and Age, accessed March 1,
2017, www.bls.gov.

5

who completed high school (only) increased from 51.3 to 62.2 percent (11 percentage points),
while it rose from 60.8 to nearly 80 percent (19 points) for women with a college degree or more.
For men, panel b shows declining labor force participation rates for all groups, with the smallest
decrease for men with a college degree or more and an especially marked decline for the least
skilled (those who completed HS or less).6
Focusing on mothers, we see in Figure 5 that labor force participation rates for women
with children under age 18 have increased dramatically over the past half century, contributing to
the large increases for women overall. From 1960 to the mid-1990s, participation rates for
married mothers rose from just 28 to a high of 70 percent. The rate then plateaued and began to
decline slightly starting in the early 2000s. These patterns closely track and help to drive the
patterns for women overall. In 1975, (the first year for which these data were available) the
participation rate for never-married mothers was fairly similar to the rate for their married
counterparts, but changed little through the early 1990s and so increasingly lagged that of
married women. However, the participation rate for this group subsequently sharply increased,
rising from 53 percent in 1992 to 75 percent by the early 2000s, eventually surpassing that of
married mothers. These participation rate gains resulted from a combination of major federal
policy changes and the buoyant labor market of the 1990s (Blank, 2000; and Meyer and
Rosenbaum, 2000). The participation rate of this group has declined somewhat since the early
2000s as well. The net result is that by 2015 the participation gap between married and nevermarried mothers stood at just 4.6 percentage points. The participation rate for ever-married
(separated, divorced or widowed) mothers exceeded that of married mothers throughout the
period and experienced a comparable 1990s increase to that of never-married mothers for similar

6

For detailed trends by educational attainment from 2000 to 2015, see Hipple (2016).
6

reasons. As of 2015, the participation rate for this group stood 10.6 percentage points higher than
that for married mothers.
As for all women (and all men), there is a sharp educational gradient in participation rates for
mothers. Illustrating this point, Figure 6 provides figures on labor force participation rates of
mothers with infants. In 2013, the rate was 74 percent for those who had completed four years of
college or more as compared to 64 percent for those with some college and just 50 percent for
those with high school or less. Note that not only did college-graduate mothers have the highest
participation rates, they also had the largest increase in participation between 2006 and 2013.
Also of importance, particularly for wages, women’s labor force attachment (continuity of
employment) has also been increasing. This is the case, for example over the course of a year,
with the share of employed women working year-round and full-time increasing from 41 percent
in 1970 to 61 percent in 2014.7 Women are also working more consistently over the life cycle.
While employed women still have less average labor-market experience than men, the gender
experience gap—the difference in average years of labor market experience between women and
men—began to decline beginning in the 1980s (O’Neil and Polachek, 1993; and Blau and Kahn,
1997). Blau and Kahn (forthcoming) report that the gap fell from 6.8 years in 1981 to 3.8 years
in 2007 (just before the Great Recession) and 1.4 years in 2011.8
As with the other outcomes reviewed, there is a strong educational gradient in
accumulated work experience. Goldin and Mitchell (2017) show that women’s work experience
“Work Experience of the Population—2010,” U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
Statistics, News Release, December 18, 2012, available at www.bls.gov, accessed December 18,
2012; and “Work Experience of the Population—2014,” U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of
Labor Statistics, News Release, December 9, 2015, available at www.bls.gov, accessed June 28,
2016.
7

8

Blau and Kahn (forthcoming) note that the very small experience gap in 2011 may be partly
due to the negative effect of the Great Recession on male experience levels.
7

is greatest for the most highly educated. For instance, for the 1970 to 1974 birth cohort, average
work experience for college graduates was 8.7 years at ages 25-34, as compared to 7.3 years for
those with some college or less.
The increase in women’s labor force attachment is further illustrated by changes in how
quickly women return to the labor force after a first birth. Table 1 provides comparison figures
for the 1960s and first decade of the 2000s. Of those women who worked during pregnancy, 72
percent in the recent cohort returned to work within 6 months as compared to just 21 percent in
the earlier cohort. Dey (2016) further documents a narrowing of the gender difference in
workforce interruptions, which she largely attributes to new mothers’ swifter return to the labor
force than in decades past (rather than men’s reduced participation rates). Goldin and Mitchell
(2017) point to another new development. With the rise in the mean age of first birth, declines in
labor women’s force participation associated with childbearing interruptions are occurring later
than in past years, a pattern they describe as a new “sagging middle.” This trend may also be
associated with the rise what is known as the “sandwich generation,” mothers of children who
are concurrently taking care of their elderly parents (Parker and Patten, 2013).9
Although women’s labor force participation and attachment have increased, important
differences remain in hours worked. Most notably, a larger fraction of women work part-time
compared to men—25 percent versus just over 12 percent. The incidence of part-time work for
mothers (whether married or not) is similar to the incidence for all women. Table 2, which
provides figures on mothers’ employment status, indicates that 24 percent of all employed
mothers with children under 18 years of age were employed part time and the corresponding
figure for those with a child under age 1 was around 27 percent. Nonetheless, these figures also
9

For a more detailed discussion of fertility patterns in developed countries including age at first
birth see Adsera, this volume.
8

point to the fact that a substantial share of employed mothers, even those with infants, combine
family with full-time paid employment.
At the top end of the hours distribution, a greater fraction of men than women engage in
what has been termed “long hours” or “overwork,” typically defined as employment of more
than 50 hours per week. Cha and Weeden (2014) find that this gender difference in long hours
changed little over the 1979 to 2009 period. There is a notable educational (and occupational)
gradient in who is working long hours. Jacobs and Gerson (2004) and Kuhn and Lozano (2008)
find that the length of the workweek has generally decreased for workers with less than a high
school education, while it rose for those who completed four or more years of college, as well as
for those in professional, managerial, and technical occupations. Boushey and Ansel (2016)
provide detailed evidence on this divide by occupation using pooled data for 2011-2014. They
find that workers with jobs in health-care support, food preparation, and clerical occupations
(occupations more dominated by women) were employed the fewest hours and those in legal and
management positions were employed the greatest number of hours.10
C. Earnings and Income by Family Type
The increase in married women’s labor force participation that we have reviewed has led
in turn to an increase in dual-earner families among married couples. As may be seen in Table 3,
among couples with children under 18, the share of dual-earner families rose from 54 percent in
1976 (the first year for which data are available) to a high of nearly 70 percent in 1990. It stayed
at that level through 2000 and then declined to 64 percent in 2010, where it remained in 2014.
This pattern tracks the labor force participation trends of married women discussed earlier. As
may also be seen in Table 3, the decline in dual-earner couples since 2000 primarily reflects a
10

Pan and Cortés , this volume, discuss trends in occupational segregation and implications for
the gender wage gap.
9

rise in husband-only employed (stay-at-home mother) families, as well as smaller increases in
wife-only employed (stay-at-home father) families and families where neither parent works.
Kreider and Elliott (2010) and Livingston (2014) provide ancillary evidence that it is lesseducated mothers who comprised the growing share of stay-at-home mothers. (This point is
discussed further below in light of particular concern about “opting out” among college-educated
mothers.)
Women’s economic contribution in dual-earner families has increased considerably. For
instance, in families with employed wives, wives’ contribution to family income rose from 26.6
percent in 1970 to 37.3 percent in 2013.11 Consistent with this, the percentage of wives with
higher annual earnings than their husbands increased from 16 percent in 1981 to 29 percent by
2015.12 An issue which has been relatively unexamined, with the exception of Winkler,
McBride, and Andrews (2005), is whether this earnings pattern is transitory or more permanent
(which would likely affect the strength of women’s bargaining power in the household). These
authors find that this earnings pattern is persistent, as measured over a three-year period, for a
large fraction of such couples (60 percent). The increasing share of wives who out-earn their
husbands is part of a broader pattern of a narrowing of the earnings difference between husbands
and wives. One factor contributing to this is that couples are increasingly likely to marry those
who are similar to themselves in terms of educational attainment (McKinnish and Mansour, this

Department of Labor, “Women in the Labor Force: A Databook, BLS Reports (December
2015), Table 25, www.bls.gov.
12
U.S. Census Bureau, “Married-Couple Families with Wives' Earning Greater than Husbands'
Earnings: 1981 to 2015 (selected years)" Table F-22 (Accessed March 11, 2017). For married
couples with children under age 18, Wang, Parker, and Taylor (2013) report an increased from
about 4 percent in 1960 to 23 percent in 2011.
11

10

volume, Schwartz and Mare, 2005).13 However, more generally, the narrowing gender earnings
gap among married couples reflects an overall rise in the gender earnings ratio. For the labor
force as a whole, the gender earnings ratio for year-round, full-time workers rose from around 60
percent in the 1970s to nearly 80 percent in 2015.14 This trend reflects many of the factors
previously discussed, including women’s rising educational attainment and labor force
attachment. In addition, the occupational upgrading of women, combined with a reduction in
labor market discrimination and shifts in the overall demand for labor favoring women relative to
men also contributed (see Blau and Kahn (forthcoming) for recent evidence and a review).15
Single-mother families are at a substantial relative economic disadvantage compared to
married-couple families, in part because there is only one earner and in part because nevermarried mothers, who tend to have less education, are a large and increasing share of all single
mothers— the share of never-married mothers among single mothers rose from 4 percent in 1960
to 44 percent in 2011 (Wang, Parker, and Taylor, 2013). The net result is that in 2015, nearly 40
percent of female-headed families were poor, compared to around 8 percent of married couples.
Poverty rates were particularly high for black and Hispanic female-headed families, with 46
percent of both groups living in poverty. Even among white, non-Hispanic female-headed
families, the poverty rate was 32 percent.16
D. Time Spent in Housework and Parents’ Time with Children
13

This pattern also has the effect of widening family inequality, all else equal. For more detail on
assortative mating and inequality see Mansour and McKinnish, this volume.
14
The ratio is calculated using median earnings for each sex. The figures are from U.S. Census
Bureau,”Women's Earnings as a Percentage of Men's Earnings by Race and Hispanic Origin:
1960 to 2015,” www.census.gov , accessed April 17, 2017.
15

See Kunze, this volume, for further discussion regarding convergence in the gender earnings
ratio.
16
U.S. Census Bureau, Table 4, “Poverty Status of Families by Type of Family, Presence of
Related Children, Race and Hispanic Origin,” accessed March 1, 2017, www.census.gov.
11

Among married couples with children, the gender gap in housework and childcare has
considerably narrowed, though it is far from parity. Arlie Hochschild (1989) famously described
large amount of unpaid work performed by employed women as “the second shift.” Bianchi et al.
(2000, with the trend updated in a 2012 follow-up piece) found that married women spent 1.7
times as much time in housework as married fathers in 2010, down from 7 times as much in
1965. This decline was mainly due to women’s considerable reduction in time spent in
housework; men only modestly increased their housework time in the 1980s. Another piece of
evidence on the current (unequal) situation is that, in 2014, husbands with employed wives spent
only slightly more time in unpaid work than those with nonemployed wives; far from more
equally sharing the load (Blau and Winkler, 2018). Nonetheless, a key consequence of women’s
substantial reduction in housework time, combined with their rising labor force participation
rates, is a considerable narrowing of the difference in women’s and men’s allocation of time to
home activities and paid work.
Parents’ time with children has also changed considerably from the 1960s to present, as
documented by Bianchi, Robinson, and Milkie (2006), Hofferth and Lee (2015), and Parker and
Wang (2015). From 1965 to 1985, mothers’ primary time spent caring for children declined as
they entered the labor force in greater numbers, but it rose steadily thereafter, for both single and
married mothers and for both the employed and nonemployed.17 Fathers’ time with children
(principally those in two-parent families) has also increased since 1985. Nevertheless, in
married-couple families, a substantial gender gap in time spent with children remains.
As might be expected, employed mothers spend somewhat less time with children than

17

The figures on child-care time discussed here focus on primary time when parents are directly
involved with children. They do not include secondary time—time spent with children while also
engaged in another activity.
12

nonemployed mothers (see for instance, Guryan, Hurst, and Kearney, 2008; and Fox, Han,
Ruhm; and Waldfogel, 2013). However, Bianchi (2000) points out that a number of factors
narrow this difference including the fact that, as we have seen, a large fraction of mothers are
employed part-time and many children (even those of nonemployed mothers) are in preschool.18
Single mothers spend somewhat less time with children, in part because they do not have a
second parent in the household with whom they can coordinate care and other household tasks
(Fox et al., 2013).
Much attention has focused on the allocation of parental time with children by parent’s level
of education. More highly educated mothers and fathers spend more time directly engaged with
their children than their less-educated counterparts, a pattern that holds regardless of the parent’s
employment or marital status, and is observed across a large number of economically advanced
countries (Guryan, Hurst and Kearney, 2008). And, this gap has been widening over time
(Ramey and Ramey, 2010; and Lundberg and Pollak, 2014). The fact that highly-educated
parents spend more time with their children is in some respects counter to what would be
expected based on economic theory, since they have a higher opportunity cost of time. Among
alternative explanations, time spent with children may be regarded as a luxury good (Guryan et
al. 2008). Also, more-educated parents have the financial resources to enable them to make
more time for children: they are more able to outsource household tasks or purchase market
substitutes, are likely to have jobs that provide greater flexibility, and are more likely to be
married and so have a second adult with whom they can coordinate schedules. Some research
also suggests that highly educated parents tend to regard time with children as a necessary
18

2015 figures indicate that 36 percent of 3-year olds and 60 percent of 4-year olds were in
preschool. These figures exclude children in center-based daycare; see National Center for
Education Statistics, “Preschool and Kindergarten Enrollment,” The Condition of Education,
Figure 3, accessed June 9, 2017, nces.ed.gov/programs.
13

“investment” for their future success (Ramey and Ramey, 2010; and Lundberg and Pollak,
2014).
III.

Women, Work, and Family: Bringing It All Together

Considerable progress has been made on many fronts since the 1960s – women’s rising
participation rates and labor force attachment, a declining gender pay gap, and a narrowing of the
difference in time spent in housework and childcare by wives and husbands—but progress is far
from complete. And, new challenges have arisen, with the rise in dual-earner families, including
those with small children, and the increase in employed single-parent families. In other words, a
growing share of the workforce is seeking to balance the dual demands of paid work and family.
In this section we examine work-family challenges for mothers with children under age 18 with a
primary focus on the effect of child care burdens, but, as previously noted, some mothers are
concurrently caring for aging parents as well. As relevant and as data and research findings
permit, we look at the different experiences and challenges for women at various points in the
educational distribution.
A. Pregnancy, Childbearing and Workforce Interruptions
As reviewed in Section II, childbearing continues to involve at least some amount of
workforce interruption for most employed women, even if it is just for a few months after each
birth. Leave, especially paid leave, is important in placing women and men on a more equal
footing in the workforce and ensuring continuity in general and firm-specific work experience.
However, the United States is the only economically advanced country that does not have a
federal paid leave policy (it mandates 12 weeks of unpaid leave and it has been estimated that

14

only 59 percent of private sector workers are eligible).19 In addition, the United States is also less
generous in the provision of other family friendly policies, including child care and opportunities
for part-time work. In their analysis of data for 22 OECD countries over the period 1990 to
2010, Blau and Kahn (2013) show that the gap in family-friendly policies between the United
States and other countries is large and growing with consequent effects for women’s labor force
participation rates. Indeed, they find that over the study period, a substantial portion (nearly 30
percent) of the considerable decrease in U.S. women’s labor force participation rates relative to
other economically advanced nations that occurred at that time was due to the greater expansion
in these other countries of various family-friendly policies, including the length and generosity of
parental leave, mandates for part-time availability, and expenditures on child care. (Their
findings also suggest that extended leave may come at a cost for women’s careers, as discussed
in a subsequent section.) For the United States, Rossin-Slater, Ruhm, and Waldfogel (2013)
provide research evidence on California, one of the few states that mandates paid leave. Using a
difference in differences approach, they find that paid leave increased the usual weekly work
hours of employed mothers of one-to-three year olds.
While family-friendly policies undoubtedly play an important role in women’s labor
force participation rates, the Blau and Kahn (2013) findings suggest that they are not the whole
story (again, accounting for about 30 percent of the U.S. relative participation rate decline). This
is consistent with Goldin and Mitchell’s (2017) conclusion that differences in leave policy are
not the main reason for the differences in women’s participation between the U.S. and other
countries. They note that life cycle-participation patterns (including post-birth participation dips)
are similar for the United States and the United Kingdom even though the latter has longer
19

Figure is from Klerman, Daley, and Pozniak (2012). For a comprehensive discussion of
maternity leave policy in the U.S. please see Rossin-Slater, this volume.
15

protected and paid leave. Olivetti and Petrongolo’s (2017) review of the literature and analysis
of the international data gives a more important role to spending on early education and childcare
than to leave policies; these are also areas where the United States performs poorly relative to
other countries.20
Childbearing and childrearing may also affect wages as first discussed in Mincer and
Polachek (1974). Subsequent work including Light and Ureta (1995) confirmed that interruptions
played an important role in explaining the gender gap in wages for young workers over the 19661984 period. However, research by Blau and Kahn (forthcoming) which compared 2010 to
earlier years found that labor market experience has significantly diminished in importance in
explaining the overall gender wage gap, as women’s average experience levels have become
more similar to men’s, although they still play a role. Moreover, the importance of gender
differences in experience and workforce interruptions appears to vary by skill level and
occupation. Recent influential work by Goldin (2014) and others, discussed at length shortly, has
pointed to large negative effects of long hours and workforce interruptions on wages and the
gender wage gap in high-skilled occupations, particularly law and business.
Women who are pregnant and those who have recently borne children face a number of
unique challenges. For instance, pregnant women must be careful to avoid heavy lifting and
excessive physical exertion and may require extra water or restroom breaks (Bakst, 2012; and
Schulte, 2014). To the extent that manual occupations and service positions provide less
flexibility at the worker’s discretion than professional jobs (Williams, Blair-Loy, and Berdahl,
2013), women in such positions are likely to be more negatively affected.

20

For a more detailed discussion of child care policy in the U.S. please see Kimmel and
Connelly, this volume.
16

Another issue unique to new mothers is breastfeeding. For mothers who return to work and
continue to breastfeed, employers tend to vary in their willingness to make needed
accommodations such as permitting breaks and providing a private area. In their statistical
analysis, Rippeyoung and Noonan (2012) find that, controlling for “work orientation” prior to
childbirth (among other factors), mothers who breastfed their children for a longer duration (six
months or more), experienced a much greater loss in income (due to reduced hours and exit from
the labor force) for the first five years post-birth than those who did so for a shorter duration or
used formula.
B. Impact of Home Responsibilities, Including Child Care, on Employment and Earnings
As we saw in Section II, the allocation of time in the home remains extremely unequal
between married parents and single mothers have no adult with whom to share household
responsibilities. Due to these unequal burdens, home responsibilities tend to disproportionately
impact mothers’ paid labor market activity on a range of dimensions, whether it be the
occupations they choose, the jobs they take, or the hours that they work, with consequent effects
on their earnings and career trajectories. Becker (1985) put forth a theory of diminished work
effort as one explanation for a gender wage difference. He argued that the time devoted by
married women to home and child-care activities might reduce the effort that they put into their
market jobs, controlling for hours, and thus decrease their hourly wages compared to men with
similar qualifications. Hersch and Stratton (1997) provide evidence of a negative impact of
housework on married women’s wages in models estimated using fixed effects and instrumental
variables to address concerns that an unobservable factor might be driving the results or that
women with higher wages “buy” themselves out of housework. In a follow-up 2002 paper they
examine this relationship for all women regardless of marital status and again identify a negative

17

relationship, suggesting that it is the effort involved with housework, not marriage per se that
drove the original finding. We note however, that neither study was restricted to mothers, which
is the focus here.
There is a voluminous research literature on motherhood and employment (for early
influential papers see Fuchs, 1988; Korenman and Neumark, 1992, and Waldfogel, 1998).
Mothers earn less than non-mothers, what has come to be known as a “motherhood penalty.” As
we saw in the prior section, a large fraction of women, especially mothers, work part-time. Parttime work, by and large, comes at a cost in terms of lower wages and benefits, and fewer
opportunities for promotion (see for instance, Budig, Misra, and Boeckmann, 2016). And
motherhood tends to be associated with work force interruptions and lower accumulation of
work experience—although less so than in the past. However, what has received considerable
attention (see, for instance, Budig and England, 2001; Binder, Anderson, and Krause, 2003; and
Budig, 2014) is that a motherhood penalty exists even for mothers with the same labor-market
experience and education as non-mothers. An important methodological issue in this literature is
identifying causal relationships. For instance, a selection argument is plausible in that women
with lower wage offers will have lower costs of children. To address this specific concern, the
common approach taken in this research is to estimate fixed-effect regressions.
Of particular interest here, the aforementioned authors – Binder et al. (2003), Budig and
England (2001), and Budig (2014) – investigated not just the overall motherhood penalty, but
also looked at it by mother’s educational attainment. Taken together, these studies find that the
largest wage penalties are borne by women in medium-skill jobs or those at the lower end of the
wage distribution—rather than by high-skilled women or those at the top of the wage
distribution. One possible explanation for this overall set of findings is that more high-skilled

18

mothers may have greater workplace flexibility which serves to attenuate negative wage impacts
associated with motherhood.
Apart from flexibility issues, another explanation for the motherhood penalty is that some
mothers may be unable to return to their previous employer after childbirth, and instead must
change firms, especially if their employer does not provide adequate maternity leave or if they
are not eligible for or cannot take advantage of unpaid leave through the 1993 federal Family and
Medical Leave Act. (Waldfogel, 1998).21 Women in this situation lose out on the benefits of
firm-specific training and potential rewards from an especially good job match.
Laboratory and field experiments by Correll, Benard, and Paik (2007) provide
compelling evidence for an additional factor, suggesting that at least part of the explanation for
the motherhood penalty is labor market discrimination against mothers – differential treatment of
otherwise equally qualified mothers by employers. In a lab study, they modified resumes to
include an indicator of parental status.22 They found that mothers were perceived more
negatively than non-mothers as measured by indicators of perceived competence and
commitment. In a field experiment, they again used fictitious resumes (which varied by
indicators of parental status) but in this case sent them to employers. They found that mothers
received fewer callbacks than non-mothers. Fathers did not face a disadvantage in either setting.
Seminal papers by Mincer (1978) and Sandell (1977) point to another way that family
ties can negatively affect married women’s job and career opportunities: most often, couples
place greater priority on husbands’ careers rather than wives’ careers. This means that wives may
find themselves more likely to be “tied movers,” relocating when it is not advantageous for them
21

Lopoo and Raissian, this volume, provide detail on parental leave and child-care policies in the
US.
22
Parental status was subtly indicated by including information on the application such as PTA
coordinator for a parent and fundraiser for a neighborhood association for a nonparent.
19

to leave a job where they have accumulated considerable seniority and firm-specific training or
“tied stayers,” unable to relocate despite better opportunities elsewhere. A more recent analysis
by Cooke, Boyle, Couch, and Feijten (2009), which employs fixed-effects regression to account
for unobserved heterogeneity, provides evidence that family relocation decisions lead to an
increase in total family earnings (and so are economically rational for the family, as a whole), but
at the expense of married women’s own earnings. Compton and Pollak (2007) find that, even
among couples in which both spouses have a college degree, it is the education (and presumably
the earning power) of the husband that principally affects the couple’s propensity to migrate to a
large metropolitan area. A methodological challenge that the authors seek to overcome is that
migration and educational investment decisions are endogeneous; to at least partly address this
concern, they include control variables to reduce the likelihood of joint determination (e.g.
whether the current state of residence is the home resident of one of the spouses). Geographic
considerations may impact women’s job choices, even prior to marriage and motherhood.
Benson (2014) shows that anticipation of a lesser ability to determine the geographic location of
the family may lead women to select occupations in which they can later secure a position in a
wide swath of geographic areas (e.g. physicians and accountants) rather than choosing
occupations that tend to have more geographically limited opportunities (e.g., research
scientists)23.
C. Workplace Culture, Constraints, and Flexibility (or lack thereof)
Workplace culture and expectations significantly contribute to the challenge of combining work
and family, especially with the advent of the ‘24/7’ work culture, both for women in professional
jobs and those in medium-skill and low-wage jobs. These groups are discussed in turn.

23

Antman, this volume, discusses the impact of family migration on women.
20

According to Davies and Frink (2014), the norm of the “ideal” office worker—typically
applied to white middle-class men—began to emerge towards the start of the 20th century, with
the rise in white-collar (office) work. They describe the ideal worker of that time as “a man
completely devoted to his employer, his faithfulness rewarded by promotions” (p. 26). Even
today, especially for those in professional positions, the maintained assumption by employers is
that work should take precedence over family. This places mothers as well as those fathers who
undertake a substantial share of childcare and housework responsibilities in a bind, and the
degree of conflict has only intensified with the general increase in weekly work hours for
professional and other highly skilled workers that we discussed in Section II.24 Williams, BlairLoy, and Berdahl (2013) theorize that professional men and women who make family
considerations an overt priority may experience career repercussions, though for different
reasons. Men may bear a penalty because they are engaging in what the authors call “gender
non-conforming behavior,” given that the idealized male worker focuses exclusively on his
career, while women may bear a penalty since they are engaging in “gender-conforming
behavior,” since their behavior is essentially validating that the workplace is not their main
focus25.
Recent influential work by Goldin (2014) and others has focused attention on the impact
of workplace culture and expectations (including long hours) on women’s wages, the gender
wage gap, and occupational choice. Goldin focuses on the concept of temporal flexibility (or lack
thereof) and its impact on wages. Temporal flexibility refers to work schedules as they pertain to
24

Two high-profile professional women -- Anne-Marie Slaughter, the first woman to be head of
Policy Planning at the U.S. State Department and Sheryl Sandberg, Chief Operating Officer of
Facebook --- have brought public and media attention to these issues. See Slaughter (2012 and
2015) and Sandberg (2013, and 2016).
25
For a detailed discussion of gender differences in response to various work environments, see
Kato and Kodama, in this volume.
21

hours worked per day and per week, where the work is performed, and the need to work specific
days and times. She observes that some occupations/firms offer disproportionate rewards for
working long hours and particular hours. One common characteristic is that workers in these
situations are not readily substitutable – another worker cannot readily substitute person-specific
or knowledge-specific capital.26 Thus, workers willing to provide longer hours or cover certain
time periods receive a wage premium, while those not willing to do so incur a wage penalty.
Given that women continue to hold a greater share of household responsibilities, they are more
likely to place a higher value on flexibility and hence to bear this type of wage penalty. Goldin
points to lack of temporal flexibility in top management positions and high-powered law firms as
a key factor behind the larger gender wage gaps in these areas. She points to pharmacy as a
notable contrast (Goldin 2014, 2016). These days most pharmacists are employed by large firms
and computerization of the field has facilitated substitutability across workers and thus flexibility
in work hours and scheduling. The result is that the penalties for part-time or part-year work are
small as is the gender wage gap. The Goldin analysis highlights that findings showing returns to
longer hours and labor market experience and penalties to workforce interruptions are
susceptible to interpretations other than human capital.
In related work, Cha and Weeden (2014) find that trends in “overwork” (working 50+
hours per week) contributed to the slower convergence of the gender wage gap over the 1979 to
2007 period. Specifically, while the gender gap in overwork remained largely unchanged, the
rising returns to overwork combined with the fact that more men engage in this type of
employment served to lower women’s wages relative to men’s, an effect equal to about 10

26

As just one example, a trial lawyer may need to work long hours right before going to court
because he or she has developed a close working relationship with the client and has detailed
knowledge of the case.
22

percent of the total change in the gap over the 1979-2007 period. Furthermore, this factor was
especially important in managerial and professional occupations.
One methodological challenge in looking at the relationship between long work hours
and the gender wage gap is identifying a causal relationship To address this, Cortés and Pan
(2016) create an instrumental variable from a supply-side shock; cities differ in the stock of lowskilled immigrant women. Presumably a greater stock of such women (who provide substitute
labor in home production) should enable a greater proportion of women to work long hours and
reap the attendant rewards. As expected, they find that in cities with more low-skilled immigrant
female labor, the gender wage gap is reduced relatively more in occupations which have the
greatest returns to long work hours.
The findings of Goldin (2016), Cha and Weeden (2014), and Cortes and Pan (2016) point
to long hours as being an important and growing contributor to the gender pay gap in some high
skill occupations. This may be one reason that highly skilled women appear to have fared less
well than their counterparts in narrowing the gender pay gap over the past thirty years. Blau and
Kahn (forthcoming) found that, in 2010, the gender wage gap was larger at the top of the wage
distribution (90th percentile) than at the middle (50th percentile) or the bottom (10th percentile).
Moreover, they found that the gender wage gap had declined less at the top of the wage
distribution since 1980 than it had at the middle and the bottom of the wage distribution. These
results—a larger current gender wage gap at the top of the wage distribution and slower progress
for those in this group since 1980—remained even after adjusting for gender differences in
qualifications.
Another potential response to lack of adequate flexibility apart from part-time work or
working in occupations with shorter hours is to exit the labor force entirely. Lisa Belkin (2003)

23

first famously raised this issue in a 2003 New York Times Magazine article in which she coined
the term “opt out revolution” for college-educated women. Evidence on this varies considerably,
but a key take-away is that there has not been an “opt-out revolution” for this group. Claudia
Goldin (2006) analyzed the career and family patterns of female graduates of selective colleges
from around 1980 (when they graduated) until 15 years later. She found that women with at least
one child spent, on average, just 2 of the 15 years out of the labor market, and fully half of these
women had not been out of the labor market (or an educational institution) for more than six
months.
Antecol (2011) also examined the extent of opting out among college-educated workers.
While she did not find broad evidence of this behavior, she did find it among the narrow set of
white married college-educated women in male-dominated occupations. Similarly, Cha (2013)
found that overwork (working more than 50 hours per week) in male-dominated occupations is
associated with mothers, but not their female childless counterparts or men, leaving the
occupation. Her finding is suggestive of a “push” from the occupation. Moreover, she found that
such mothers tend to respond by exiting the labor force, rather than shifting to a less maledominated occupation.
While a desire for flexibility may be an explanation for some high-powered women
opting out, Hersch (2013) suggests it may not be the full explanation. In her study, she compares
labor force participation rates for women who graduated from the most elite schools, especially
those who earned MBAs, as compared to those who graduated from less-selective institutions.
After accounting for a host of personal factors, she finds that women who graduated from elite
schools have lower participation rates. She argues that workplace flexibility or lack thereof
cannot explain the difference because women who graduated from both types of schools would

24

likely find employment at the same firms (and thereby face the same workplace policies). This
may be the case, but it is also possible that the women from the elite schools are
disproportionately employed in high pressure workplaces (firms or departments within firms)
with less flexibility. Hersch suggests that women from the most elite schools may place a higher
value on investing time in children, all else equal.
A complete picture of workplace culture and flexibility necessitates looking at nonprofessional workers because such individuals comprise the majority of the U.S. workforce.
These individuals are both low- and middle-wage workers.27 Low-wage workers, a large fraction
of whom are women, tend to be subject to the most rigid schedules—schedules that are set
largely at the employers’ discretion, not the workers’ (Council of Economic Advisers, 2010;
Golden, 2015; and Boushey and Ansel, 2016b). The middle wage group faces flexibility issues
somewhere in between the other two groups (the group is too heterogeneous to be described by a
single paradigm).
Considerable concern has been raised regarding the prevalence and consequences of
unpredictable schedules. Workers are often required to be available at a moment’s notice, what
has been referred to as “open availability” or “just in time” scheduling so that the firm can avoid
the costs associated with overstaffing. Workers may also be sent home earlier than expected
when demand is slow, a practice that also leads to irregular shifts and unpredictable earnings.
Williams, Blair-Loy, and Berdahl (2013) and Boushey and Ansel (2016b) discuss that when lowwage workers request more flexible hours they are often instead offered fewer hours, which
negatively impacts earnings. Further, they observe that lack of adequate employment flexibility
27

Williams, Blair-Loy and Berdahl (2013) divide families into three groups: low income,
professional (those in the top 20 percent of income and include at least one college graduate),
and the “missing middle.” This latter group is so named because although it is, by far, the
largest, it receives the least attention from researchers.
25

contributes to greater tardiness and absenteeism as well as more quits. Albeda (2011) points out
that these concerns are especially acute for single mothers who, unless they live with extended
family, find it extremely difficult to juggle schedules. From a policy standpoint, these negative
impacts are of considerable importance. However, we would note that research to date has not
devoted the same level of analytical rigor as has been applied to high-skilled occupations.
D. Gendered Norms about Appropriate Roles for Women and Men
Research points to gendered attitudes about appropriate roles for women and men as an
explanation for trends in women’s labor force participation rates (Cotter, Hermsen and
Vanneman 2011; and Fortin 2015). These authors point out that gender roles were becoming
more egalitarian from the mid-1970s to the mid-1990s when female labor force participation was
growing, but then did not change further when female participation rate growth stagnated.
However, one challenge is firmly establishing causality since broad changes in participation rates
may influence attitudes. Fortin (2015) addresses this issue by using an instrumental variable
approach. Specifically, she uses an exogenous shock to attitudes in the form of the HIV/AIDS
“scare” —individuals’ concerns about contracting AIDS well-exceeded their actual chances — to
instrument for gender role attitudes. While she acknowledges that the HIV/AIDS is likely to be
only one of the factors that produced the changes in gender role attitudes, she argues that its
effect is sufficient to provide an exogenous source of identification. Using this approach, she
finds that the stalling of progress in gender role attitudes in the mid-1990s explains at least a
third of the leveling-off in female labor force participation trends.
In related research, Bertrand, Kamenica and Pan (2015) find that gendered norms continue to
hold considerable sway, even in couples with nontraditional earnings patterns—those in which
wives potentially outearn their husbands. While one would expect women in such couples to

26

have increased bargaining power as a result of their greater earnings, these authors find that a
wife whose earnings are predicted to be greater than her husband’s (and so their economic roles
do not conform to the gender appropriate ones) is actually less likely to participate in the labor
force, all else equal. And, if she does work, she earns less than predicted, in part due to lower
work hours (perhaps to hold down her earnings). Bertrand et al. also find that the wife spends
more time in household tasks, perhaps to make the situation more acceptable to her husband.
They also find that such couples are less happy in their marriage and more likely to divorce.
Bertrand et al.’s finding regarding time spent in housework is consistent with earlier work by
Bittman, England, Folbre, Sayer, and Matheson (2003), who find that wives who earn the
majority of family earnings spend more time in housework than those who bring home a smaller
share of the earnings. Some research has questioned Bittman et al’s findings (see England, 2011;
Gupta, 2007; and Sullivan, 2011), but what particularly distinguishes Bertrand et al.’s study is
that they found this result in models that looked at within couple variation in earnings over time.
In addition, they included controls for the level of both husband’s and wife’s income; if this is
not done, the impact of relative income might pick up some of the effect of the absolute income
levels of each spouse.
An additional point relates to Bertrand et al.’s finding for divorce. They found that couples
with a nontraditional earnings pattern are more likely to divorce. However some evidence
suggests attitudes about gender appropriate roles are changing (Wang, Parker, and Taylor, 2013),
and so this impact may be diminishing. Consistent with this, related work by Schwartz and Han
(2014), which examines divorce patterns by spouse’s relative educational advantage (rather than
earnings advantage), finds that married couples formed since the early 1990s in which the wife
holds the educational advantage are less prone to divorce then earlier cohorts and are now no

27

longer more likely to divorce than couples in which the husband has the educational advantage.28
Recent research nonetheless indicates that gender identity as it affects the marriage market
may shape the responses of even young, college-educated single (and childless) women,
suggesting that such views continue to have a strong hold. Using survey and experimental
methods applied to MBA students, Bursztyn, Fujiwara, and Pallais (2017) collected information
on single women’s expressed job preferences and personality traits. They found that when these
women expected their responses to be public (shared with their MBA classmates) single women
gave less career-minded responses than when they expected their classmates would not see their
responses, perhaps to make themselves appear less ambitious and thus more attractive in the
marriage market.
While much research looks at the impact of gendered norms on labor market outcomes,
Pedulla and Thébaud (2015) investigate the extent to which the family-friendly nature of the
workplace (e.g. the availability of paid family leave, subsidized child care, the option for flexible
hours) affects preferences regarding spouses’ gender roles (e.g. male/primary earner,
wife/primary earner, egalitarian). They use an experimental research design applied to young
unmarried childless women and men. In one experiment, they randomly ask respondents about
preferred gender roles (without any information about the availability of family-friendly
workplace policies) and in another they ask respondents the same question after “priming” them
with information about the broad availability of such policies. They find that when “primed”
with this information, men’s preferences regarding gender roles are not affected while women
indicate that they are more likely to prefer an egalitarian arrangement. Their findings suggest
that the availability of family-friendly workplace policies may be effective in shifting gendered
28

Lehrer and Son, this volume, present a detailed examination of trends in divorce by
socioeconomic status.
28

preferences, particularly of women, and, in turn, reducing inequality in the allocation of time
between husbands and wives.
IV.

Conclusion and Suggestions for Moving Forward

In this chapter we reviewed long-term trends and research evidence on women, work, and
family. In doing so, we looked at evidence by educational attainment to a greater extent than is
usually done. We saw that mothers, at all points in the educational distribution, face challenges
in balancing work and family, though the specifics differ. There is also an important
intergenerational dimension to differences by parents’ educational attainment. As we have seen,
time with children has especially increased among highly-educated parents. To the extent that
less educated mothers have less flexibility in the workplace, they cannot as easily adjust their
schedules to spend more time with children, contributing to this difference. To reduce the
disproportionate challenges faced by mothers in the labor market, policies and practices should
take explicit account of differences by educational attainment so that they meet the needs of all
Americans, not just those who are in one segment of jobs or the other.
When available, leave policies and other family friendly policies, have the potential to
increase gender equality in the workplace, especially if men utilize these policies as well as
women. As discussed earlier, Blau and Kahn (2013) point to the important role that family policy
plays in supporting women’s paid work. However, they also present evidence suggesting that
extremely generous family policies may encourage women’s employment in part-time work and
lower-level occupations. Thus the participation gains may come at a cost in terms of advancing
women’s status in the labor market. Olivetti and Petrongolo (2017) similarly point to potentially
beneficial effects of moderate (up to one year) leave on women’s employment (largely driven by
effects on the employment of less-skilled women). In contrast, they find that longer leaves have

29

detrimental effects on employment for all women (regardless of skill level) and negative effects
on the relative earnings of higher-skilled women, indicative of the consequences of losing out on
valuable career advancement opportunities.
It might be argued that the negative effects of parental leave on women’s outcomes could
be considerably mitigated if men more equally shared in leave taking. For this reason, some
countries, including Norway and Sweden, have instituted “daddy leave” which provides a period
of paid leave that is available exclusively to the father after the birth of a child on a “use it or
lose it” basis. Such policies have been found to increase leave utilization by fathers (although not
to the point of equalizing the duration of leave taken across mothers and fathers). One reason for
this is that if the family wishes to fully avail itself of the entire leave allotment, fathers have an
incentive to take the “daddy leave” since they cannot transfer this benefit to the mother (Haas
and Rostgaard, 2011). However, evidence for a similar program in Quebec suggests that fathers
had a very high take up even though most families had not fully exhausted their leave allotment
under the previous program—that is the draw into the program was not simply to “stretch” the
total amount of leave time available to the family (Patnaik, 2016). Patnaik suggests that the
“daddy only” label itself may help to promote father’s leave-taking through its effect on norms
about paternal leave-taking.
Another very important point about family-friendly policies is that child-care subsidies
potentially have different effects than leave and part-time policies. This is a policy option that
make it easier to combine work and family and unambiguously increase women’s labor force
participation, without the potentially detrimental effects associated with leave policies (Olivetti
and Petrolongo, 2017; and Blau and Winkler, 2018).
Another “way forward” is restructuring the workplace and re-setting workplace norms.

30

Goldin (2014, 2016) point to the case of pharmacy as an occupation in which hourly wages are
not much impacted by shorter or longer work hours. However, the question remains as to how
applicable the example of pharmacy is for other professions requiring college and advanced
degrees, since conditions which have permitted such a high degree of substitution among
pharmacy workers may not be present elsewhere. Regarding workplace norms, France has taken
an interesting step by pushing back on the intrusion of technology into the private lives of
workers (The Guardian, 2016). It has passed a law that requires firms with more than 50
workers to set out times when workers can be disconnected from email communication. Another
option, as discussed by Boushey and Ansel (2016) and Correll, Kelly, O'Connor and Williams
(2014), among others, is for firms to give workers greater say over where and when work is
performed. Government can also mandate this as well, such as Vermont, which, in 2014,
adopted a “right to request” part-time policy. However, it is policies like these in other OECD
countries that, as discussed above, are believed to have contributed to women’s concentration in
part-time and lower-level jobs. Thus, similar to the reasons discussed regarding leave, it is
crucial that both male and female workers utilize any flexibility that is provided so that they are
on a level playing field in the workplace.
As we have noted, it is likely that professional workers have more flexibility than other
workers. Nonetheless, our review of the evidence on the role of temporal inflexibility in
adversely impacting some highly skilled workers, particularly in law and management, suggests
that they could benefit from additional flexibility. With regard to the workplace situation of the
vast majority of workers who are neither professionals nor employed in positions requiring a
college degree, policies that give greater employee discretion over work hours and provide
greater predictability in hours would facilitate work-family balance, without unduly jeopardizing

31

the earnings that they need to support their families.

32

References
Antecol, Heather. “The Opt-Out Revolution: Recent Trends in Female Labor Supply.” In
Research in Labor Economics, volume 33, edited by Solomon W. Polachek and Konstantinos
Tatsiramos. Emerald Publishing Group, 2011: 45-83.
Albeda, Randy. “Time Binds: US Antipoverty Policies, Poverty, and the Well-Being of Single
Mothers.” Feminist Economics 17, no. 4 (October 2011): 189–214.
Bailey, Martha J. and Thomas DiPrete. “Five Decades of Remarkable, but Slowing, Change in
U.S. Women’s Economic and Social Status and Political Participation.” Russell Sage Foundation
Journal of the Social Sciences 2, no. 4 (August 2016): 1-32.
Bakst. Dina. “Pregnant, and Pushed Out of a Job.” New York Times (January 30, 2012).
Anderson, Deborah J., Melissa Binder, and Kate Krause. “The Motherhood Wage Penalty
Revisited: Experience, Heterogeneity, Work Effort and Work-Schedule Flexibility.” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review 56, no. 2 (January 2003): 273–94.
Belkin, Lisa. “The Opt-Out Revolution.” New York Times Magazine (October 26, 2003).
Benson, Alan. “Re-thinking the Two-Body Problem: The Segregation of Women into
Geographically-Flexible Occupations.” Demography 51, no. 5 (October 2014): 1619-39.
Bertrand, Marianne, Emir Kamenica, and Jessica Pan. “Gender Identity and Relative Income
within Households.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 130, no. 3 (August 2015): 571-614.
Bianchi, Suzanne M., Liana C. Sayer, Melissa A. Milkie, and John P. Robinson. “Housework:
Who Did, Does, or Will Do It and How Much Does It Matter?” Social Forces 91, no. 2
(December 2012): 55-63.
Bianchi, Suzanne M., Melissa A. Milkie, Liana C. Sayer and John P. Robinson. “Is Anyone
Doing the Housework? Trends in the Gender Division of Household Labor.” Social Forces 79,
no. 1 (September 2000): 191-228.
Bianchi, Suzanne M. “Maternal Employment and Time with Children: Dramatic Change or
Surprising Continuity?” Demography 37, no.4 (November 2000): 401-14.
Bittman, Michael, Paula England, Nancy Folbre, Liana Sayer, and George Matheson. “When
Does Gender Trump Money? Bargaining in Time and Household Work.” American Journal of
Sociology 109, no. 1 (July 2003): 186-214.

33

Becker, Gary S. “The Allocation of Effort, Specific Human Capital, and the Differences
Between Men and Women in Earnings and Occupations.” Journal of Labor Economics 3, no. 1,
pt. 2 (January 1985): 33–58.
Blank, Rebecca. "Fighting Poverty: Lessons from Recent U.S. History.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 14, no.2 (Spring 2000): 3-19.
Blau, Francine D. “Trends in the Well-being of American Women, 1970-1995.” Journal of
Economic Literature 36, no. 1 (March 1998): 112-165.
Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn, “Swimming Upstream: Trends in the Gender Wage
Differential in the 1980s.” Journal of Labor Economics 15, no. 1 (January 1997): 1-42.
Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn. “Changes in the Labor Supply Behavior of Married
Women: 1980–2000.” Journal of Labor Economics 25, no. 3 (July 2007): 393–438.
Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn. “Female Labor Supply: Why is the US Falling
Behind?” American Economic Review 103, no. 3 (May 2013): 251-256.
Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn. “The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends, and
Explanations.” Journal of Economic Literature (Forthcoming, September 2017).
Blau, Francine D. and Anne E. Winkler. The Economics of Women, Men, and Work, 8th edition.
(Oxford University Press, 2018).
Boushey, Heather and Bridget Ansel. “Overworked America: The Economic Causes and
Consequences of Long Work Hours.” Washington Center for Equitable Growth (May 16, 2016),
equitablegrowth.org, accessed July 1, 2016.
Boushey, Heather and Bridget Ansel. “Working by the Hour: The Economic Consequences of
Unpredictable Scheduling Practices.” Washington Center for Equitable Growth (September
2016), equitablegrowth.org, accessed January 2017.
Budig, Michelle J. “The Fatherhood Bonus & the Motherhood Penalty: Parenthood and the
Gender Gap in Pay.” Report. Third Way (September 2, 2014), www.thirdway.org
Budig, Michelle J. and Paula England. “The Wage Penalty for Motherhood.” American
Sociological Review 66, no. 2 (April 2011): 204-225.
Budig, Michelle J, Joya Misra, and Irene Boeckmann. “Work–Family Policy Trade-Offs for
Mothers? Unpacking the Cross-National Variation in Motherhood Earnings Penalties.” Work and
Occupations 43, no. 2 (May 2016): 119-177.
Bursztyn, Leonardo, Thomas Fujiwara Amanda Pallais. “‘Acting Wife’: Marriage Market
Incentives and Labor Market Investments.” NBER Working Paper 23043 (January 2017).

34

Cancian, Maria and Deborah Reed. “The Impact of Wives’ Earnings on Income Inequality:
Issues and Estimates.” Demography 36, no. 2 (May 1999): 173–84.
Cherlin, Andrew. The Marriage-Go-Round: The State of Marriage and the Family in
America Today. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2009.
Cha, Youngjoo. “Overwork and the Persistence of Gender Segregation in Occupations.” Gender
& Society 27, no. 2 (April 2013): 158–184.
Cha, Youngjoo and Kim A. Weeden. “Overwork and the Slow Convergence in the Gender Gap
in Wages.” American Sociological Review 79, no. 3 (June 2014): 457-84.
Compton, Janice and Robert A. Pollak. “Why Are Power Couples Increasingly Concentrated in
Large Metropolitan Areas?” Journal of Labor Economics 25, no. 3 (July 2007): 475–512.
Cooke, Thomas J, Paul Boyle, Kenneth Couch, and Peteke Feijten. “A Longitudinal Analysis of
Family Migration and the Gender Gap in Earnings in the United States and Great Britain.”
Demography 46, no. 1 (February 2009): 147–67.
Correll, Shelley J., Stephen Benard, and In Paik. “Getting a Job: Is There a Motherhood
Penalty?” American Journal of Sociology 112, no. 5 (March 2007): 1297–338.
Correll, Shelley J., Erin L. Kelly, Lindsey Trimble O’Connor, and Joan C. Williams.
“Redesigning, Redefining Work.” Introductory essay for Special Issue, Work and Occupations
41, no. 1 (February 2014): 3-17.
Cortés, Patricia and Jessica Pan. “When Time Binds: Returns to Working Long Hours and the
Gender Wage Gap among the Highly Skilled.” IZA Working Paper 9846, March 2016.
Cotter, David, Joan M. Hermsen, and Reeve Vanneman. “The End of the Gender
Revolution? Gender Role Attitudes from 1977 to 2008." American Journal of
Sociology 117, no. 1 (July 2011): 259-289.
Davies, Andrea Rees and Brenda D. Frink. “The Origins of the Ideal Worker: The Separation of
Work and Home in the United States From the Market Revolution to 1950.” Work and
Occupations 41, no. 1 (February 2014): 18-39.
Dey, Judith, “How Has Labor Force Participation among Young Moms and Dads Changed? A
Comparison of Two Cohorts.” Beyond the Numbers 3, no. 19 (September 2014): bls.gov,
accessed July 1, 2016.
England, Paula and Anjula Srivastava. “Educational Differences in U.S. Parents’ Time Spent in
Child Care: The Role of Culture and Cross-Spouse Influence.” Social Science Research 42, no. 4
(July 2013): 971-988.

35

England, Paula. “Missing the Big Picture and Making Much Ado About Almost Nothing: Recent
Scholarship on Gender and Household Work.” Journal of Family Theory and Review 3, no. 1
(March 2011): 23-26.
Ellwood, David T. and Christopher Jencks. “The Spread of Single-Parent Families in the United
States since 1960.” In The Future of the Family, edited by Daniel P. Moynihan, Timothy M.
Smeeding, and Lee Rainwater. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2004: 25-65.
Fortin, Nicole M. “Gender Role Attitudes and Women’s Labor Market Participation: OptingOut, AIDS, and the Persistent Appeal of Housewifery.” Annals of Economics and Statistics,
Special Issue on Economics of Gender 117/118 (June 2015): 379-401.
Fox, Liana E, Wen-Jui Han, Christopher Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel. “Time for Children: Trends
in the Employment Patterns of Parents, 1967–2009.” Demography 50, no. 1 (February 2013): 2549.
Fuchs, Victor R. Women’s Quest for Economic Equality. Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1988.
Giddings, Lisa, John M. Nunley, Alyssa Schneebaum and Joachim Zietz. ”Cohort and the
Specialization Gap Between Same-Sex and Different-Sex Couples.” Demography 51, no. 2
(April 2014): 509-34.
Golden, Lonnie. “Irregular Work Scheduling and Its Consequences.” Economic Policy Institute,
Briefing Paper 394 (April 9, 2015).
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and
Women's Career and Marriage Decisions.” Journal of Political Economy 110, no. 4 (2002): 730770.
Goldin, Claudia C. and Lawrence F. Katz. “A Most Egalitarian Profession: Pharmacy and the
Evolution of a Family Friendly Occupation.” Journal of Labor Economics 34, no. 3 (July 2016):
705-746.
Goldin, Claudia C. “The Quiet Revolution that Transformed Women’s Employment, Education,
and Family.” American Economic Review 96, no. 2 (May 2006): 1–20.
Goldin, Claudia C. “A Grand Convergence: Its Last Chapter,” American Economic Review 104,
no. 4 (May 2014): 1091-1119.
Goldin, Claudia C. and Joshua Mitchell. “The New Life Cycle of Women’s Employment:
Disappearing Humps, Sagging Middles, Expanding Tops.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 31,
no. 1 (Winter 2017): 161-182.
Gupta, Sanjiv. “Autonomy, Dependence, or Display? The Relationship between Married
Women’s Earnings and Housework.” Journal of Marriage and Family 69 (May 2007): 399–417.
36

Guryan, Jonathan, Erik Hurst, and Melissa Kearney. “Parental Education and Parental Time with
Children.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 22, no. 3 (Summer 2008): 23–46.
Haas, Linda and Tine Rostgaard. “Fathers' Rights to Paid Parental Leave in the Nordic
Countries: Consequences for the Gendered Division of Leave.” Community, Work, and Family
14, no. 2 (May 2011): 177-195.
Hersch, Joni and Leslie S. Stratton. “Housework, Fixed Effects and Wages of Married Workers.”
Journal of Human Resources 32, no. 2 (Spring 1997): 285–307.
Hersch, Joni and Leslie S. Stratton. “Housework and Wages.” The Journal of Human Resources
37, no. 1 (Winter 2002): 217-229.
Hersch, Joni. “Opting Out Among Women with Elite Education.” Review of Economics of the
Household 11, no. 4 (December 2013): 469-506.
Hofferth, Sandra and Yoonjoo Lee. “Family Structure and Trends in U.S. Fathers’ Time with
Children, 2003-2013.” Family Science 6, no. 1 (2015): 318-29.
Hochschild, Arlie. The Second Shift. New York: Viking Press, 1989.
Isen, Adam and Betsey Stevenson. “Women’s Education and Family Behavior: Trends in
Marriage, Divorce, and Fertility.” NBER chapters, in Demography and the Economy. National
Bureau of Economic Research, 2010: 107-140.
Jacobs, Jerry A., and Kathleen Gerson. The Time Divide: Work, Family, and Gender Inequality.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004.
Klerman, Jacob Alex, Kelly Daley, and Alyssa Pozniak. Family and Medical Leave in 2012:
Executive Summary (Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates, September 7, 2012. Updated September
13, 2013). www.dol.gov.
Kreider, Rose M. and Diana B. Elliott. “Historical Changes in Stay-at-Home Mothers: 1969 to
2009.” U.S. Census Bureau (2010).
Korenman, Sanders and David Neumark. ‘‘Marriage, Motherhood, and Wages.’’ Journal of
Human Resources 27, no. 2 (Spring 1992): 233 – 55.
Kuhn, Peter and Fernando Lozano. “The Expanding Workweek? Understanding Trends in Long
Work Hours among U.S. Men, 1979–2006.” Journal of Labor Economics 26, no. 2 (April 2008):
311–43.
The Guardian, “French Workers Win Legal Right to Avoid Checking Work Email Out-ofHours.” (December 31, 2016).
Light, Audrey and Manuelita Ureta. “Early-Career Work Experience and Gender Wage
Differentials.” Journal of Labor Economics 13, no. 1 (January 1995): 121-154.
37

Livingston, Gretchen. “Opting Out? About 10% of Highly-Educated Moms are Staying at
Home” (Washington, DC: Pew Research Center, May 7, 2014).
Lundberg, Shelly, Robert A. Pollak, and Jenna E. Stearns. “Family Inequality: Diverging
Patterns in Marriage, Cohabitation, and Childbearing.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 30, no.
2 (Spring 2016): 79-102.
Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak. "Cohabitation and the Uneven Retreat from Marriage in
the United States 1950-2010." In Human Capital in History: The American Record, edited by
Leah Platt Boustan, Carola Frydman, and Robert A. Margo. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press (2014).
McLanahan, Sara. “Diverging Destinies: How Children Are Faring Under the Second
Demographic Transition.” Demography 41, no. 4 (November 2004): 607–27.
Meyer, Bruce D, and Dan T. Rosenbaum. “Making Single Mothers Work: Recent Tax and
Welfare Policy and Its Effects.” National Tax Journal 53 (December 2000): 1027–62.
Mincer, Jacob and Solomon W. Polachek. “Family Investment in Human Capital: Earnings of
Women.” Journal of Political Economy 82, no. 2 (March/April 1974): S76-S108.
Mincer, Jacob. “Family Migration Decisions.” Journal of Political Economy 86, no. 5 (October
1978): 749–73.
Myers, C. (forthcoming) “The Power of Abortion Policy: Re-Examining the Effects of Young
Women's Access to Reproductive Control,” Journal of Political Economy.
Olivetti, Claudia and Barbara Petrongolo. “The Economic Consequences of Family Policies:
Lessons From a Century of Legislation in High-Income Countries.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 31, no. 1 (Winter 2017): 205-31.
O’Neil, June and Solomon W. Polachek. “Why the Gender Gap in Wages Narrowed in the
1980s.” Journal of Labor Economics 11, no. 1, pt. 1 (January 1993): 205–28.
Parker, Kim and Eileen Patten. “The Sandwich Generation: Rising Financial Burdens for
Middle-Age Americans.” Washington, DC: Pew Research Center (January 30, 2013).
Patnaik, Ankita. “Reserving Time for Daddy: The Short and Long-Run Consequences of Fathers'
Quotas.” SSRN (January 18, 2016). https://ssrn.com.
Pedulla, David S. and Sarah Thébaud. “Can We Finish the Revolution? Gender, Work-Family
Ideals, and Institutional Constraint.” American Sociological Review 80, no. 1 (February
2015):116-139.
Ramey, Garey, and Valerie A. Ramey. “The Rug Rat Race.” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 41 no. 1 (Spring 2010): 129-199.
38

Rippeyoung, Phyllis L.F. and Mary C. Noonan. “Is Breastfeeding Truly Cost Free? Income
Consequences of Breastfeeding for Women.” American Sociological Review 20, no. 10 (March
2012): 1–24.
Rossin-Slater, Maya, Christopher J. Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel. “The Effects of California’s
Paid Family Leave Program on Mothers’ Leave-Taking and Subsequent Labor Market
Outcomes.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 32, no. 2 (Spring 2013): 224-245.
Sandberg, Sheryl. Lean In: Women, Women, and the Will to Lead. New York: Knopf Doubleday
Publishing Group (2013).
Sandberg, Sheryl. “Sheryl Sandberg Reflects on Single Motherhood, Says Lean In Critics 'Were
Right.’ ” Fortune (May 7, 2016).
Sandell, Steven H. “Attitudes toward Market Work and the Effect of Wage Rates on the Lifetime
Labor Supply of Married Women.” Journal of Human Resources 12, no. 3 (Summer 1977): 379386.
Schulte, Brigid. “States Move to Ensure Pregnant Workers Get Fair Chance to Stay on Job.”
Washington Post (September 8, 2014).
Schwartz, Christine R. and Hongyun Han. “The Reversal of the Gender Gap in Education and
Trends in Marital Dissolution.” American Sociological Review 79, no 4. (August 2014): 605-29.
Schwartz, Christine R. and Robert D. Mare. “Trends in Educational Assortative Marriage from
1940 to 2003.” Demography 42, no. 4 (November 2005): 621–46.
Slaughter, Anne-Marie. “Why Women Still Can’t Have It All.” The Atlantic (July/August 2012).
Slaughter, Anne-Marie. Unfinished Business: Women, Men, Work, Family. New York: Random
House, 2015.
Sullivan, Oriel. “An End to Gender Display through the Performance of Housework? A Review
and Reassessment of the Quantitative Literature Using Insights from the Qualitative Literature.”
Journal of Family Theory and Review 3 (March 2011): 1–13.
Black, Dan A., Seth G. Sanders, and Lowell J. Taylor. “The Economics of Lesbian and Gay
Families.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 21, no. 2 (Spring 2007): 53–70.
Waldfogel, Jane. “Understanding the ‘Family Gap’ in Pay for Women with Children.” Journal
of Economic Perspectives 12, no. 1 (Winter 1998): 137-56.
Wang, Wendy, Kim Parker, and Paul Taylor. “Breadwinner Moms: Mothers are the Sole or
Primary Provider in Four-in-Ten Households with Children; Public Conflicted about the
Growing Trend.” Washington, DC: Pew Research Center (2013). www.pewresearch.org.
39

Williams, Joan C, Mary Blair-Loy, and Jennifer L. Berdahl. “Cultural Schemas, Social Class,
and the Flexibility Stigma.” Journal of Social Issues 69, no. 2 (July 2013): 209-34.
Winkler, Anne E, Timothy D. McBride, and Courtney Andrews. “Wives Who Outearn Their
Husbands: A Transitory or Persistent Phenomenon for Couples?” Demography 42, no. 3 (August
2005): 523–35.

40

Figure 1. Trends in Share of Married Adults,
1970-2014 (%)
80

`
72.6

71.7
70

As Percent of All Adults

64.1

64.0

61.9
60

71.8
61.7

58.8
55.1

52.0

50

45.8
1970

38.3

40

1990
2014

30
20
10
0
All

White, NonHispanic

Black

Hispanic origin

Notes: Data are for adults, ages 18+. For 2014, data on whites are for white, non-Hispanics and
individuals are able to report more than one race; whites are defined as persons who selected this race
group only and blacks are those who selected black alone or in combination with other race. For all
years, persons of Hispanic origina may be of any race. Married adults include married spouse present,
married spouse absent, and separated.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, detailed tables from www.census.gov: Table A1, "Marital Status of People
15 Years and Over by Age, Sex, Personal Earnings, Race, and Hispanic Origin;" U.S. Census Bureau,
America's Families and Living Arrangements (2014); and U.S. Census Bureau, "Marital Status and Living
Arrangements: March 1994," Current Population Report P20-484 (Feb. 1996), Tables A-1, A-2, and A-3.

41

Figure 2. Trends in Share of Mother-Only Families,
1970-2015 (%)
60

56.2

54.3
1970

50

1990
2015
Percent of All Families

40
33.0
29.3 28.9

30
24.2

25.6
18.8 18.9

20
11.5
8.9

10

0
All races

White, nonHispanic

Black

Hispanic origin

Notes: Mother-only families include female household heads and those living in the in the
households of others. Prior to 2015, these figures may include some cohabiting families. For
2015, figures are for white, non-Hispanics and individuals are able to report more than one
race; whites are persons who selected this race group only and blacks are those who selected
black alone or in combination with another race. For all years, persons of Hispanic origin may
be of any race.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, detailed tables from www.census.gov: Table A1, "Marital Status of
People 15 Years and Over by Age, Sex, Personal Earnings, Race, and Hispanic Origin;" U.S.
Census Bureau, America's Families and Living Arrangements (2014); and U.S. Census Bureau,
"Marital Status and Living Arrangements: March 1994," Current Population Report P20-484
(Feb. 1996), Tables A-1, A-2, and A-3.

42

Figure 3. Share of Women Currently Married,
Ages 30-50, By Educational Attainment,
1970 and 2015
90
80

85.2

84.0

80.9

78.3

70.7
70

Percent

60

53.5

54.8

56.4

50
1970
40

2015

30
20
10
0
Less than 4 years of
high school

4 years of high
school

1-3 years of college 4 or more years of
college

Source: Francine D. Blau and Anne E. Winkler, The Economics of Women, Men, and Work, 8th edition
(Oxford University Press, 2018), figure 13-1. Figure are based on authors' calculations from March
Current Population Surveys accessed from IPUMS.

43

100.0

Figure 4. Labor Force Participation by Education, 1970
and 2015, Ages 25-64
(a) Women
1970

2015

90.0
79.9
Participation Rate

80.0
72.9
70.0
62.2

60.8

60.0
51.3

51.0

50.0
43.0 44.0
40.0

30.0
Less than 4 years of
high school

4 years of high
school

1-3 years of college 4 or more years of
college

Source: Francine D. Blau and Anne E. Winkler, The Economics of Women, Men, and Work, 8th edition
(Oxford University Press, 2 018), figure 6a. Figures are from U.S. Department of Labor, Handbook of
Labor Statistics, and authors’ tabulations from the 2015 microdata file of the March Current Population
Survey.

44

100.0

Figure 4. Labor Force Participation by Education, 1970
and 2015, Ages 25-64
(b) Men
96.3
1970

90.0

96.1

95.8

2015

90.6

89.3
83.7
79.8

Participation Rate

80.0
73.1
70.0

60.0

50.0

40.0

30.0
Less than 4 years of
high school

4 years of high
school

1-3 years of college

4 or more years of
college

Source: Francine D. Blau and Anne E. Winkler, The Economics of Women, Men, and Work, 8th edition
(Oxford University Press, 2 018), figure 6b. Figures are from U.S. Department of Labor, Handbook of
Labor Statistics, and authors’ tabulations from the 2015 microdata file of the March Current Population
Survey.

45

Figure 5. Trends in Labor Force Participation Rates of
Women With Children Under Age 18, 1960-2015
90

80

70

Percent

60

50
Never- married
with child under
18
Married with child
under 18

40

30

20
1960

Other evermarried with child
under 18
1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Year

Sources: Francine D. Blau and Anne E. Winkler, The Economics of Women, Men, and Work, 8th edition
(Oxford University Press, 2018), figure 6-4. Figures are from Statistical Abstract of the United States,
2004 (Table 597), 2008 (Table 580), and 2012 (Table 599), Proquest Statistical Abstract of the United
States 2016 (Table 617) (accessed May-2016); BLS Bulletin 2340 (August 1989); Bernan Press, Handbook
of U.S. Labor Statistics, 1st ed. (1997); and unpublished data from the BLS.

46

Percent of Women with Births in the Past Year

Figure 6. Labor Force Participation of Women With
Births in the Past Year by Educational Attainment,
2006 and 2013
80

73.8

70

62.5

64.4

66.3

60
50

49.0

49.6

40

30
20
10
0
High school or less

Some college
2006

Bachelor's or more

2013

Source: U.S. Census Bureau "Women Who Had a Birth in the Past Year and Their Percentage in the
Labor Force," Fertility of American Women, Historical Table 5, Accessed April 21, 2017,
www.census.gov.

47

Table 1. Employment Patterns of Pregnant and New Mothers, 1960s and 2000s

Worked during pregnancy
Percent of those working during pregnancy who returned to work
within 3 months
Percent of those working during pregnancy who returned to work
within 6 months

1960s

2000s

44%

66%

17%

59%

21%

73%

Note: The 1960s refer to 1961–1965, and the 2000s refer to 2006–2008.
Source: Linda Laughlin, “Maternity Leave and Employment Patterns of First-Time
Mothers: 1961–2008,” U.S. Census Bureau, Washington, DC (October 2011),
Tables 1 and 8.

48

Table 2. Employment Status of Mothers, by Age of Youngest Child,
2015
All Mothers

Married Mothers

With Child Under Age 18
% employed
% employed part-time

66.2
24.0

65.3
24.5

With Child Under Age 3
% employed
% employed part-time

57.3
27.2

57.2
25.6

With Child Under Age 1
% employed
% employed part-time

54.2
27.4

55.8
26.0

Note: Part time refers to usually works fewer than 35 hours per week at all jobs.
Source: Authors' calculations from Bureau of Labor Statistics, Employment Characteristics of
Families - 2015, USDL-16-0795 (April 22, 2016), Tables 5 and 6, www.bls.gov.

49

Table 3. Trends in Employment Patterns of Married Couples with Children Under Age 18,
1976 to 2014 (%)
1976
1990
2000
2010
2014
Both Spouses Employed (Dual-Earner)
Husband Employed Only
Wife Employed Only
Neither Spouse Employed
Total

54.3
40.9
2.0
2.8
100.0

69.5
25.7
2.2
2.6
100.0

70.6
24.0
3.2
2.1
100.0

64.3
27.0
5.3
3.4
100.0

64.4
27.7
4.5
3.4
100.0

Notes: Employed is defined as having positive earnings.

Source: Authors calculations from U.S. Census Bureau, "Work Experience of Husband and Wife-Married Couple Families," Tables F-14, F-15, and F-17 (1976 and 1990); and U.S. Census Bureau,
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Table FINC-04, "Presence of Related Children Under 18 Years Old -Married Couple Families, by Total Money Income and Work Experience, Race and Hispanic Origin of
Reference Person" (2000, 2010, and 2014), accessed April 2017, www.census.gov.

50

