                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         ADDRESSING THE OPIOID EPIDEMIC:
                    IS THERE A ROLE FOR PHYSICIAN EDUCATION?

                                         Molly Schnell
                                         Janet Currie

                                      Working Paper 23645
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23645


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          August 2017, Revised November 2017




We thank Michael Barnett, Amitabh Chandra, Angus Deaton, Jonathan Skinner, Atheendar
Venkataramani, and participants at the 2016 Population Health Sciences Research Workshop for
their helpful feedback. Generous financial support from the program for US Health and Health
Policy at the Center for Health and Wellbeing at Princeton University is gratefully acknowledged.
The statements, findings, conclusions, views, and opinions contained and expressed herein are
not necessarily those of QuintilesIMS or any of its affiliated or subsidiary entities. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Molly Schnell and Janet Currie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Addressing the Opioid Epidemic: Is There a Role for Physician Education?
Molly Schnell and Janet Currie
NBER Working Paper No. 23645
August 2017, Revised November 2017
JEL No. I1,I18

                                          ABSTRACT

Using national data on opioid prescriptions written by physicians from 2006 to 2014, we uncover
a striking relationship between opioid prescribing and medical school rank. Even within the same
specialty and practice location, physicians who completed their initial training at top medical
schools write significantly fewer opioid prescriptions annually than physicians from lower ranked
schools. Additional evidence suggests that some of this gradient represents a causal effect of
education rather than patient selection across physicians or physician selection across medical
schools. Altering physician education may therefore be a useful policy tool in fighting the current
epidemic.


Molly Schnell
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
mollyks@princeton.edu

Janet Currie
Department of Economics
Center for Health and Wellbeing
185A Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
jcurrie@princeton.edu
I. Introduction

Between 2000 and 2014, drug overdoses involving opioids rose 200%, fueling widespread

concern about an opioid epidemic and spurring calls for changes in public policy (Chen et al.,

2014; Dart et al., 2015; Rudd et al., 2016). A distinguishing feature of the current epidemic of

drug abuse is that many overdoses and deaths can be attributed to legal opioids that were

prescribed by a physician. The clinical use of opioids in the United States has quadrupled since

1999, contributing to the rise in drug overdoses, emergency room visits, and admissions for drug

treatment. Despite significant efforts to restrict the prescribing of opioids over the past decade,

prescription opioid abuse and drug overdoses due to prescription opioids have continued to rise

(Health and Human Services, 2014; Meara et al., 2016).

        Recent evidence suggests that doctors play a key role in the opioid epidemic. While

prescription drug monitoring programs (PDMPs)—prescription databases that allow physicians

to check for signs of opioid abuse before prescribing—have little effect on average (Paulozzi et

al., 2011; Reifler et al., 2012; Haegerich et al., 2014; Meara et al., 2016), research shows that

they are more effective when states require physicians to consult them (Dowell et al., 2016;

Buchmueller and Carey, 2017; Dave et al., 2017). Furthermore, among patients treated in the

same emergency room, Barnett et al. (2017) demonstrate that those who happen to be treated by

a physician with a higher propensity to prescribe opioids are more likely to be dependent on

opioids 12 months later. Despite being the gatekeepers of the legal opioid supply, very little is

known about why some physicians are more likely to prescribe opioids than others1 or about

what role physician training can play in bringing the epidemic under control.



1
  Recent evidence documents differences in opioid prescribing by medical specialty (Volkow et al., 2011; Ringwalt
et al., 2014; Levy et al., 2015).




                                                                                                                    2
         In this paper, we use comprehensive data on all opioid prescriptions written by doctors in

the US between 2006 and 2014 to examine the relationship between opioid prescribing and

training. In particular, we ask how the number of opioid prescriptions written yearly by

individual physicians varies with a key feature of the school where they received their initial

medical training: the rank of the medical school.2 As general practitioners (GPs) account for 48%

of opioid prescriptions written by physicians in our sample, we examine the relationship between

medical school rank and opioid prescriptions both across all physicians and separately for GPs.3

         We find that where a doctor received his/her initial training matters in terms of predicting

how likely they are to prescribe opioids: physicians trained at the lowest ranked US medical

schools prescribe nearly three times as many opioids per year as physicians trained at the top

medical school. This striking inverse relationship reflects two factors: (1) physicians from lower

ranked medical schools are more likely to write any opioid prescriptions; and (2) conditional on

being an opioid prescriber, physicians for lower ranked medical schools write more opioid

prescriptions on average. This prescribing gradient is particularly pronounced among GPs. Our

results demonstrate that if all GPs prescribed like those from the top ranked school, we would

have had 56.5% fewer opioid prescriptions and 8.5% fewer deaths over the period 2006 to 2014.

         Differences in the propensity to prescribe opioids across medical schools need not reflect

a causal effect of training. If physicians from lower ranked medical schools systematically see

patients with a greater need for opioids, then at least part of the relationship between medical

school rank and prescribing will reflect patient sorting across physicians. Furthermore, if people

who have a higher probability of getting into selective medical schools are systematically less

2
  Our data does not include information on the number of patients seen by each physician. Using data for Medicare
Part D, we demonstrate that our results are robust to using opioid prescription rates (total prescriptions/ number of
unique patients) in the Medicare population.
3
  We define GPs as physicians in general practice, family practice, and internal medicine. Results are quite similar
if we exclude internal medicine.


                                                                                                                        3
likely to write opioid prescriptions ex ante, then the prescribing gradient will also reflect

selection into medical schools. While we cannot definitively quantify the role of training, we

provide three additional sets of analyses that suggest that selection alone cannot account for the

differences in prescribing habits that we observe across medical school ranks.

         First, we demonstrate that the relationship between opioid prescriptions and medical

school rank persists conditional on physician specialty and county of practice.4 It is therefore

unlikely that differences in patient need across physicians can account for the entirety of the

prescribing gradient. Second, we demonstrate that the prescribing gradient is flatter among

physicians in specialties that receive specific training in the use of opioids after medical school.

If physicians who go on to prescribe fewer opioids select into higher ranked medical schools (or

if patients with a high need for opioids sort towards physicians from lower ranked schools), then

the prescribing gradient should not be dependent on subsequent training in pain management.

Finally, we demonstrate that the prescribing gradient is flatter in more recent cohorts. Since

selectivity at top medical schools has been increasing over time, a story of selection would

instead imply that the relationship should be stronger in more recent cohorts.

         This paper contributes to a growing empirical literature on policies to address the opioid

epidemic. In addition to the introduction of PDMPs,5 researchers have examined the impact of

the introduction of abuse-deterrent opioids (Cicero and Ellis, 2012; Alpert et al., 2016; Evans et

al., 2017), the strengthening of pain clinic laws (Kennedy-Hendricks et al., 2016; Meinhofer,

2016), and improvements in access to opioid antagonists such as naloxone (Mueller et al., 2015;

Rees et al., 2017) on opioid abuse and related health outcomes. To the best of our knowledge,


4
  Taking this analysis a step further, we also demonstrate that a prescribing gradient exists among specialists who
practice in the exact same hospital or clinic.
5
  See Haegerich et al. (2014) for a review of earlier studies and Meara et al. (2016), Dowell et al. (2016), Patrick et
al. (2016), Bao et al. (2016), Buchmueller and Carey (2017), and Dave et al. (2017) for more recent work.


                                                                                                                          4
this is the first study to examine whether additional physician training is likely to have a

significant role to play in addressing the opioid epidemic.

         This paper further contributes to a large literature in health economics on the

determinants of physician practice style. While a physician’s network is known to influence how

they practice (Coleman et al., 1957; Soumerai et al., 1998; Epstein and Nicholson, 2009; Lucas

et al., 2010), the rank of a physician’s initial medical school is one aspect of a physician’s

network that has received surprisingly little attention. A notable exception is Doyle et al. (2010),

who demonstrate that patients randomly assigned to a doctor who attended a higher ranked

medical school have less expensive stays but no difference in health outcomes compared to

patients who instead see physicians from a lower ranked program.6

         Finally, we contribute to a literature on the impacts of selectivity in higher education on

subsequent outcomes. While the literature on the effects of university rank highlights that at least

some of the “effect” of going to a higher ranked school is the result of selection into schools

rather than a consequence of any difference in the education received, the evidence suggests that

there are economic returns to attending more selective institutions (Brewer et al., 1999; Dale and

Krueger, 2002; Hoekstra, 2009; Hoxby, 2016). Our work demonstrates that the value-added of

attending a selective medical school may include broader public health benefits resulting from

differences in clinical practice as a result of the training received.

         The paper proceeds as follows. Section II introduces the data. Section III asks how the

number of annual opioid prescriptions written by individual physicians varies with the rank of

the medical school where they were initially training. Section IV introduces three sets of



6
  Although not focused on practice style, Hartz (1999) finds that surgeons who trained at prestigious residency or
fellowship programs are more likely to be regarded as a “best doctor” by other physicians in the same market.




                                                                                                                     5
empirical exercises that can be used to probe whether a causal effect of training contributes to the

prescribing gradient that we observe. Section V provides the results from these ancillary

analyses. Section VI discusses limitations of our study and provides a variety of robustness

checks to help mitigate these concerns. Section VII provides a discussion and conclusions.



II. Data

To examine the relationship between opioid prescribing and training, we combine prescription

data from QuintilesIMS with medical school rankings from US News and World Report and a

new dataset documenting the countries of over 900 foreign medical schools. This data is

supplemented with locations of teaching hospitals from the American Hospital Association's

(AHA) annual surveys, physician-level opioid prescription rates from the Centers for Medicare

and Medicaid Services’ (CMS) 2014 provider utilization and payment data, county-level

characteristics from the five-year pooled 2008-2012 American Community Survey (ACS), and

county-level mortality from the US Mortality Files.

       Our primary prescription data was purchased from QuintilesIMS, a public company

specializing in pharmaceutical market intelligence. This dataset contains the number of

prescriptions filled for opioid analgesics at US retail pharmacies in each year from 2006 to 2014

at the prescriber level. In addition to the number of prescriptions, the QuintilesIMS data contain

information on each prescriber provided by the American Medical Association (AMA). In

particular, we know each prescriber’s specialty, current practice address as of 2014, the medical

school where they obtained their first medical degree, and the year in which they graduated from

medical school. We use ArcGIS to extract each provider’s county of practice from their practice

address. To create the sample of physicians used in the paper, we keep active physicians who




                                                                                                     6
graduated from medical school before 2006 and are not missing any information necessary for

our analysis.7

         We therefore have nine observations for every physician in our sample—one for each

year between 2006 and 2014. Altogether, 2.16 billion opioid prescriptions were written between

2006 and 2014; 72.9% of these were written by the 742,297 physicians in our cleaned sample.8

Although GPs (here defined as physicians in general practice, family practice, and internal

medicine) make up only 27.4% of our sample, they wrote 48.2% of all opioids prescribed by

physicians between 2006 and 2014 (35.1% of all opioid prescriptions). See Table S2 for an

overview of these summary statistics.

         There was a continuous increase in the number of opioid prescriptions from2.04 million

in 2006 to 2.6 million in 2012 and then a slight moderation. Nevertheless, in 2014 the average

physician still wrote 221.7 opioid prescriptions. This figure includes zeros—in 2014, 28.3% of

physicians did not write any opioid prescriptions. Among physicians in general practice, these

statistics are even more striking: only 16.2% of GPs wrote no opioid prescriptions in 2014 with

opioid-prescribing GPs writing 480.3 prescriptions on average.

         In order to rank medical schools, we use US News and World Report's “Best Medical




7
  In particular, we keep prescribers whose status is listed as “active” in 2014 (94.20% of prescribers) and who list a
specialty that requires either the degree of medical doctor (MD) or doctor of osteopathic medicine (DO). We
exclude physicians whose medical school is not provided or whose medical school name is ambiguous (2.29% of
active physicians have missing medical school; 0.12% of active physicians list “University of Medicine” or “College
of Medical Sciences” as their medical school). We also exclude prescribers who list a P.O. Box, a home address, or
an address of unknown type (0.49% of remaining physicians) in place of an office address as well as physicians
whose offices are in US territories (0.06% of remaining physicians). Finally, to avoid including physicians who are
still doing a residency or other training, we exclude physicians who graduated medical school in 2006 or later
(15.93% of remaining physicians). Note that we purchased data from QuintilesIMS for both anti-depressant and
opioid prescriptions. Of physicians who appear in the AMA data set, only 0.45% do not appear in our Quintiles
IMS prescription data.
8
  19.1% of the remaining prescriptions were written by non-physician providers including dentists, nurse
practitioners, and physician assistants. We exclude non-physician providers from our analysis since our data
includes no information on where they were trained.


                                                                                                                    7
Schools: Research Rankings.”9 Although medical school rankings change from year to year, we

construct a composite medical school rank to use in our analyses. In particular, we take the

average of a school's non-missing rankings from 2010 to 2017 and then re-rank schools

according to this average rank (assigning a rank of “1” to the school with the lowest average

rank, “2” to the school with the next lowest average rank, and so on).10 Refer to Table S1 for a

list of these composite rankings while Figure S2 shows how stable our composite ranking is from

2010 to 2017. The pairwise correlation coefficients are all greater than 0.96 across annual

rankings from 2010 to 2017.

        There are 92 ranked medical schools and 55 unranked US medical schools in these data.

We divide unranked schools by whether they grant the degree of medical doctor (MD) or doctor

of osteopathic medicine (DO) (35 and 20 medical schools, respectively).

        We group foreign medical schools based on the UN's “Classification of Countries by

Major Area and Region of the World.”11 While the QuintilesIMS data does not provide

information on the location of each medical school, we googled all medical schools with 10 or

more opioid prescribers in the main sample and recorded the country of the school's primary

campus (902 medical schools). Foreign medical schools with fewer than 10 opioid prescribers in

the main sample are labeled as “Uncategorized” (695 medical schools). Refer to Figure S1 for

the distribution of medical schools and physicians in our data across world regions.

        While the QuintilesIMS data contain information representative of all opioid

prescriptions filled at US retail pharmacies, it is not without limitations. As of 2014, they directly

9
  Latest rankings available at https://grad-schools.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com/best-graduate-schools/top-
medical-schools.html.
10
   We exclude schools that are ranked in only one or two years over the sample (eight medical schools). Of the
remaining medical schools, each school is ranked in 7.4 years on average.
11
   Available at http://www.unep.org/tunza/tunzachildren/downloads/country-Classification.pdf; last accessed
September 5, 2016).




                                                                                                                 8
survey 86% of retail pharmacies, with the remaining prescriptions imputed to add to industry

totals using a patented projection method. The fraction of pharmacies directly surveyed has

increased slightly since 2006. Since hospital pharmacies are not included in the data,

prescriptions of specialists who practice primarily in hospitals (such as surgeons) may be under-

represented. This is one motivation for looking at the relationship between prescribing and rank

by specialty as discussed further below. Also, the QuintilesIMS “Xponents” data we were able

to purchase contained no information on the number of patients seen by each physician or about

the strength or number of pills included in each prescription. We use three additional datasets to

verify that these data shortcomings are unlikely to drive our results.

        First, using the AHA’s annual surveys from 2007 to 2013, we demonstrate that our

results are robust to excluding physicians who practice in a zip code containing a university-

affiliated hospital. We consider a zip code as containing a university-affiliated hospital if it

contained a hospital that reported a university affiliation to the AMA in any year between 2007

and 2013. According to this measure, 9.4% of zip codes with any physicians in our data include a

university-affiliated hospital.

        Second, using publicly available data from CMS’s Medicare Part D provider utilization

and payment data files,12 we demonstrate that our results are consistent to using opioid

prescription rates as opposed to prescription levels in the Medicare population. While this data

does not include information on each physician’s medical school, we merge the Medicare Part D

data with CMS’s publicly available Physician Compare database to extract this information.13,14


12
   Available at https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/Medicare-
Provider-Charge-Data/Part-D-Prescriber.html; last accessed August 10, 2017.
13
   Available at https://data.medicare.gov/data/physician-compare; last accessed August 10, 2017.
14
   This merge is not perfect. According to CMS, clinicians are only listed on Physician Compare if they are in
“approved” status in the Medicare enrollment system (PECOS), have a specialty and at least one practice address
listed, and submit at least one Medicare Fee-For-Service claim within the past 12 months.


                                                                                                              9
           Finally, using county-level deaths from the US Vital Statistics Mortality Files, we

demonstrate that the number of opioid prescriptions correlate with deaths involving drugs. To

measure “deaths involving drugs,” we include all deaths where either the underlying cause of

death or a condition contributing to death indicates accidental poisoning by and exposure to

drugs (ICD-10 codes X40-X44); intentional self-poisoning by exposure to drugs (ICD-10 codes

X60-X64); poisoning by and exposure to drugs (ICD-10 codes Y10-Y14); and poisoning by,

adverse effects of, or under dosing of drugs excluding anesthetics (ICD-10 codes T40, T42,

T43). We further include deaths where drug dependence, excluding alcohol or tobacco, is

indicated on the death certificate (ICD-10 codes F11-F16, F18, F19).15 Summary statistics for the

annual, county-level mortality measures that we use are provided in Table S3. There was a clear

upward trend in deaths due to drugs between 2006 and 2014 from 12.9 to 17.4 per 100,000—a

trend that has received a great deal of recent attention (c.f. Case and Deaton, 2015).



III. Opioid Prescriptions and Medical School Rankings

We are interested in whether the propensity to prescribe opioids is associated with the rank of the

medical school where a physician attained his/her initial medical education. We consider three

outcomes: (1) the number of opioid prescriptions written annually by each physician including

physician-years with no opioid prescriptions, (2) the number of opioid prescriptions excluding

physician-years with no opioid prescriptions, and (3) an indicator denoting physician-years with

at least one opioid prescription. As GPs account for nearly half of the opioid prescriptions

written in the sample (Table S2), we look at all physicians as well as GPs separately. For ease of




15
     Our results are robust to only including deaths where a drug overdose is listed as the cause of death.


                                                                                                              10
presentation, we present graphs summarizing the empirical findings as well as tables with

regression output.

       Figure 1 shows the average number of opioid prescriptions written yearly per physician

by medical school rank, both among all physicians (Subfigure A) and among GPs (Subfigure B).

We see that a higher medical school rank is associated with fewer opioid prescriptions: on

average, physicians from the lowest ranked US medical schools write three times as many opioid

prescriptions as physicians trained at Harvard Medical School, the top ranked school. While GPs

trained at Harvard write an average of 180.2 opioid prescriptions per year, GPs from the lowest

ranked US medical schools write an average of nearly 550 opioid prescriptions per year (Table

S5).

       This striking inverse relationship between the number of annual opioid prescriptions and

medical school rank reflects two factors: (1) physicians from higher ranked medical schools are

less likely to write any opioid prescriptions; and (2) conditional on writing any opioid

prescription, physicians from higher ranked medical schools write fewer opioid prescriptions on

average. Only 65% of physicians trained at Harvard Medical School wrote at least one opioid

prescription in a given year between 2006 and 2014 compared to nearly 80% of physicians from

the lowest ranked medical schools (see Figure S3 and Table S4 for all physicians and Figure S4

and Table S5 for the analogous information for GPs). Conditional on prescribing opioids, the

behavior of physicians likewise varies with medical school rank: on average, opioid prescribers

from the lowest ranked medical schools write over 160% more opioid prescriptions per year than

opioid prescribers from Harvard (146.4 versus 381.6; see Table S4).

       Turning to the results for physicians trained at unranked medical schools, we see from

Figure 1 that foreign doctors have similar prescribing habits as physicians trained at mid-tier US




                                                                                                11
schools, while MDs from unranked US schools are closer to the average for physicians from the

lowest ranked schools. This is true both among all physicians (Subfigure A) and among GPs

(Subfigure B). Comparing the prescribing habits of DOs to MDs, we see that DOs in general

practice prescribe similarly to GPs trained at the lowest ranked US schools. However, at an

average of over 400 opioid prescriptions annually per physician, DOs across all specialties write

more opioid prescriptions per prescriber than MDs trained either domestically or abroad.



IV. Empirical Strategy

The striking inverse relationship between opioid prescribing and medical school rank

documented in Section III begs the question of why such a relationship exists. It is possible that

medical schools have differing approaches to the tradeoff between pain management and

addiction and instill different beliefs among their graduates about the appropriate clinical use of

opioids. However, a prescribing gradient across medical school rankings need not reflect a causal

effect of training. There are two key threats to attributing the raw prescribing gradient to

differences in training:

     1.! If physicians from lower ranked medical schools are systematically more likely to see

         patients with a greater need for opioids, then at least part of the relationship between

         medical school rank and prescribing will reflect patient sorting across physicians.16

     2.! If physicians who have a higher probability of getting into a higher ranked medical

         school have a lower propensity to prescribe opioids ex ante, then at least part of the


16
   We note that only a particular type of patient sorting threatens a causal interpretation of the relationship between
opioid prescribing and medical school rank. If patients sort towards physicians from lower ranked medical schools
based on medical need, then the relationship between opioid prescribing and medical school rank cannot be
attributed (at least entirely) to a causal effect of training. If, however, patients sort towards physicians from lower
ranked medical schools based on a desire to misuse or abuse opioids (for example because physicians from low-
ranked schools are known to be more lenient prescribers), then this endogenous sorting is a consequence of the
differences in prescribing practices that we want to capture.


                                                                                                                      12
       relationship between medical school and prescribing will reflect physician sorting

       across medical schools.

       While we do not have the data necessary to test whether physicians select into medical

schools based on their outlooks towards opioids (or, more realistically, whether physicians select

into medical schools based on characteristics that are correlated with their outlooks towards

opioids), we can examine whether physicians from lower ranked medical schools are more likely

to encounter patients with a greater medical need for opioids. In particular, we can examine

whether physicians from lower ranked medical schools are systematically more likely to practice

in specialties and/or locations where patient need for opioids may be higher.

       As shown in Table 1, there are differences in both the specialties and practice locations

chosen across medical school rankings. The eight specialties shown in the table are the top eight

opioid-prescribing specialties (Table S6) and together account for 84% of opioid prescriptions in

our sample. The table makes clear that while as a group, GPs prescribe the most opioids, this is

because they are the most numerous practitioners. Not surprisingly, other specialties, such as

those in pain medicine, prescribe much more on a per capita basis.

       While only 20% of doctors from the top 30 medical schools are in general practice, over

50% of DOs are GPs. Furthermore, while doctors from the top 30 schools tend to practice in

places with greater population density, lower percentages of white inhabitants, and higher

education levels (that is, in more urban settings), DOs practice in areas with low population

density, a high percentage of white inhabitants, and the highest percentage of less educated

residents. If, for example, GPs who practice in more rural settings see patients with a greater

need for opioids, then the patterns documented in Figures 1 and S3 could reflect differences in

the specialties and practice locations chosen across medical school rankings.




                                                                                                   13
       In the following section, we provide three sets of additional analyses that together

provide evidence that neither patient sorting across physicians nor physician sorting across

medical schools can account for all of the prescribing gradient that we observe. First, to control

for differences in patient need, we replicate the analysis from Section III conditional on specialty

and county of practice fixed effects. In particular, we estimate regressions of the following form:

       (1) Yitc = βRanki + δSpecialtyi + αc + γt + eitc

where Yitc denotes the number of opioid prescriptions written by doctor i in year t in county c;

Specialtyi, αc, and γt denote specialty, county, and year fixed effects, respectively; and eitc is an

error term. In some specifications, county fixed effects are replaced with either exact practice

address fixed effects or a vector of county characteristics. Ranki is a vector of indicators for

medical school rank group. Harvard is the top ranked medical school, followed by schools

ranked 2-5, 6-10, etc. Including this vector of indicators allows the effect of school rank to be

non-linear. We further include separate indicators for unranked schools that grant MDs,

unranked schools that grant DOs, and foreign schools. With the inclusion of county and specialty

fixed effects, the parameters of interest—the vector β—are identified using variation in the

number of prescriptions written by physicians within the same specialty who attended different

medical school but who practice in the same county. Standard errors are clustered by physician.

       While Equation (1) is useful for graphical analyses (the vector β can be plotted to

visualize the prescribing gradient), we would like a parsimonious way to examine how the

prescribing gradient changes when we include different controls. Hence, we also estimate

equations similar to Equation (1) where we replace indicators for medical school rank bins with a

quadratic in continuous medical school rank. That is, we estimate equations of the form:

       (2) Yitc = β Ranki + β Ranki2 + δSpecialtyi         αc + γt + eitc



                                                                                                        14
where Ranki is a continuous measure of medical school rank (graduates of Harvard receive a

value of 1, graduates of Johns Hopkins receive a values of 2, etc.) and all other variables are

defined as in Equation (1). We include a quadratic in medical school rank because results from

Equation (1) suggest that the relationship between medical school rank and annual opioid

prescriptions is approximately quadratic. As there in no ordinal ranking for physicians who

trained at unranked US medical schools or foreign institutions, we only include physicians who

graduated from ranked US medical schools in these regressions. As before, standard errors are

clustered by physician.

         Next, instead of residualizing the number of prescriptions from specialty fixed effects, we

examine whether the prescribing gradient is different across physicians in different specialties. If

the prescribing gradient is driven entirely by patient sorting across physicians or physician

selection into medical schools, then we would expect the prescribing gradient to be similar

across specialties. If, however, there is a causal effect of training, then we would expect the

prescribing gradient to be weaker in specialties that receive subsequent training in pain

management.

         To estimate the prescribing gradient across different specialties, we estimate Equations

(1) and (2) separately for the top eight opioid-prescribing specialties.17 The eight specialties with

the most opioid prescriptions over our sample period are general practice, orthopaedic surgery,

emergency medicine, pain medicine, physical medicine and rehabilitation, obstetrics and

gynecology, anesthesiology, and general surgery (see Table S6). Of these specialties, those in

pain medicine, physical medicine and rehabilitation, and anesthesiology prescribe the most on a

17
  When these equations are estimated on a single specialty, specialty fixed effects are excluded. However, when we
estimate these equations only on GPs, we include sub-specialty fixed effects to account for differences across the
three categories of sub-specialties we include in our definition of GPs (general practice, family practice, and internal
medicine).




                                                                                                                     15
per capita basis and have the most detailed subsequent training in the use of pain medicines.

       Finally, we examine whether the prescribing gradient is different across graduation

cohorts. While medical school rankings have been quite stable over time, the degree of

selectivity at top schools has been increasing as the market for higher education has become

national (and international) rather than being regionally segmented (Hoxby, 2009). Hence, if the

effect of medical school rank is due to the selection of more qualified people into higher ranked

schools, then we should see the effect of rank increase in more recent cohorts with increasing

selectivity. Conversely, if the effect of rank is due to differences in training offered at different

schools, and if training standards tend to diffuse downwards from the top schools over time, then

the effect of rank should be less important in more recent cohorts. To examine whether the

prescribing gradient is stronger in more selective cohorts, we estimate Equations (1) and (2)

separately for four broad cohorts: those who graduated before 1975, between 1976 and 1985,

between 1986 and 1995, and after 1996.



V. The Role of Training

We now implement the three sets of empirical exercises introduced in Section IV to investigate

whether there is evidence that the prescribing gradient we uncover in Section III is driven—at

least in part—by a causal effect of training.


a. Prescribing gradient conditional on specialty and practice location

Figure 2 provides coefficient estimates and 95% confidence intervals on indicators for medical

school rank bins from estimation of Equation (1), both for all physicians (Subfigure A) and for

GPs (Subfigure B). The figures are scaled so that the coefficients on the highest ranked medical

school (Harvard) are set to zero, and all other schools are compared to it. A comparison of



                                                                                                        16
Figures 1 and 2 demonstrates that controlling for differences in specialties and practice locations

moderates the relationship between medical school rank and opioid prescribing. However, even

within the same specialty and county of practice, the relationship between medical school rank

and opioid prescriptions remains highly statistically significant. This is particularly true among

GPs, for whom the average number of opioid prescriptions written yearly per physician rises

steeply with medical school rank until around the rank of 60, where the curve flattens out.18

        A comparison of specifications with and without controls is shown more formally in

Table 2. Here, we provide results for variants of Equation (2) estimated on all physicians (Panel

A) and using GPs alone (Panel B). Looking to the results for all physicians first, we see that a

regression of annual opioid prescriptions on medical school rank yields a best fit line of y =

117.07 + 2.44x – 0.01x2 (column (1)). Controlling for specialty (column (2)), reduces the

derivative of y with respect to x by about half, as does controlling for county-level demographics

from the ACS (column (3)).19 Comparing columns (3) and (4), we see that the estimates are very

similar whether we control for observable differences across counties or for both observable and

unobservable differences across counties using county fixed effects. Finally, column (5) shows

estimates from a specification similar to that depicted in Figure 5 in that it includes both county

and specialty fixed effects: here, the best fit line is given by y = 111.57 + 0.64x – 0.003x2.

Taking into account differences in specialties and counties of practice across medical school

rankings, doctors from the lowest ranked schools still write on average over 33 more opioid

prescriptions per year than doctors from the highest ranked schools.




18
   Tables S8 and S9 show the regressions underlying Figure 2, Figure S3 and Figure S4.
19
  Controls include population density; percent male; percent in 12 age bins; percent white, black, and Hispanic;
percent in seven education categories; percent unemployed; percent in 16 income categories; percent poverty for
three different age ranges; percent with public and private health insurance; and median age of housing stock.


                                                                                                                   17
       While the prescribing gradient among GPs is also attenuated when we control for

specialty and county of practice, we see from the regression output in Panel B of Table 2 that a

significant gradient persists among GPs practicing in the same county. Conditional on specialty

and county of practice, GPs from the lowest ranked schools write on average over 70 more

opioid prescriptions per year than GPs from the highest ranked schools (column (5)).

       Turning to the coefficients on unranked medical schools in Figure 2, we see that among

all physicians (Subfigure A), DOs write more prescriptions per prescriber than all other doctors

even when we control for differences in specialties and practice locations. Furthermore,

conditional on these controls, MDs trained at unranked US medical schools still prescribe

similarly to physicians from the lowest third of ranked US medical schools, both among all

physicians and among GPs. However, unlike in Figure 1, foreign-trained doctors actually write

fewer opioid prescriptions than US-trained doctors once we control for specialty and county of

practice.

       The behavior of foreign-trained doctors is probed further in Figure 3. Here, we plot

coefficient estimates from a regression similar to the specification outlined in Equation (1)

except that the categories for ranked US schools are collapsed and indicators are added for world

region of training for foreign doctors. Conditional on specialty and county characteristics,

physicians trained in most regions outside of the US write significantly fewer opioid

prescriptions per year on average than physicians trained domestically. In fact, GPs trained in

the Caribbean, Canada, and Mexico/Central America are the only foreign-trained GPs who on

average write more opioid prescriptions per year than GPs trained at the top 30 US schools. The

stark differences between physicians trained in various regions of the world suggest considerable




                                                                                                   18
variation in attitudes towards opioids across world regions that practitioners bring with them to

the U.S., and provides further evidence that differences in training are likely to be important.20

       It is possible that we are not fully controlling for medical need by controlling for

physician specialty and county of practice. We can extend our analysis to compare the

prescribing practices of physicians who practice in the exact same hospital or clinic by including

practice address fixed effects in place of county fixed effects in Equations (1) and (2). The

results of this exercise for all physicians and GPs are shown in column (6) of Table 5 (see also

Figure S9). Even within the same practice, opioid prescribing increases with medical school

rank, although the relationship is flatter than in a specification without these controls. This

reduction in the relationship between medical school rank and prescribing practices within a

given practice location indicates either that practices tend to hire doctors with similar

propensities to prescribe opioids or that the opioid prescribing behavior of physicians is

influenced by the institutions where they practice and/or the behavior of their colleagues.


b. Prescribing Gradient Across Specialties

We next ask whether there are differences in the prescribing gradient across the top eight opioid-

prescribing specialties. As discussed in Section IV, if differences in opioid prescribing across

medical school ranks are in fact driven by differences in training, then we expect the rank of a

physician’s initial medical school to be a less important predictor of opioid prescribing behavior

among specialties that receive subsequent training in the use of opioids.

       Figure 4 shows that there is an inverse relationship between medical school rank and

opioid prescribing in most of the top eight opioid-prescribing specialties, although the

       20
         Figure S5 plots similar estimates from models without county controls both for all
physicians (Subfigure A) and for GPs (Subfigure B).



                                                                                                     19
relationship is generally much flatter in other specialties than that observed for GPs.21 This can

also be seen in Table 3, which provides estimates of Equation (2) for physicians in different

specialties. For pain medicine, physical medicine and rehabilitation, and anesthesiology—the

specialties where all practitioners could be expected to receive specific training in the use of

opioids, and which have high per capita prescribing of opioids relative to GPs22—we see

virtually no relationship between initial medical school rank and opioid prescribing, as

hypothesized above. For ER doctors, the figure indicates a relationship between rank and

prescribing that is basically flat up to about rank 50 and then increases. In the quadratic

regressions, this concavity is captured by a negative main effect and a positive coefficient on the

quadratic term, with a turnaround point right around rank 50, consistent with the figure.



c. Prescribing Gradient Across Cohorts

         We next turn to the question of cohort-level differences in the relationship between

medical school rank and opioid prescribing. As discussed in Section IV, if the prescribing

gradient is driven by physician selection into medical schools, then the gradient should be

stronger in more recent cohorts due to the increasing selectivity at top medical schools.

         We find that that the relationship between initial medical school rank and opioid

prescribing, while significant in all cohorts, has become consistently flatter over time. For GPs

who graduated from medical school before 1976 for instance, a regression of annual opioid

prescriptions on a quadratic in continuous medical school rank with year, specialty, and county



21
   Figure S6 shows similar figures for two specialties where many observers agree that opioids are often necessary
for adequate pain relief: oncology and nephrology. These figures show that a relationship between medical school
rank and opioid prescribing exists even among specialties where the use of opioids is uncontroversial, although the
relationship is much flatter than that found for GPs.
22
   As shown in Table S6, physicians in pain medicine write an average of 2,040.2 opioid prescriptions per year
compared to an average of 414.1 for GPs.


                                                                                                                  20
fixed effects (Equation (2)) yields a best fit line of y = 354.40 + 3.55x – 0.03x2 (column (2) of

Panel B) compared to the best fit line of y = 247.61 + 1.28x – 0.01x2 for the cohort that

graduated between 1996 and 2005 (column (5) of Panel B). This flattening gradient is

inconsistent with the idea that the relationship between medical school rank and opioid

prescribing is driven by selection into the top medical schools (see Figure S7 and Table S7).23



VI. Robustness

One limitation of these data is that they do not include information about the number of patients

seen by each physician. If doctors trained at top schools are more likely to engage part-time in

research or teaching and therefore see fewer patients than doctors from lower ranked medical

schools, then a correlation between medical school rank and prescriptions could emerge because

of differences in workloads. Unfortunately, there is currently no dataset available that has patient

volumes for every doctor in the US.

       Despite this limitation, it is unlikely that differences in the number of patients seen can

explain our findings. Recall that a strong relationship between prescribing and school rank

remains throughout the distribution of medical schools ranks. In order for patient volume to

explain our findings, GPs from the 30th ranked schools would have to see significantly fewer

patients on average than GPs from the 40th ranked schools, for example. We do not think there is

any evidence or reason to think that this is the case. Furthermore, large differences in opioid

prescribing patterns exist across foreign-trained physicians—a significant share of practicing US

physicians—depending on the world region in which they were trained. We are not aware of

evidence suggesting that there are large differences in patient volume by region of origin.

23
   Table S7 also shows results for pain medicine specialists separately. Consistent with the
figure for all cohorts, there is no statistically significant association between initial medical
school rank and opioid prescribing for pain specialists of any cohort.


                                                                                                     21
       To investigate the possibility of differential patient loads more formally, we provide two

additional analysis. First, we replicate our analysis excluding physicians who practice in a zip

code containing a university-affiliated hospital. If doctors from top-ranked medical schools see

fewer patients on average because they are more likely to engage part-time in teaching or

research, then we would expect our results to be attenuated when we exclude physicians in

university-affiliated zip codes. The results for all physicians and for GPs are remarkably

consistent with those discussed above (see Table S10, and Figure S8).

       Second, since publicly available Medicare data includes information on both the number

of Medicare beneficiaries seen and the number of opioid prescriptions written, we can verify that

our results are robust to using a prescription rate (total prescriptions divided by the total number

of unique patients) in the Medicare population. As shown in Figure 5, using total prescriptions or

prescription rates paints a very similar picture: physicians who attended higher ranked medical

schools prescribe significantly fewer opioids.

       Another limitation of the QuintilesIMS data is that we do not know either the number or

the strength of the pills included in each prescription. To the extent that physicians trained in

different specialties tend to prescribe opioids of different strengths, estimating models by

specialty as we have done above will help to mitigate the problem. Still, even within specialty, if

physicians trained at top schools always write prescriptions for a month’s supply of high-dose

opioids, whereas physicians trained at lower ranked schools always write prescriptions for a few

low-dose pills, then differences in the number of prescriptions could emerge without this

association having any bearing on the overall provision of opioids. However, even when looking

within a given county over time, there is a significant relationship between the number of opioid

prescriptions and deaths involving drugs: On average, a 10% increase in opioid prescriptions




                                                                                                    22
annually is associated with a 1.5% increase in deaths involving drugs each year (see Table S11).

This relationship suggests that differences in prescribing patterns are not fully offset by

differences in the number or strength of pills prescribed, and thus that it is meaningful to look at

the number of prescriptions as an indicator of physician practice style.

       A final limitation is that we only observe where each physician completed his or her

initial medical training. Hence we cannot say how the rankings of institutions where physicians

receive subsequent training are related to the propensity to prescribe opioids. However, the fact

that physicians in specialties with significant further training in pain management have flatter

relationships between opioid prescribing and initial medical school rank strongly suggests that

the nature and type of further training is an important determinant of physician practice style. If

physicians who receive their initial training at top medical schools are more likely to go on to

residencies that offer better training in the use of pain medications, then this could be viewed as

one of the mechanisms whereby initial medical school rank affects prescribing behavior.



VII. Discussion and Conclusions

This study offers several new facts about how doctor characteristics are related to their

propensity to prescribe opioids. First, between 2006 and 2014, nearly half of all opioids

prescribed by doctors were prescribed by GPs. This is true even though doctors in some

specialties, like pain medicine, write many more prescriptions per practitioner. Thus, it will be

important to understand and modify the prescribing behavior of GPs as well as those of doctors

in certain key specialties like pain medicine if the opioid epidemic is to be successfully

addressed.

       Second, there is a striking inverse relationship between the rank of a physician’s medical

school and his/her propensity to prescribe opioids, especially among GPs. Previous research


                                                                                                    23
indicating that differences in practice style are largely set as early as the first year of medical

practice (Epstein et al., 2016) suggests that the relationship between initial medical school rank

and opioid prescribing behavior could reflect differences in training regarding the appropriate

use of opioids across schools. An alternative hypothesis is that the estimated effect of medical

school rank on the propensity to prescribe opioids reflects differences in either the types of

patients seen by physicians who attend medical schools of higher and lower rank or the types of

physicians who are selected into these schools.

        While we cannot definitively rule out these alternatives, our ancillary results support the

training hypothesis. In particular, the relationship between medical school rank and propensity to

prescribe opioids persists even among specialists who attended different medical schools but

practice in the exact same hospital or clinic—where patients can be assumed to be relatively

homogenous in their need for opioids. Furthermore, the prescribing gradient is less pronounced

in specialties in which physicians might be expected to receive specialized training in dealing

with pain medications, such as pain medicine and anesthesiology. Finally, given the increasing

competition to get into top ranked medical schools, the fact that the relationship between medical

school rank and prescribing behavior has weakened over time (rather than strengthening) further

suggests that the relationship reflects the more rapid diffusion of best practices in top schools

rather than the selection of certain types of physicians.

        We cannot know how training regarding opioids has differed across medical schools over

time, or even whether the differences in prescribing practices that we see reflect specific training

about opioids. They might, for example, reflect more subtle differences in how doctors are

taught to think about potential harms from medication, or periodic reviews of medications that




                                                                                                      24
patients are taking. Or they might reflect physician attitudes towards evidence-based medicine

more generally.

        A review of the curricula at all four medical schools in Massachusetts found that there

was no standard in place to make sure that all students were taught safe and effective opioid-

prescribing practices before graduation (Antman et al., 2016). Recognizing that more

comprehensive training will be needed to improve prescriber practices, in March 2016 the White

House asked medical schools to pledge to include the Center for Disease Control’s new opioid-

prescribing guidelines in their curriculum. Over 60 medical schools announced that they would

update their curriculum by the fall of 2016, with 28% (43%) of ranked (unranked) US medical

schools taking the pledge.24 If such training is effective in reducing opioid prescribing, then

policy makers might consider offering stronger inducements for medical schools to incorporate

these guidelines.

        Taken together, our findings suggest that a doctor’s initial training has a large impact on

their attitudes towards opioid prescribing, especially for GPs who are less likely to receive

subsequent training in pain management. Since variations in opioid prescribing have contributed

to deaths due to the current opioid epidemic, training aimed at reducing prescribing rates among

the most liberal prescribers—who disproportionately come from the lowest ranked medical

schools—could possibly have large public health benefits. Physician education targeted to the

physicians responsible for the majority of the prescribing therefore likely has a role to play in

addressing the opioid epidemic.




24
  Refer to https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/2016/03/29/fact-sheet-obama-administration-
announces-additional-actions-address for a list of the medical schools that pledged to incorporate the CDC’s opioid-
prescribing guidelines; these guidelines are available at https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/rr/rr6501e1.htm.


                                                                                                                 25
REFERENCES

Alpert, A., D. Powell, and R.L. Pacula. “Supply-Side Drug Policy in the Presence of Substitutes:
Evidence from the Introduction of Abuse-Deterrent Opioids,” RAND Working Paper No. WR-
1181. 2016.

Antman, K.H., H.A. Berman, T.R. Flotte, J. Flier, D.M. Dimitri, M. Bharel. “Developing Core
Competencies for the Prevention and Management of Prescription Drug Misuse: A Medical
Education Collaboration in Massachusetts,” Academic Medicine. 2016; 91(10): 1348-1351.

Bao, Y., Y. Pan, A. Taylor, S. Radakrishnan, F. Luo, H.A. Pincus, and B.R. Schackman.
“Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs are Associated with Sustained Reductions In Opioid
Prescribing by Physicians,” Health Affairs. 2016; 35(6): 1045-1051.

Barnett, M., A. Olenski, and A. Jena. “Opioid-Prescribing Patterns of Emergency Physicians and
Risk of Long- Term Use,” The New England Journal of Medicine. 2017; 376: 663-673.

Brewer, D., E. Eric, and R. Ehrenberg. “Does It Pay to Attend an Elite Private College? Cross-
Cohort Evidence on the Effects of College Type on Earnings,” Journal of Human Resources.
1999; 34(1): 104–123.

Buchmueller, T.C. and C. Carey. “The Effect of Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs on
Opioid Utilization in Medicare,” NBER Working Paper No. 23148. 2017.

Case, A. and A. Deaton. “Rising Morbidity and Mortality in Midlife Among White Non-
Hispanic Americans in the 21st Century,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
2015; 112(49): 15078-15083.

Chen, L.H., H. Hedegaard, and M. Warner. “Drug-poisoning Deaths Involving Opioid
Analgesics: United States, 1999–2011,” NCHS Data Brief No. 166. 2014.

Cicero, T.J. and M.S. Ellis. “Effect of Abuse-Deterrent Formulation of OxyContin,” The New
England Journal of Medicine. 2012; 367(2): 187-189.

Coleman, J., E. Katz, and H. Menzel. “The Diffusion of an Innovation Among Physicians,”
Sociometry. 1957; 20(4): 253-270.

Dale, S.B. and A. Krueger. “Estimating the Payoff to Attending a More Selective College: An
Application of Selection on Observables and Unobservables,” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
2002; 117(4): 1491-1527.

Dart, R., H. Surratt, T. Cicero, M. Parrino, G. Severtson, B. Bucher-Bartelson, and J. Green.
“Trends in Opioid Analgesic Abuse and Mortality in the United States,” The New England
Journal of Medicine. 2015; 372: 241-248.

Dave, D.M., A.M. Grecu, and H. Saffer. “Mandatory Access Prescription Drug Monitoring
Programs and Prescription Drug Abuse,” NBER Working Paper No. 23537. 2017.


                                                                                                 26
Dowell, D., T.M. Haegerich, R. Chou. “CDC Guideline for Prescribing Opioids for Chronic
Pain—United States, 2016,” MMWR Recommendations and Reports. 2016; 65(1): 1-49.

Dowell, D., K. Zhang, R.K. Noonan, and J.M. Hockenberry. “Mandatory Provider Review And
Pain Clinic Laws Reduce The Amounts Of Opioids Prescribed And Overdose Death Rates,”
Health Affairs. 2016; 35(10): 1876–1883.

Doyle, J.J., S.M. Ewer, and T.H. Wagner. “Returns to Physician Human Capital: Evidence from
Patients Randomized to Physician Teams,” Journal of Health Economics. 2010; 29(6): 866-882.

Epstein, A.J. and S. Nicholson. “The Formation and Evolution of Physician Treatment Style: An
Application to Cesarean Sections,” Journal of Health Economics. 2009; 28(6): 1126-1240.

Epstein, A.J., S. Nicholson, and D.A. Asch. “The Production of and Market for New Physicians’
Skill,” American Journal of Health Economics, 2016; 2(1): 41-65.

Evans, W.N., E. Lieber, and P. Power. “How the Reformulation of OxyContin Ignited the Heroin
Epidemic,” Working Paper. 2017.

Haegerich, T., L. Paulozzi, B. Manns, and C. Jones. “What We Know, and Don't Know, About
the Impact of State Policy and Systems-Level Interventions on Prescription Drug Overdose,”
Drug and Alcohol Dependence. 2014; 145: 34-47.

Hartz, A.J., E.M. Kuhn, and J. Pulido. “Prestige of training programs and experience of bypass
surgeons as factors in adjusted patient mortality rates,” Medical Care. 1999; 37(1): 93–103.

Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
“Results from the 2013 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Summary of National
Findings,” NSDUH Series H-48, HHS Publication No. (SMA) 14-4863. 2014.

Hoekstra, M. “The Effect of Attending the Flagship State University on Earnings: A
Discontinuity-Based Approach,” The Review of Economics and Statistics. 2009; 91(4): 717-724.

Hoxby, C.M. “The Changing Selectivity of American Colleges,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives. 2009; 23(4): 95-118.

Hoxby, C.M. “The Dramatic Economics of the US Market for Higher Education,” NBER
Reporter. 2016; 3: 1-6.

Kennedy-Hendricks, A., M. Richey, E.E. McGinty, E.A. Stuart, C.L. Barry, and D.W. Webster.
“Opioid Overdose Deaths and Florida's Crackdown on Pill Mills,” American Journal of Public
Health. 2016; 106(2): 291-297.

Levy, B., L. Paulozzi, K. Mack, and C. Jones. “Trends in Opioid Analgesic-Prescribing Rates by
Specialty, US, 2007-2012,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2015; 49(3): 409-413.



                                                                                                 27
Lucas, F.L., B.E. Sirovich, P.M. Gallagher, A.E. Siewers, and D.E. Wennberg. “Variation in
Cardiologists’ Propensity to Test and Treat: Is it Associated with Regional Variation in
Utilization?,” Circulation: Cardiovascular Quality and Outcomes. 2010; 3(3): 253-260.

Meara, E., J. Horwitz, W. Powell, L. McClelland, W. Zhou, J. O'Malley, and N. Morden. “State
Legal Restrictions     and Prescription Opioid Use among Disabled Adults,” The New England
Journal of Medicine. 2016; 375: 44-53.

Meinhofer, A. “The War on Drugs: Estimating the Effect of Prescription Drug Supply-Side
Interventions,” Working Paper. 2016.

Mueller, S.R., A.Y. Walley, S.L. Calcaterra, J.M. Glanz, and I.A. Binswanger. “A Review of
Opioid Overdose Prevention and Naloxone Prescribing: Implications for Translating Community
Programming into Clinical Practice,” Substance Abuse. 2015; 36(2): 240–253.

Patrick, S.W., C.E. Fry, T.F. Jones, and M.B. Buntin. “Implementation of Prescription Drug
Monitoring Programs Associated With Reductions In Opioid-Related Death Rates,” Health
Affairs. 2016; 35(7):1324–1332.

Paulozzi, L.J., and E.M. Kilbourne, and H.A. Desai. “Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs
and Death Rates from Drug Overdose,” Pain Medicine. 2011; 12(5): 747–54.

Rees, D.I., J.J. Sabia, L.M. Argys, J. Latshaw, and D. Dhaval. “With a Little Help From my
Friends: The Effects of Naloxone Access and Good Samaritan Laws on Opioid-Related Deaths,”
NBER Working Paper No. 23171. 2017.

Reifler, L.M., D. Droz, J.E. Bailey, S.H. Schnoll, R. Fant, R.C. Dart, and B. Bucher-Bartelson.
“Do Prescription Monitoring Programs Impact State Trends in Opioid Abuse/Misuse?,” Pain
Medicine. 2012; 13.

Ringwalt, C., H. Gugelmann, M. Garrettson, N. Dasgupta, A. Chung, S. Proescholdbell, and A.
Skinner. “Differential Prescribing of Opioid Analgesics According to Physician Specialty for
Medicaid Patients with Chronic Noncancer Pain Diagnoses,” Pain Research and Management.
2014; 19(4): 179-185.

Rudd, R., N. Aleshire, J. Zibbell, and M. Gladden. “Increases in Drug and Opioid Overdose
Deaths—United States, 2000-2014,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR). 2016;
64(50): 1378-1382.

Soumerai, S., T. McLaughlin, J. Gurwitz, E. Guadagnoli, P. Hauptman, C. Borbas, N. Morris, B.
McLaughlin, X. Gao, D. Willison, R. Asinger, F. Gobel. “Effect of Local Medical Opinion
Leaders on Quality of Care for Acute Myocardial Infarction: A Randomized Controlled Trial,”
JAMA. 1998; 279: 1358-1363.

Volkow, N., T. McLellan, J. Cotto, M. Karithanom, and S. Weiss. “Characteristics of Opioid
Prescriptions in 2009,” JAMA. 2011; 305(13): 1299-1301.



                                                                                                  28
1     Figures


                                                                        Figure 1: Opioid Prescriptions by Medical School Rank

                     Annual opioid prescriptions per physician                            A. All physicians
                                                                 400
                      relative to Harvard (including zeroes)
                                                                 300
                                                                 200
                                                                 100




                                                                       ← Harvard
                                                                       1
                                                                   6− 5
                                                                  11 10
                                                                  16 15
                                                                  21 20
                                                                  26 25
                                                                  31 30
                                                                  36 35
                                                                  41 40
                                                                  46 45
                                                                  51 50
                                                                  56 55
                                                                  61 60
                                                                  66 65
                                                                  71 70
                                                                  76 75
                                                                  81 80
                                                                  86 85
                                                                       2


                                                                                                                              d D)
                                                                                                                               re )
                                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                             Fo DO
                                                                    2−




                                                                    −9




                                                                                                                                 ig
                                                                    nk



                                                                    −
                                                                    −
                                                                    −
                                                                    −
                                                                    −
                                                                    −
                                                                    −
                                                                    −
                                                                    −
                                                                    −
                                                                    −
                                                                    −
                                                                    −
                                                                    −
                                                                    −




                                                                                                                            ke M
                                                             Ra




                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                          an (
                                                                                                                       nr ed
                                                                                                                     U ank
                                                                                                                       nr
                                                                                                                     U


                                                                                       B. General practitioners
                                                                 600
                     Annual opioid prescriptions per physician
                      relative to Harvard (including zeroes)
                                                                 500
                                                                 400
                                                                 300
                                                                 200




                                                                       ← Harvard
                                                                        1
                                                                    6− 5
                                                                   11 10
                                                                   16 15
                                                                   21 20
                                                                   26 25
                                                                   31 30
                                                                   36 35
                                                                   41 40
                                                                   46 45
                                                                   51 50
                                                                   56 55
                                                                   61 60
                                                                   66 65
                                                                   71 70
                                                                   76 75
                                                                   81 80
                                                                   86 85
                                                                        2


                                                                                                                              d D)
                                                                                                                               re )
                                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                             Fo DO
                                                                     2−




                                                                     −9




                                                                                                                                 ig
                                                                      k


                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −




                                                                                                                            ke M
                                                                n
                                                             Ra




                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                          an (
                                                                                                                       nr ed
                                                                                                                     U ank
                                                                                                                       nr
                                                                                                                     U




Notes: The above figures depict the average number of opioid prescriptions written yearly per physician by medical school rank. Subfigure A
includes all physicians; Subfigure B only includes GPs (physicians in general practice, family practice, and internal medicine). Physician-years
with zero opioid prescriptions are included. The size of the marker indicates the number of physician-year observations in a given bin. Refer to
Tables S4 and S5 for the underlying averages for all physicians and GPs, respectively.



                                                                                                 29
       Figure 2: Opioid Prescriptions by Medical School Rank Controlling for Specialty and County of Practice

                                                               A. All physicians


                      100
                      50
                      0
                     Ra rva −50
                       nk rd

                          6− 5
                       11 10
                       16 15
                       21 20
                       26 25
                       31 30
                       36 35
                       41 40
                       46 45
                       51 50
                       56 55
                       61 60
                       66 65
                       71 70
                       76 75
                       81 80
                       86 85
                              2



                                                                                                               d )
                                                                                                              Fo O)
                                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                             ke D
                           2−




                           −9




                                                                                                                   ig
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −




                                                                                                           an (M
                                                                                                                (D
                                                                                                                re
                        a




                                                                                                        nr ed
                      H




                                                                                                       U nk
                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                        nr
                                                                                                      U
                                                          B. General practitioners
                      150
                      100
                      50
                      0
                     Ra rva −50
                       nk rd

                          6− 5
                       11 10
                       16 15
                       21 20
                       26 25
                       31 30
                       36 35
                       41 40
                       46 45
                       51 50
                       56 55
                       61 60
                       66 65
                       71 70
                       76 75
                       81 80
                       86 85
                              2



                                                                                                               d )
                                                                                                              Fo O)
                                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                             ke D
                           2−




                           −9




                                                                                                                   ig
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −
                           −




                                                                                                           an (M
                                                                                                                (D
                                                                                                                re
                        a




                                                                                                        nr ed
                      H




                                                                                                       U nk
                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                        nr
                                                                                                      U




Notes: The above figures depict the coefficient estimates on indicators for medical school rank bins from regressions of opioid prescriptions at the
physician-year level on medical school rank bin indicators with year, specialty, and county fixed effects (Equation (1)). Subfigure A includes all
physicians; Subfigure B only includes GPs (physicians in general practice, family practice, and internal medicine). Physician-years with zero opioid
prescriptions are included. The bars denote 95% confidence intervals; standard errors are clustered by physician. Refer to Tables S8 and S9 for the
underlying coefficient estimates for all physicians and GPs, respectively.




                                                                        30
   Figure 3: Opioid Prescriptions by Regions of Foreign Schools Controlling for Specialty and County of Practice

                                                                                                  A. All physicians


                      Annual opioid prescriptions per physician
                                                                  100
                       relative to Harvard (including zeroes)
                                                                  50
                                                                  0
                                                                  −50
                                                                  −100


                                                                                      1− 0
                                                                               a 6 0
                                                                            nr d 92
                                                                                   d )
                                                                                           )



                                                                                                            + Ca an
                                                                                                            u m a
                                                                                                      E est Am ica
                                                                                                       W ope Eur ca
                                                                                                            ,a R e
                                                                                                                 C a
                                                                                                             t E a
                                                                                                      E a rn A sia
                                                                                                            So A a
                                                                                                                h ca
                                                                                                            nc c a
                                                                                                                  or a
                                                                                                                       ed
                                                                                 ke D
                                                                                        O




                                                                                                         So A nad



                                                                                                         , S + op
                                                                                                          SE nd ussi
                                                                                                          or d si


                                                                                                         d C ric


                                                                                                          U O fric
                                                                                                                eg i
                                                                                         3
                                                                                        6




                                                                                                              at ean
                                                                                                           r n i




                                                                                                              ut fri
                                                                                                                   be




                                                                                                                    iz
                                                                                      1−


                                                                          U nke 1−
                                                                               an (M
                                                                                     (D




                                                                                                        N an A
                                                                                                        W he A
                                                                                                        W th er
                                                                                                       Eu er er




                                                                                                       an nd f


                                                                                                                  A
                                                                                                  rib
                                                                                    3
                                                                         nk




                                                                                                 Ca
                                                                   Ra




                                                                                                              C
                                                                            nr




                                                                                                        o
                                                                          U




                                                                                                      ic
                                                                                                  ex
                                                                                                 M




                                                                                               B. General practitioners
                      Annual opioid prescriptions per physician
                                                                  100
                       relative to Harvard (including zeroes)
                                                                  0
                                                                  −100
                                                                  −200


                                                                                      1− 0
                                                                               a 6 0
                                                                            nr d 92
                                                                                   d )
                                                                                           )



                                                                                                           + Ca an
                                                                                                           u m a
                                                                                                     E est Am ica
                                                                                                      W ope Eur ca
                                                                                                           ,a R e
                                                                                                                C a
                                                                                                            t E a
                                                                                                     E a rn A sia
                                                                                                           So A a
                                                                                                               h ca
                                                                                                           nc c a
                                                                                                                  or a
                                                                                                                       ed
                                                                                 ke D
                                                                                        O




                                                                                                        So A nad



                                                                                                        , S + op
                                                                                                         SE nd ussi
                                                                                                         or d si


                                                                                                        d C ric


                                                                                                         U O fric
                                                                                                               eg i
                                                                                         3
                                                                                        6




                                                                                                             at ean
                                                                                                          r n i




                                                                                                             ut fri
                                                                                                                    be




                                                                                                                    iz
                                                                                      1−


                                                                          U nke 1−
                                                                               an (M
                                                                                     (D




                                                                                                       N an A
                                                                                                       W he A
                                                                                                       W th er
                                                                                                      Eu er er




                                                                                                      an nd f


                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                                 ib
                                                                                    3
                                                                         nk




                                                                                                    r
                                                                                                 Ca
                                                                   Ra




                                                                                                             C
                                                                            nr




                                                                                                        o
                                                                          U




                                                                                                      ic
                                                                                                  ex
                                                                                                 M




Notes: The above figures depict the coefficient estimates on indicators for medical school rank bins for US-trained physicians and regions of
training for foreign-trained physicians from regressions of opioid prescriptions at the physician-year level on medical school rank bin or region
indicators with year, specialty, and county fixed effects (variants of Equation (1)). Subfigure A includes all physicians; Subfigure B only includes
GPs (physicians in general practice, family practice, and internal medicine). Physician-years with zero opioid prescriptions are included. The bars
denote 95% confidence intervals; standard errors are clustered by physician. Refer to Tables S8 and S9 for the underlying coefficient estimates for
all physicians and GPs, respectively.




                                                                                                            31
                                                                                                                                                                        Annual opioid prescriptions per physician relative to Harvard (including zeroes)
                                                                                                                                                                    H           −100   0       100    200   300                             H           −500   0   500   1000   1500                                                  H           −50     0   50     100    150                                 H           −50    0      50   100    150
                                                                                                                                                                   Ra arv                                                                  Ra arv                                                                                    Ra arv                                                                    Ra arv
                                                                                                                                                                     nk ard                                                                  nk ard                                                                                    nk ard                                                                    nk ard
                                                                                                                                                                        2−                                                                      2−                                                                                        2−                                                                        2−
                                                                                                                                                                       6− 5                                                                    6− 5                                                                                      6− 5                                                                      6− 5
                                                                                                                                                                      11 10                                                                   11 10                                                                                     11 10                                                                     11 10
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      16 15                                                                   16 15                                                                                     16 15                                                                     16 15
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      21 20                                                                   21 20                                                                                     21 20                                                                     21 20
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      26 25                                                                   26 25                                                                                     26 25                                                                     26 25
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      31 30                                                                   31 30                                                                                     31 30                                                                     31 30
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      36 35                                                                   36 35                                                                                     36 35                                                                     36 35
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      41 40                                                                   41 40                                                                                     41 40                                                                     41 40
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      46 45                                                                   46 45                                                                                     46 45                                                                     46 45
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      51 50                                                                   51 50                                                                                     51 50                                                                     51 50
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      56 55                                                                   56 55                                                                                     56 55                                                                     56 55
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      61 60                                                                   61 60                                                                                     61 60                                                                     61 60
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      66 65                                                                   66 65                                                                                     66 65                                                                     66 65
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      71 70                                                                   71 70                                                                                     71 70                                                                     71 70
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      76 75                                                                   76 75                                                                                     76 75                                                                     76 75
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Anesthesiology
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              General Practice




                                                                                                                                                                      81 80                                                                   81 80                                                                                     81 80                                                                     81 80
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      86 85                                                                   86 85                                                                                     86 85                                                                     86 85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Emergency Medicine




                                                                                                                                                            U           −9
                                                                                                                                                                           2                                                        U           −9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2                                                                         U           −9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2                                                          U           −9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                              nr                                                                      nr                                                                                        nr                                                                        nr
                                                                                                                                                            U ank                                                                   U ank                                                                                     U ank                                                                     U ank
                                                                                                                                                              nr e                                                                    nr e                                                                                      nr e                                                                      nr e
                                                                                                                                                                 an d (                                                                  an d (                                                                                    an d (                                                                    an d (
                                                                                                                                                                   ke M                                                                    ke M                                                                                      ke M                                                                      ke M
                                                                                                                                                                     d D                                                                     d D                                                                                       d D                                                                       d D
                                                                                                                                                                       ( )                                                                     ( )                                                                                       ( )                                                                       ( )




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation
                                                                                                                                                                    Fo DO                                                                   Fo DO                                                                                     Fo DO                                                                     Fo DO
                                                                                                                                                                       re )                                                                    re )                                                                                      re )                                                                      re )
                                                                                                                                                                         ig                                                                      ig                                                                                        ig                                                                        ig
                                                                                                                                                                            n                                                                       n                                                                                         n                                                                         n




32
                                                                                                                                                                    H           −50        0         50     100                             H            −20   0   20    40     60                                                    H           −1000   0   1000   2000   3000                                H           −200   −100    0    100     200
                                                                                                                                                                   Ra arv                                                                  Ra arv                                                                                    Ra arv                                                                    Ra arv
                                                                                                                                                                     nk ard                                                                  nk ard                                                                                    nk ard                                                                    nk ard
                                                                                                                                                                        2−                                                                      2−                                                                                        2−                                                                        2−
                                                                                                                                                                       6− 5                                                                    6− 5                                                                                      6− 5                                                                      6− 5
                                                                                                                                                                      11 10                                                                   11 10                                                                                     11 10                                                                     11 10
                                                                                                                                                                        −1                                                                      −1                                                                                        −1                                                                        −1
                                                                                                                                                                      16 5                                                                    16 5                                                                                      16 5                                                                      16 5
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      21 20                                                                   21 20                                                                                     21 20                                                                     21 20
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      26 25                                                                   26 25                                                                                     26 25                                                                     26 25
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      31 30                                                                   31 30                                                                                     31 30                                                                     31 30
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      36 35                                                                   36 35                                                                                     36 35                                                                     36 35
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      41 40                                                                   41 40                                                                                     41 40                                                                     41 40
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      46 45                                                                   46 45                                                                                     46 45                                                                     46 45
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      51 50                                                                   51 50                                                                                     51 50                                                                     51 50
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      56 55                                                                   56 55                                                                                     56 55                                                                     56 55
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      61 60                                                                   61 60                                                                                     61 60                                                                     61 60
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      66 65                                                                   66 65                                                                                     66 65                                                                     66 65
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      71 70                                                                   71 70                                                                                     71 70                                                                     71 70
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                      76 75                                                                   76 75                                                                                     76 75                                                                     76 75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pain Medicine




                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  General Surgery
                                                                                                                                                                      81 80                                                                   81 80                                                                                     81 80                                                                     81 80
                                                                                                                                                                        −                                                                       −                                                                                         −                                                                         −
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Orthopaedic Surgery




                                                                                                                                                                      86 85                                                                   86 85                                                                                     86 85                                                                     86 85
                                                                                                                                                            U           −9
                                                                                                                                                                           2                                                        U           −9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2                                                                         U           −9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2                                                          U           −9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                              nr                                                                      nr                                                                                        nr                                                                        nr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Obstetrics and Gynecology




                                                                                                                                                            U ank                                                                   U ank                                                                                     U ank                                                                     U ank
                                                                                                                                                              nr e                                                                    nr e                                                                                      nr e                                                                      nr e
                                                                                                                                                                 an d (                                                                  an d (                                                                                    an d (                                                                    an d (
                                                                                                                                                                   ke M                                                                    ke M                                                                                      ke M                                                                      ke M




     opioid prescriptions are included. The bars denote 95% confidence intervals; standard errors are clustered by physician.
                                                                                                                                                                     d D                                                                     d D                                                                                       d D                                                                       d D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 4: Opioid Prescriptions by Medical School Rank Across Specialties




                                                                                                                                                                       ( )                                                                     ( )                                                                                       ( )                                                                       ( )
                                                                                                                                                                    Fo DO                                                                   Fo DO                                                                                     Fo DO                                                                     Fo DO
                                                                                                                                                                       re )                                                                    re )                                                                                      re )                                                                      re )
                                                                                                                                                                         ig                                                                      ig                                                                                        ig                                                                        ig
                                                                                                                                                                            n                                                                       n                                                                                         n                                                                         n




     are the 8 specialties out of 57 specialties with the most opioid prescriptions collectively from 2006-2014 (Table S6). Physician-years with zero
     physician-year level on medical school rank bin indicators with year and county fixed effects (variants of Equation (1)). The displayed specialties
     Notes: The above figures depict the coefficient estimates on indicators for medical school rank bins from regressions of opioid prescriptions at the
            Figure 5: Opioid Prescriptions by Medical School Rank: Levels versus Rates in Medicare Part D

                                                                         A. All physicians




                                                                200




                                                                                                                  .7
                                                                                                                       Average annual opioid prescription rate
                      billed to Medicare Part D per physician
                       Average annual opioid prescriptions




                                                                                                                         per physician in Medicare Part D
                                                                150




                                                                                                                  .6
                                                                100




                                                                                                                  .5
                                                                                                    Levels
                                                                                                    Rates
                                                                50




                                                                                                                  .4
                                                        nk rd

                                                           6− 5
                                                        11 10
                                                        16 15
                                                        21 20
                                                        26 25
                                                        31 30
                                                        36 35
                                                        41 40
                                                        46 45
                                                        51 50
                                                        56 55
                                                        61 60
                                                        66 65
                                                        71 70
                                                        76 75
                                                        81 80
                                                        86 85
                                                               2
                                                            2−




                                                            −9
                                                      Ra rva



                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                         a
                                                       H




                                                                      B. General practitioners
                                                                350




                                                                                                                  .9
                                                                                                                       Average annual opioid prescription rate
                      billed to Medicare Part D per physician
                       Average annual opioid prescriptions




                                                                                                                         per physician in Medicare Part D
                                                                300




                                                                                                                  .8
                                                                250




                                                                                                                  .7
                                                                200




                                                                                                                  .6
                                                                150




                                                                                                    Levels
                                                                                                    Rates
                                                                 100




                                                                                                                  .5
                                                        nk rd

                                                           6− 5
                                                        11 10
                                                        16 15
                                                        21 20
                                                        26 25
                                                        31 30
                                                        36 35
                                                        41 40
                                                        46 45
                                                        51 50
                                                        56 55
                                                        61 60
                                                        66 65
                                                        71 70
                                                        76 75
                                                        81 80
                                                        86 85
                                                               2
                                                            2−




                                                            −9
                                                      Ra rva



                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                            −
                                                         a
                                                       H




Notes: The above figures depict the (i) average number of opioid prescriptions written per physician and the (ii) average opioid prescription rate
per physician in Medicare Part D in 2014. Subfigure A includes all physicians; Subfigure B only includes GPs (physicians in general practice,
family practice, and internal medicine). Data on both the number of opioid prescriptions billed to Medicare Part D and the number of Medicare
beneficiaries seen per physician are taken from CMS’s public use Medicare files; this data is merged via NPI with CMS’s Physician Compare
database to extract medical school for each provider.




                                                                                33
2     Tables


                     Table 1: Opioid Prescriptions and Practice Characteristics by Medical School Rank
                                                                              U.S. Ranked                       U.S. Unranked

                                                      Full         Top 30         31-60         61-92         M.D.           D.O.        Foreign
                                                     sample

 N physicians                                       742,297   134,119   142,822   127,007                    96,644        49,376       192,329
 N physician-years (9 years/ physician)             6,680,673 1,207,071 1,285,398 1,143,063                  869,796       444,384      1,730,961
 Opioid prescriptions
   Total (100 million)                                15.7            2.1           3.0           3.1           2.3           1.8          3.3
   Average per physician-year                        235.7          172.4         235.3         273.7         269.0         414.3         192.3
     including zeroes                                (1.4)          (2.4)         (2.9)         (3.6)         (4.1)         (7.2)         (2.7)
   Average per physician-year                        319.0          240.3         309.5         356.2         348.6         501.7         283.1
     excluding zeroes                                (1.8)          (3.2)         (3.7)         (4.5)         (5.2)         (8.4)         (3.8)
   Zeroes (% physician-years)                         26.1           28.3          24.0          23.2          22.8          17.4          32.1
 Specialties (% physicians)
   General practice                                   27.4          19.2          24.5           25.0          24.2          50.7          32.6
   Orthopaedic surgery                                 3.3          4.7           4.2            3.9           3.7           2.8           1.1
   Emergency medicine                                  4.5          4.3           5.7            5.5           5.7           8.2           1.5
   Pain medicine                                       0.5          0.3           0.5            0.5           0.5           0.6           0.7
   Physical medicine & rehabilitation                  1.1           0.7           1.0            1.1           1.3           1.8          1.2
   Obstetrics & gynecology                             5.4          5.2           5.9            6.5           7.1           4.5           3.6
   Anesthesiology                                      4.4          3.9           4.7            4.8           4.4           3.9           4.3
   General surgery                                     4.0          4.3           4.3            4.6           4.4           2.7           3.5
 County of practice (avg across phys-yrs)
   Pop density (People/1000 sq miles)                  3.6           4.9           3.0            2.3           3.6           2.0          4.5
   Percent white                                      71.0          69.2          72.2           72.6          70.0          76.8          69.4
   Percent HS or less                                 40.0          37.7          39.0           40.0          40.7          42.1          41.6
   Percent unemployed                                  9.3          9.2           9.2            9.1           9.2           9.4           9.7
   Median household income                            53.7          55.8          54.4           52.4          52.8          51.9          53.4
   Percent poverty                                    13.9          13.7          13.6           13.9          14.1          13.6          14.0
   Percent uninsured                                  14.4          13.9          14.1           14.1          14.8          14.0          14.9
 Zipcode of practice (% physicians)
   Contains university-affiliated hosp                45.0          51.1          45.4           44.9          43.7          30.6          44.9

Notes: Standard errors are displayed in parentheses and are clustered by physician. The displayed specialties are the top 8 specialties out of the 57
with the most opioid prescriptions collectively from 2006-2014 (Table S6). The prescription statistics are raw averages; that is, they do not control
for physician specialty or county of practice.




                                                                        34
                                        Table 2: Opioid Prescriptions by Medical School Rank
 A. All physicians                                                         Annual opioid prescriptions

                                        (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)                (5)                 (6)

 Medical rank                        2.439***           1.243***            1.524***            1.502***            0.635***           0.263***
                                      (0.120)            (0.110)             (0.119)             (0.118)             (0.109)            (0.097)
 (Medical rank)2                    -0.007***             0.001            -0.008***           -0.010***           -0.003***            -0.002
                                      (0.001)            (0.001)             (0.001)             (0.001)             (0.001)            (0.001)
 Constant                          117.071***           71.847**          -9.1e+03***         164.871***          111.570***          232.763***
                                      (2.074)           (30.845)            (623.952)            (2.120)            (31.767)           (39.732)
 Specialty FEs                          No                  Yes                No                  No                  Yes                 Yes
 County demographics                    No                  No                 Yes                 No                  No                  No
 County FEs                             No                  No                 No                  Yes                 Yes                 No
 Practice address FEs                   No                  No                 No                  No                  No                  Yes
 N (physician-years)                3,635,532           3,635,532           3,635,532          3,635,532           3,635,532           3,635,532
 R2                                   0.006               0.147               0.039              0.064               0.194               0.525

 B. General practitioners                                                  Annual opioid prescriptions

                                        (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)                (5)                 (6)

 Medical rank                        4.147***           2.995***            2.644***            2.784***            2.418***            1.441***
                                      (0.309)            (0.307)             (0.301)             (0.292)             (0.292)             (0.257)
 (Medical rank)2                    -0.011***            -0.003            -0.015***           -0.021***           -0.018***           -0.014***
                                      (0.003)            (0.003)             (0.003)             (0.003)             (0.003)             (0.003)
 Constant                          202.380***          321.419***         -8.3e+03***         295.736***          354.644***          362.420***
                                      (5.818)            (6.521)           (1297.679)            (5.712)             (6.264)             (5.713)
 Specialty FEs                          No                  Yes                No                  No                  Yes                 Yes
 County demographics                    No                  No                 Yes                 No                  No                  No
 County FEs                             No                  No                 No                  Yes                 Yes                 No
 Practice address FEs                   No                  No                 No                  No                  No                  Yes
 N (physician-years)                 832,005             832,005              832,005            832,005            832,005             832,005
 R2                                   0.014               0.029                0.096              0.174              0.178               0.636

Notes: The above table presents output from regressions of opioid prescriptions at the physician-year level on a quadratic in medical school rank
(variants of Equation (2)). All specifications include year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by physician. Panel A includes all physicians;
Panel B only includes GPs (physicians in general practice, family practice, and internal medicine). Column (3) includes the following county-level
controls: population density; percent male; percent in 12 age bins; percent white, black, and Hispanic; percent in seven education categories; percent
unemployed; percent in 16 income categories; percent poverty for three different age ranges; percent with public and private health insurance; and
median age of housing stock.




                                                                         35
                           Table 3: Opioid Prescriptions by Medical School Rank Across Specialties
                                                           Annual opioid prescriptions (including zeroes)

                           (1)             (2)        (3)                 (4)              (5)             (6)            (7)              (8)
 Specialty:              General        Orthopaedic Emergency            Pain           Phy. med.        Ob./gyn.       Anesthe-         General
                         practice        surgery    medicine            medicine         & rehab.                       siology          surgery

 Medical rank           2.418***    1.920**    -0.631*                    -3.814          -4.467        0.658***           0.788       0.650***
                          (0.292)    (0.846)    (0.368)                  (9.275)         (4.110)          (0.181)         (0.865)        (0.244)
 (Medical rank)2        -0.018***   -0.018*   0.013***                    0.038            0.067         -0.005**          -0.003         -0.003
                          (0.003)    (0.009)    (0.004)                  (0.101)         (0.044)          (0.002)         (0.010)        (0.003)
 Constant               354.644*** 537.923*** 70.700***                 1507.539***      301.616        87.348***        -26.520       126.145***
                          (6.264)   (20.956)   (20.580)                 (207.711)       (328.576)        (22.719)        (23.612)       (20.778)
 N (phys-years)          832,005         155,547         187,785          15,318          33,462         213,282         162,225         158,913
 R2                       0.178           0.195           0.245            0.356          0.288           0.210           0.118           0.235

Notes: The above table presents output from regressions of opioid prescriptions at the physician-year level on a quadratic in medical school rank
with year and county fixed effects (variants of Equation (2)) estimated separately across different specialties. Standard errors are clustered by
physician. The displayed specialties are the 8 specialties out of 57 specialties with the most opioid prescriptions collectively from 2006-2014 (Table
S6).




                                                                         36
A      Supplementary Tables and Figures


               Figure S1: Number of Physicians and Medical Schools Across Rankings and World Regions



                                                     1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                   8
                                                                                                                                                                             695




                                                                                                                                                                                       N medical schools (100s)
                           N physicians (100,000s)




                                                                                                                                                                                   6
                                                     1




                                                                                                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                                                             258
                                                     .5




                                                                                                                                 174




                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                       107         111
                                                                                                                            83
                                                            30     30                       32   35        35         47
                                                                                                      20         19                                      21   20   15   12
                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                              31 0
                                                                      a 6 0
                                                                    nr d 2
                                                                            d )
                                                                              ib )
                                                                      + Ca an
                                                                      u m a
                                                             E st m ca

                                                              W ope Eur a
                                                                      , a Ru e
                                                                   SE nd C ssia

                                                                       t E ia
                                                            E an A ia
                                                                      So A a
                                                                           h ca
                                                                   U O rica
                                                                           eg ia
                                                                                     ed
                                                                          ke D
                                                                         Ca (DO


                                                                  So A ad


                                                                                   ic
                                                                  , S + op




                                                                   d C ic
                                                                                    3
                                                                                  −6
                                                                 U nke 1−9




                                                                 N and As
                                                                 W hern As




                                                                         at an
                                                                 W th A eri




                                                                         ut fri
                                                                                be




                                                                                  iz
                                                                                1−



                                                                       an (M




                                                                Eu ern er




                                                               an d fr
                                                                                n




                                                                                 f
                                                                      nc ce
                                                                               or
                                                                              A
                                                     nk




                                                                            r
                                          Ra




                                                                        C




                                                                   or
                                                                   nr




                                                                    e
                                                                    r
                                                                   o
                                                                 U




                                                                ic
                                                             ex
                                                           M




                                                                                                                           N physicians
                                                                                                                           N medical schools


Notes: Rankings for the top 92 US schools are defined as in Section II. US medical schools that are not ranked are divided by whether they grant the
degree of DO or MD. Foreign medical schools are grouped according to the UN’s classification of countries by world regions. For foreign medical
schools with 10 or more opioid prescribers in our main sample, we googled the medical school and recorded the country of the school’s primary
campus. For foreign medical schools with fewer than 10 opioid prescribers in our main sample, we assign the medical school to the “Uncategorized”
group.




                                                      Figure S2: Persistence Across Medical School Rankings Over Time
                                                                                80
                                                                   Annual rankings (2010−2017)
                                                                 20         40          60




                                                                                                                                       2010−2016 rankings
                                                                                                                                       2017 ranking
                                                                                0




                                                                                                 0          20           40         60                        80
                                                                                                                 Average ranking: 2010−2017

Notes: The above figure depicts how our composite ranking compares to annual rankings from 2010 to 2017. For each composite rank on the x-axis,
there are up to eight observations denoting the corresponding medical school’s rank in each year between 2010 and 2017. Annual rankings from
2010-2016 are denoted by a point; the most recent ratings (2017) are denoted by a cross.



                                                                                                                              37
                                                           Figure S3: Opioid Prescriptions by Medical School Rank: All Physicians

                                                                              A. Average per physician (excluding zeroes)




                                                                  500
                      Annual opioid prescriptions per physician
                       relative to Harvard (excluding zeroes)
                                                                  400
                                                                  300
                                                                  200




                                                                        ← Harvard
                                                                  100
                                                                        1
                                                                    6− 5
                                                                   11 10
                                                                   16 15
                                                                   21 20
                                                                   26 25
                                                                   31 30
                                                                   36 35
                                                                   41 40
                                                                   46 45
                                                                   51 50
                                                                   56 55
                                                                   61 60
                                                                   66 65
                                                                   71 70
                                                                   76 75
                                                                   81 80
                                                                   86 85
                                                                        2


                                                                                                                                   d D)
                                                                                                                                    re )
                                                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                                  Fo DO
                                                                     2−




                                                                     −9




                                                                                                                                      ig
                                                                     nk



                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −




                                                                                                                                 ke M
                                                              Ra




                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                               an (
                                                                                                                            nr ed
                                                                                                                          U ank
                                                                                                                            nr
                                                                                                                          U
                                                                                B. Percent with no opioid prescriptions
                                                                  .35




                                                                        ← Harvard
                      Percent of phy−yrs w/ zero opioid
                       prescriptions relative to Harvard
                                                                  .3
                                                                  .25
                                                                  .2
                                                                  .15
                                                                        1
                                                                    6− 5
                                                                   11 10
                                                                   16 15
                                                                   21 20
                                                                   26 25
                                                                   31 30
                                                                   36 35
                                                                   41 40
                                                                   46 45
                                                                   51 50
                                                                   56 55
                                                                   61 60
                                                                   66 65
                                                                   71 70
                                                                   76 75
                                                                   81 80
                                                                   86 85
                                                                        2


                                                                                                                                   d D)
                                                                                                                                    re )
                                                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                                  Fo DO
                                                                     2−




                                                                     −9




                                                                                                                                      ig
                                                                     nk



                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −




                                                                                                                                 ke M
                                                              Ra




                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                               an (
                                                                                                                            nr ed
                                                                                                                          U ank
                                                                                                                            nr
                                                                                                                          U




Notes: The above figures depict the average number of opioid prescriptions written yearly per physician conditional on writing at least one opioid
prescription (Subfigure A) and the percent of physician-year observations with zero opioid prescriptions (Subfigure B) by medical school rank.
All physicians are included; Figure S4 provides an analogous figure for GPs only. The size of the marker indicates the number of physician-year
observations in a given bin. Refer to Table S4 for the underlying averages.




                                                                                                  38
                              Figure S4: Opioid Prescriptions by Medical School Rank: General Practitioners

                                                                              A. Average per physician (excluding zeroes)


                      Annual opioid prescriptions per physician
                                                                  600
                       relative to Harvard (excluding zeroes)
                                                                  500
                                                                  400
                                                                  300




                                                                        ← Harvard
                                                                  200
                                                                        1
                                                                    6− 5
                                                                   11 10
                                                                   16 15
                                                                   21 20
                                                                   26 25
                                                                   31 30
                                                                   36 35
                                                                   41 40
                                                                   46 45
                                                                   51 50
                                                                   56 55
                                                                   61 60
                                                                   66 65
                                                                   71 70
                                                                   76 75
                                                                   81 80
                                                                   86 85
                                                                        2


                                                                                                                                   d D)
                                                                                                                                    re )
                                                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                                  Fo DO
                                                                     2−




                                                                     −9




                                                                                                                                      ig
                                                                     nk



                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −




                                                                                                                                 ke M
                                                              Ra




                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                               an (
                                                                                                                            nr ed
                                                                                                                          U ank
                                                                                                                            nr
                                                                                                                          U
                                                                                B. Percent with no opioid prescriptions
                                                                  .3
                      Percent of phy−yrs w/ zero opioid




                                                                        ← Harvard
                       prescriptions relative to Harvard
                                                                  .25
                                                                  .2
                                                                  .15
                                                                  .1
                                                                        1
                                                                    6− 5
                                                                   11 10
                                                                   16 15
                                                                   21 20
                                                                   26 25
                                                                   31 30
                                                                   36 35
                                                                   41 40
                                                                   46 45
                                                                   51 50
                                                                   56 55
                                                                   61 60
                                                                   66 65
                                                                   71 70
                                                                   76 75
                                                                   81 80
                                                                   86 85
                                                                        2


                                                                                                                                   d D)
                                                                                                                                    re )
                                                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                                  Fo DO
                                                                     2−




                                                                     −9




                                                                                                                                      ig
                                                                     nk



                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −
                                                                     −




                                                                                                                                 ke M
                                                              Ra




                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                               an (
                                                                                                                            nr ed
                                                                                                                          U ank
                                                                                                                            nr
                                                                                                                          U




Notes: The above figures depict the average number of opioid prescriptions written yearly per physician conditional on writing at least one opioid
prescription (Subfigure A) and the percent of physician-year observations with zero opioid prescriptions (Subfigure B) by medical school rank. Only
GPs are included (physicians in general practice, family practice, and internal medicine); Figure S3 provides an analogous figure for all physicians.
The size of the marker indicates the number of physician-year observations in a given bin. Refer to Table S5 for the underlying averages.




                                                                                                  39
                       Figure S5: Opioid Prescriptions by US Rankings and Regions of Foreign Schools

                                                                                                A. All physicians


                     Annual opioid prescriptions per physician
                      relative to Harvard (including zeroes)
                                                                 400
                                                                 300
                                                                 200
                                                                 100


                                                                                    1− 0
                                                                             a 6 0
                                                                          nr d 92
                                                                                 d )
                                                                                         )



                                                                                                          + Ca an
                                                                                                          u m a
                                                                                                    E est Am ica
                                                                                                     W ope Eur ca
                                                                                                          ,a R e
                                                                                                               C a
                                                                                                           t E a
                                                                                                    E a rn A sia
                                                                                                          So A a
                                                                                                              h ca
                                                                                                          nc c a
                                                                                                                or a
                                                                                                                     ed
                                                                               ke D
                                                                                      O




                                                                                                       So A nad



                                                                                                       , S + op
                                                                                                        SE nd ussi
                                                                                                        or d si


                                                                                                       d C ric


                                                                                                        U O fric
                                                                                                              eg i
                                                                                       3
                                                                                      6




                                                                                                            at ean
                                                                                                         r n i




                                                                                                            ut fri
                                                                                                                 be




                                                                                                                  iz
                                                                                    1−


                                                                        U nke 1−
                                                                             an (M
                                                                                   (D




                                                                                                      N an A
                                                                                                      W he A
                                                                                                      W th er
                                                                                                     Eu er er




                                                                                                     an nd f


                                                                                                                A
                                                                                                rib
                                                                                  3
                                                                       nk




                                                                                               Ca
                                                                 Ra




                                                                                                            C
                                                                          nr




                                                                                                      o
                                                                        U




                                                                                                    ic
                                                                                                ex
                                                                                               M




                                                                                             B. General practitioners
                     Annual opioid prescriptions per physician
                                                                 600
                      relative to Harvard (including zeroes)
                                                                 500
                                                                 400
                                                                 300
                                                                 200
                                                                 100


                                                                                    1− 0
                                                                             a 6 0
                                                                          nr d 92
                                                                                 d )
                                                                                         )



                                                                                                         + Ca an
                                                                                                         u m a
                                                                                                   E est Am ica
                                                                                                    W ope Eur ca
                                                                                                         ,a R e
                                                                                                              C a
                                                                                                          t E a
                                                                                                   E a rn A sia
                                                                                                         So A a
                                                                                                             h ca
                                                                                                         nc c a
                                                                                                                or a
                                                                                                                     ed
                                                                               ke D
                                                                                      O




                                                                                                      So A nad



                                                                                                      , S + op
                                                                                                       SE nd ussi
                                                                                                       or d si


                                                                                                      d C ric


                                                                                                       U O fric
                                                                                                             eg i
                                                                                       3
                                                                                      6




                                                                                                           at ean
                                                                                                        r n i




                                                                                                           ut fri
                                                                                                                  be




                                                                                                                  iz
                                                                                    1−


                                                                        U nke 1−
                                                                             an (M
                                                                                   (D




                                                                                                     N an A
                                                                                                     W he A
                                                                                                     W th er
                                                                                                    Eu er er




                                                                                                    an nd f


                                                                                                               A
                                                                                                               ib
                                                                                  3
                                                                       nk




                                                                                                  r
                                                                                               Ca
                                                                 Ra




                                                                                                           C
                                                                          nr




                                                                                                      o
                                                                        U




                                                                                                    ic
                                                                                                ex
                                                                                               M




Notes: The above figures depict the average number of opioid prescriptions written yearly per physician by medical school rank for US-trained
physicians and region of training for foreign-trained physicians. Subfigure A includes all physicians; Subfigure B only includes GPs (physicians
in general practice, family practice, and internal medicine). Physician-years with zero opioid prescriptions are included. The size of the marker
indicates the number of physician-year observations in a given bin; confidence intervals not displayed are covered by the marker. Refer to Tables
S4 and S5 for the underlying averages for all physicians and GPs, respectively.




                                                                                                          40
                   Figure S6: Opioid Prescriptions by Medical School Rank: Oncology and Nephrology

                                                                        A. Hematology and oncology




                                                                  80
                      Annual opioid prescriptions per physician
                       relative to Harvard (including zeroes)
                                                                  60
                                                                  40
                                                                  20
                                                                  0
                                                        Ra arva −20
                                                          nk rd
                                                            6− 5
                                                           11 10
                                                           16 15
                                                           21 20
                                                           26 25
                                                           31 30
                                                           36 35
                                                           41 40
                                                           46 45
                                                           51 50
                                                           56 55
                                                           61 60
                                                           66 65
                                                           71 70
                                                           76 75
                                                           81 80
                                                           86 85
                                                                2


                                                                                                              d D)
                                                                                                               re )
                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                             Fo DO
                                                             2−




                                                             −9




                                                                                                                 ig
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −




                                                                                                            ke M
                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                          an (
                                                                                                       nr ed
                                                         H




                                                                                                      U ank
                                                                                                       nr
                                                                                                     U
                                                                              B. Nephrology
                                                                  100
                      Annual opioid prescriptions per physician
                       relative to Harvard (including zeroes)
                                                                  50
                                                                  0
                                                        Ra arva −50
                                                          nk rd
                                                            6− 5
                                                           11 10
                                                           16 15
                                                           21 20
                                                           26 25
                                                           31 30
                                                           36 35
                                                           41 40
                                                           46 45
                                                           51 50
                                                           56 55
                                                           61 60
                                                           66 65
                                                           71 70
                                                           76 75
                                                           81 80
                                                           86 85
                                                                2


                                                                                                              d D)
                                                                                                               re )
                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                             Fo DO
                                                             2−




                                                             −9




                                                                                                                 ig
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −




                                                                                                            ke M
                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                          an (
                                                                                                       nr ed
                                                         H




                                                                                                      U ank
                                                                                                       nr
                                                                                                     U




Notes: The above figures depict the coefficient estimates on indicators for medical school rank bins from regressions of opioid prescriptions at
the physician-year level on medical school rank bin indicators with year and county fixed effects (variants of Equation (1)). Subfigure A includes
physicians in hematology or oncology; Subfigure B includes physicians in nephrology. Physician-years with zero opioid prescriptions are included.
The bars denote 95% confidence intervals; standard errors are clustered by physician.




                                                                                   41
                                                                                                                                                                                     Annual opioid prescriptions per physician                                                                                                                              Annual opioid prescriptions per physician
                                                                                                                                                                                      relative to Harvard (including zeroes)                                                                                                                                 relative to Harvard (including zeroes)
                                                                                                                                                                  H
                                                                                                                                                                              −100     0   100   200   300                              H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −100   0   100   200   300                                                           H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     −100      0     100   200                              H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −100   0   100   200
                                                                                                                                                                    a                                                                     a                                                                                                a                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                                                 Ra rva                                                                Ra rva                                                                                           Ra rva                                                             Ra rva
                                                                                                                                                                   nk rd                                                                 nk rd                                                                                            nk rd                                                              nk rd
                                                                                                                                                                       2−                                                                    2−                                                                                               2−                                                                 2−
                                                                                                                                                                      6− 5                                                                  6− 5                                                                                             6− 5                                                               6− 5
                                                                                                                                                                    11 10                                                                 11 10                                                                                            11 10                                                              11 10
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    16 15                                                                 16 15                                                                                            16 15                                                              16 15
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    21 20                                                                 21 20                                                                                            21 20                                                              21 20
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    26 25                                                                 26 25                                                                                            26 25                                                              26 25
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    31 30                                                                 31 30                                                                                            31 30                                                              31 30
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    36 35                                                                 36 35                                                                                            36 35                                                              36 35
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    41 40                                                                 41 40                                                                                            41 40                                                              41 40
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    46 45                                                                 46 45                                                                                            46 45                                                              46 45
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    51 50                                                                 51 50                                                                                            51 50                                                              51 50
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    56 55                                                                 56 55                                                                                            56 55                                                              56 55
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    61 60                                                                 61 60                                                                                            61 60                                                              61 60
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    66 65                                                                 66 65                                                                                            66 65                                                              66 65
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    71 70                                                                 71 70                                                                                            71 70                                                              71 70
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    76 75                                                                 76 75                                                                                            76 75                                                              76 75
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −




                                                                                                                                                                                                             Cohort: 1986−1995
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cohort: 1986−1995




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cohort: Before 1975
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Cohort: Before 1975




                                                                                                                                                                    81 80                                                                 81 80                                                                                            81 80                                                              81 80
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    86 85                                                                 86 85                                                                                            86 85                                                              86 85
                                                                                                                                                                       −9                                                                    −9                                                                                               −9                                                                 −9
                                                                                                                                                            U             2                                                      U              2                                                                                 U              2                                                   U              2
                                                                                                                                                             nr                                                                   nr                                                                                               nr                                                                 nr
                                                                                                                                                                a                                                                    a                                                                                                a                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                                            U nke                                                                U nke                                                                                            U nke                                                              U nke
                                                                                                                                                             nr d                                                                 nr d                                                                                             nr d                                                               nr d
                                                                                                                                                                an (M                                                                an (M                                                                                            an (M                                                              a n (M
                                                                                                                                                                  ke D                                                                 ke D                                                                                             ke D                                                                ke D
                                                                                                                                                                    d )                                                                  d )                                                                                              d )                                                                 d )
                                                                                                                                                                     (D                                                                   (D                                                                                               (D                                                                  (D
                                                                                                                                                                   Fo O)                                                                Fo O)                                                                                            Fo O)                                                               Fo O)
                                                                                                                                                                     re                                                                   re                                                                                               re                                                                  re




42
                                                                                                                                                                       ig                                                                    ig                                                                                               ig                                                                  ig
                                                                                                                                                                          n                                                                     n                                                                                                n                                                                   n


                                                                                                                                                                  H
                                                                                                                                                                              −100     0   100   200   300                              H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −100   0   100   200   300                                                           H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     −100      0     100   200                              H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −100   0   100   200
                                                                                                                                                                    a                                                                     a                                                                                                a                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                                                 Ra rva                                                                Ra rva                                                                                           Ra rva                                                             Ra rva
                                                                                                                                                                   nk rd                                                                 nk rd                                                                                            nk rd                                                              nk rd
                                                                                                                                                                       2−                                                                    2−                                                                                               2−                                                                 2−
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A. All physicians




                                                                                                                                                                      6− 5                                                                  6− 5                                                                                             6− 5                                                               6− 5
                                                                                                                                                                    11 10                                                                 11 10                                                                                            11 10                                                              11 10
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B. General practitioners
                                                                                                                                                                    16 15                                                                 16 15                                                                                            16 15                                                              16 15
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    21 20                                                                 21 20                                                                                            21 20                                                              21 20
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    26 25                                                                 26 25                                                                                            26 25                                                              26 25
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    31 30                                                                 31 30                                                                                            31 30                                                              31 30
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    36 35                                                                 36 35                                                                                            36 35                                                              36 35
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    41 40                                                                 41 40                                                                                            41 40                                                              41 40
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    46 45                                                                 46 45                                                                                            46 45                                                              46 45
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    51 50                                                                 51 50                                                                                            51 50                                                              51 50
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    56 55                                                                 56 55                                                                                            56 55                                                              56 55
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    61 60                                                                 61 60                                                                                            61 60                                                              61 60
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    66 65                                                                 66 65                                                                                            66 65                                                              66 65
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    71 70                                                                 71 70                                                                                            71 70                                                              71 70
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    76 75                                                                 76 75                                                                                            76 75                                                              76 75
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −




                                                                                                                                                                                                             Cohort: 1996−2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cohort: 1976−1985
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cohort: 1996−2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Cohort: 1976−1985




                                                                                                                                                                    81 80                                                                 81 80                                                                                            81 80                                                              81 80




     prescriptions are included. The bars denote 95% confidence intervals; standard errors are clustered by physician.
                                                                                                                                                                       −                                                                     −                                                                                                −                                                                  −
                                                                                                                                                                    86 85                                                                 86 85                                                                                            86 85                                                              86 85
                                                                                                                                                                       −9                                                                    −9                                                                                               −9                                                                 −9
                                                                                                                                                            U             2                                                      U              2                                                                                 U              2                                                   U              2
                                                                                                                                                             nr                                                                   nr                                                                                               nr                                                                 nr
                                                                                                                                                                a                                                                    a                                                                                                a                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                                            U nke                                                                U nke                                                                                            U nke                                                              U nke
                                                                                                                                                             nr d                                                                 nr d                                                                                             nr d                                                               nr d
                                                                                                                                                                an (M                                                                an (M                                                                                            an (M                                                              a n (M
                                                                                                                                                                  ke D                                                                 ke D                                                                                             ke D                                                                ke D
                                                                                                                                                                    d )                                                                  d )                                                                                              d )                                                                 d )
                                                                                                                                                                     (D                                                                   (D                                                                                               (D                                                                  (D
                                                                                                                                                                   Fo O)                                                                Fo O)                                                                                            Fo O)                                                               Fo O)
                                                                                                                                                                     re                                                                   re                                                                                               re                                                                  re
                                                                                                                                                                       ig                                                                    ig                                                                                               ig                                                                  ig
                                                                                                                                                                          n                                                                     n                                                                                                n                                                                   n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure S7: Opioid Prescriptions by Medical School Rank Across Graduation Cohorts




     physicians; Subfigure B only includes GPs (physicians in general practice, family practice, and internal medicine). Physician-years with zero opioid
     physician-year level on medical school rank bin indicators with year, specialty, and county fixed effects (Equation (1)). Subfigure A includes all
     Notes: The above figures depict the coefficient estimates on indicators for medical school rank bins from regressions of opioid prescriptions at the
          Figure S8: Opioid Prescriptions by Medical School Rank Excluding University-Affiliated Zip Codes

                                                                           A. All physicians




                                                                  100
                      Annual opioid prescriptions per physician
                       relative to Harvard (including zeroes)
                                                                  50
                                                                  0
                                                        Ra arva −50
                                                          nk rd
                                                            6− 5
                                                           11 10
                                                           16 15
                                                           21 20
                                                           26 25
                                                           31 30
                                                           36 35
                                                           41 40
                                                           46 45
                                                           51 50
                                                           56 55
                                                           61 60
                                                           66 65
                                                           71 70
                                                           76 75
                                                           81 80
                                                           86 85
                                                                2


                                                                                                                d D)
                                                                                                                 re )
                                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                               Fo DO
                                                             2−




                                                             −9




                                                                                                                   ig
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −




                                                                                                              ke M
                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                            an (
                                                                                                         nr ed
                                                         H




                                                                                                        U ank
                                                                                                         nr
                                                                                                      U
                                                                        B. General practitioners
                                                                  200
                      Annual opioid prescriptions per physician
                       relative to Harvard (including zeroes)
                                                                  150
                                                                  100
                                                                  50
                                                                  0
                                                                  −50
                                                          nk rd
                                                            6− 5
                                                           11 10
                                                           16 15
                                                           21 20
                                                           26 25
                                                           31 30
                                                           36 35
                                                           41 40
                                                           46 45
                                                           51 50
                                                           56 55
                                                           61 60
                                                           66 65
                                                           71 70
                                                           76 75
                                                           81 80
                                                           86 85
                                                                2


                                                                                                                d D)
                                                                                                                 re )
                                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                               Fo DO
                                                             2−




                                                             −9




                                                                                                                   ig
                                                        Ra arva



                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −




                                                                                                              ke M
                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                            an (
                                                                                                         nr ed
                                                         H




                                                                                                        U ank
                                                                                                         nr
                                                                                                      U




Notes: The above figures depict the coefficient estimates on indicators for medical school rank bins from regressions of opioid prescriptions at the
physician-year level on medical school rank bin indicators with year, specialty, and county fixed effects (Equation (1)). Physicians whose practice
address is in a zip code with a university-affiliated hospital are excluded. Physician-years with zero opioid prescriptions are included. The bars
denote 95% confidence intervals; standard errors are clustered by physician.




                                                                                  43
       Figure S9: Opioid Prescriptions by Medical School Rank Controlling for Specialty and Practice Address

                                                                           A. All physicians


                      Annual opioid prescriptions per physician
                       relative to Harvard (including zeroes)
                                                                  40
                                                                  20
                                                                  0
                                                                  −20
                                                        Ra arva −40
                                                          nk rd
                                                            6− 5
                                                           11 10
                                                           16 15
                                                           21 20
                                                           26 25
                                                           31 30
                                                           36 35
                                                           41 40
                                                           46 45
                                                           51 50
                                                           56 55
                                                           61 60
                                                           66 65
                                                           71 70
                                                           76 75
                                                           81 80
                                                           86 85
                                                                2


                                                                                                              d D)
                                                                                                               re )
                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                             Fo DO
                                                             2−




                                                             −9




                                                                                                                 ig
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −




                                                                                                            ke M
                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                          an (
                                                                                                       nr ed
                                                         H




                                                                                                      U ank
                                                                                                       nr
                                                                                                     U
                                                                        B. General practitioners
                                                                  100
                      Annual opioid prescriptions per physician
                       relative to Harvard (including zeroes)
                                                                  50
                                                                  0
                                                                  −50
                                                        Ra arva −100
                                                          nk rd
                                                            6− 5
                                                           11 10
                                                           16 15
                                                           21 20
                                                           26 25
                                                           31 30
                                                           36 35
                                                           41 40
                                                           46 45
                                                           51 50
                                                           56 55
                                                           61 60
                                                           66 65
                                                           71 70
                                                           76 75
                                                           81 80
                                                           86 85
                                                                2


                                                                                                              d D)
                                                                                                               re )
                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                             Fo DO
                                                             2−




                                                             −9




                                                                                                                 ig
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −
                                                             −




                                                                                                            ke M
                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                          an (
                                                                                                       nr ed
                                                         H




                                                                                                      U ank
                                                                                                       nr
                                                                                                     U




Notes: The above figures depict the coefficient estimates on indicators for medical school rank bins from regressions of opioid prescriptions
at the physician-year level on medical school rank bin indicators with year, specialty, and practice address fixed effects (variants of Equation
(1)). Subfigure A includes all physicians; Subfigure B only includes GPs (physicians in general practice, family practice, and internal medicine).
Physician-years with zero opioid prescriptions are included. The bars denote 95% confidence intervals; standard errors are clustered by physician.




                                                                                  44
                                          Table S1: Composite Medical School Rankings
 1     HARVARD MEDICAL SCHOOL                                        47    WAKE FOREST SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 2     JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                   48    INDIANA UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 3     PERELMAN SCHOOL OF MEDICINE AT UPENN                          49    TUFTS UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 4     UCSF SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                                       50    UNIVERSITY OF MIAMI MILLER SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 5     STANFORD UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                        51    UNIVERSITY OF MASSACHUSETTS MEDICAL SCHOOL
 6     WASH U IN ST LOUIS SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                         52    UNIVERSITY OF UTAH SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 7     YALE UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                            53    MEDICAL COLLEGE OF WISCONSIN
 8     DUKE UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                            54    TEMPLE UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 9     COLUMBIA U COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS AND SURGEONS                 55    UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT CHICAGO COLLEGE OF MEDICINE
 10    UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                   56    UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS MEDICAL SCHOOL AT HOUSTON
 11    UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN MEDICAL SCHOOL                         57    SCHOOL OF MEDICINE AT STONY BROOK UNIVERSITY
 12    UCHICAGO PRITZKER SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                          58    UNIVERSITY OF VERMONT COLLEGE OF MEDICINE
 13    DAVID GEFFEN SCHOOL OF MEDICINE AT UCLA                       59    MEDICAL UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH CAROLINA
 14    VANDERBILT UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                      60    UT SCHOOL OF MEDICINE AT SAN ANTONIO
 15    UNIVERSITY OF PITTSBURGH SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                   61    SIDNEY KIMMEL MEDICAL COLLEGE AT THOMAS JEFFERSON U
 16    UCSD SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                                       62    UNIVERSITY OF CONNECTICUT SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 17    WEILL CORNELL MEDICAL COLLEGE                                 63    UNIVERSITY AT BUFFALO SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 18    NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY                                       64    GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 19    ICHAN SCHOOL OF MEDICINE AT MOUNT SINAI                       65    UNIVERSITY OF KENTUCKY COLLEGE OF MEDICINE
 20    BAYLOR COLLEGE OF MEDICINE                                    66    UNIFORMED SERVICES F E HEBERT SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 21    UNC AT CHAPEL HILL SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                         67    UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA COLLEGE OF MEDICINE
 22    EMORY UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                           68    RUSH MEDICAL COLLEGE OF RUSH UNIVERSITY
 23    NEW YORK UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                        69    ST LOUIS UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 24    UT SOUTHWESTERN MEDICAL SCHOOL                                70    UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA COLLEGE OF MEDICINE
 25    CASE WESTERN UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                    71    UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 26    UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                     72    VIRGINIA COMMONWEALTH U SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 27    MAYO MEDICAL SCHOOL                                           73    WAYNE STATE UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 28    UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                    74    UNIVERSITY OF OKLAHOMA COLLEGE OF MEDICINE
 29    UNIVERSITY OF IOWA                                            75    MEDICAL COLLEGE OF GEORGIA AT GEORGIA REGENTS U
 30    UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                    76    U OF SOUTH FLORIDA HEALTH MORSANI COLLEGE OF MEDICINE
 31    BOSTON UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                          77    RUTGERS ROBERT WOOD JOHNSON MEDICAL SCHOOL
 32    WARREN ALPERT MEDICAL SCHOOL OF BROWN                         78    RUTGERS NEW JERSEY MEDICAL SCHOOL
 33    UNIVERSITY OF ALABAMA SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                      79    UNIVERSITY OF MISSOURI COLUMBIA SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 34    OREGON HEALTH & SCIENCE UNIVERSITY                            80    UNIVERSITY OF LOUISVILLE SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 35    KECK SCHOOL OF MEDICINE OF THE USC                            81    UNIVERSITY OF TENNESSEE COLLEGE OF MEDICINE
 36    OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY COLLEGE OF MEDICINE                     82    CREIGHTON UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 37    UNIVERSITY OF COLORADO SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                     83    TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY COLLEGE OF MEDICINE
 38    GEISEL SCHOOL OF MEDICINE AT DARTMOUTH                        84    UNIVERSITY OF HAWAII AT MANOA
 39    UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA MEDICAL SCHOOL                        85    UNIVERSITY OF NEW MEXICO SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 40    UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                     86    UNIVERSITY OF ARKANSAS COLLEGE OF MEDICINE
 41    ALBERT EINSTEIN COLLEGE OF MEDICINE OF YESHIVA U              87    TEXAS TECH UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 42    UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI COLLEGE OF MEDICINE                  88    DREXEL UNIVERSITY COLLEGE OF MEDICINE
 43    UC DAVIS SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                                   89    UNIVERSITY OF NEVADA SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 44    UC IRVINE COLLEGE OF MEDICINE                                 90    MICHIGAN STATE UNIVERSITY COLLEGE OF HUMAN MEDICINE
 45    UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA COLLEGE OF MEDICINE                     91    WEST VIRGINIA UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
 46    GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE                      92    UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH CAROLINA SCHOOL OF MEDICINE

Notes: The above table lists the composite rankings used for ranked US medical schools. Refer to Section II for a detailed overview of how these
rankings are constructed.




                                                                      45
                                            Table S2: Summary Statistics: Prescription Data
                                                                                         By year

                                                 2006      2007      2008       2009      2010      2011       2012      2013      2014        All

 Total opioids dispensed (100 million)           2.04      2.14       2.21       2.50     2.57       2.58      2.60      2.52       2.44     21.60
 Panel A: All physicians
   N physicians                                 742,297    742,297   742,297    742,297   742,297   742,297   742,297   742,297    742,297   742,297
   N physician-years                               .          .         .          .         .         .         .         .          .      6,680,673
   Opioids prescribed (100 million)              1.52       1.60      1.66       1.89      1.92      1.90      1.87      1.75       1.65     15.74
   % of total dispensed                          74.5       74.9      75.0       75.4      74.7      73.6      71.6      69.5       67.3      72.9
   Average per physician-year                   204.9      215.8     223.1      254.1     258.5     255.7     251.4     235.8      221.7     235.7
     including zeroes                           (1.2)      (1.3)     (1.4)      (1.6)     (1.6)     (1.7)     (1.6)     (1.6)      (1.5)     (1.4)
   Average per physician-year                   287.1      298.7     303.7      337.1     342.0     339.7     331.4     318.7      309.0     319.0
     excluding zeroes                           (1.7)      (1.8)     (1.8)      (2.0)     (2.1)     (2.1)     (2.1)     (2.1)      (2.1)     (1.8)
   Zeroes (% physician-years)                    28.6       27.7      26.5       24.6      24.4      24.7      24.2      26.0       28.3      26.1
 Panel B: General practitioners
   N physicians                                 203,576    203,576   203,576    203,576   203,576   203,576   203,576   203,576    203,576   203,576
   N physician-years                               .          .         .          .         .         .         .         .          .      1,832,184
   Opioids prescribed (100 million)              0.70       0.74      0.77       0.91      0.93      0.92      0.92      0.87       0.82      7.59
   % of total dispensed                          34.2       34.7      35.0       36.5      36.3      35.8      35.2      34.5       33.5      35.1
   Average per physician-year                   342.7      364.5     379.9      448.8     458.1     453.0     450.8     427.0      402.4     414.1
     including zeroes                           (2.8)      (3.0)     (3.1)      (3.5)     (3.6)     (3.5)     (3.5)     (3.3)      (3.2)     (2.9)
   Average per physician-year                   426.1      446.7     456.3      526.1     534.5     527.8     522.3     501.3      480.3     492.1
     excluding zeroes                           (3.3)      (3.5)     (3.6)      (3.9)     (4.0)     (4.0)     (3.9)     (3.8)      (3.7)     (3.3)
   Zeroes (% physician-years)                    19.6       18.4      16.7       14.7      14.3      14.2      13.7      14.8       16.2      15.8

Notes: Standard errors are displayed in parentheses and are clustered by physician. The top row displays the total number of opioids dispensed as
reported in the QuintilesIMS data. The next two panels provide summary statistics for our cleaned sample of physicians (Panel A) and GPs (Panel
B; physicians in general practice, family practice, and internal medicine). The prescription statistics are raw averages; that is, they do not control
for physician specialty or county of practice.




                            Table S3: Summary Statistics: County-Level Prescriptions and Mortality
                                                                                        By year

                                             2006       2007       2008        2009      2010      2011       2012      2013       2014       All

 N counties                                  3,140      3,140     3,140        3,140    3,140      3,140     3,140      3,140     3,140      3,140
 N county-years                                 .         .         .            .        .          .         .          .         .        28,260
 Unweighted averages
   Opioid prescriptions/ capita               0.53   0.55   0.56   0.65   0.65   0.65   0.67   0.66   0.64   0.62
   Total deaths/100,000                      1008.1 1004.8 1024.6 1002.3 1000.0 1015.6 1024.8 1040.0 1050.9 1019.0
   Deaths involving drugs/100,000             12.9   13.7   14.0   14.4   14.7   16.0   15.8   16.7   17.4   15.1
 Population-weighted averages
   Opioid prescriptions/ capita               0.64       0.67      0.69         0.77     0.79       0.79      0.79       0.76      0.73       0.74
   Total deaths/100,000                      813.3      804.8     813.1        794.6    797.9      806.9     809.6      820.7     823.6      809.5
   Deaths involving drugs/100,000             14.9       15.2      15.1         15.1     15.5       16.7      16.6       17.5      18.6       16.2

Notes: “Deaths involving drugs” include poisonings from drugs resulting in death as well as deaths in which drug dependence was indicated on the
death certificate.




                                                                          46
                                       Table S4: Opioid Prescriptions by Medical School Rank
                                                                                       Opioid prescriptions

                                                                        Including zeroes                   Excluding zeroes

                                Unique           Total (in       Average per        95% CI of       Average per        95% CI of        Zeroes (%
                               physicians        millions)         phy-yr            average          phy-yr            average         phys-yrs)

 A. US trained
 Ranked
   1 (Harvard)                    5,762              4.9              94.7           (88, 102)          146.4          (136, 157)          35.3
   2-5                           17,155             19.4             125.5          (120, 131)          185.1          (178, 192)          32.2
   6-10                          21,602             31.5             162.2          (156, 168)          231.2          (223, 239)          29.8
   11-15                         24,031             40.4             187.0          (181, 193)          256.1          (248, 264)          27.0
   16-20                         21,589             33.1             170.4          (164, 177)          234.1          (226, 242)          27.2
   21-25                         25,246             43.6             191.9          (186, 198)          262.3          (254, 270)          26.8
   26-30                         18,734             35.1             208.4          (202, 215)          279.5          (271, 288)          25.4
   31-35                         19,919             46.2             257.5          (249, 266)          337.8          (327, 349)          23.8
   36-40                         26,607             52.4             218.8          (213, 225)          286.9          (279, 295)          23.7
   41-45                         20,308             37.9             207.3          (199, 215)          279.5          (269, 290)          25.8
   46-50                         29,076             61.5             235.1          (229, 241)          309.7          (302, 318)          24.1
   51-55                         27,519             57.8             233.5          (227, 240)          305.6          (298, 313)          23.6
   56-60                         19,393             46.6             267.1          (259, 276)          346.6          (336, 357)          22.9
   61-65                         22,628             45.2             222.0          (214, 229)          296.0          (286, 306)          25.0
   66-70                         18,054             36.8             226.7          (219, 234)          309.0          (299, 319)          26.6
   71-75                         29,563             83.7             314.7          (307, 323)          400.4          (391, 410)          21.4
   76-80                         18,561             45.7             273.8          (263, 285)          354.0          (340, 368)          22.6
   81-85                         14,668             38.0             287.7          (277, 298)          372.8          (360, 386)          22.8
   86-92                         23,533             63.3             299.0          (291, 307)          381.6          (371, 392)          21.6
 Unranked
   US (MD)                       96,644            234.0             269.0          (265, 273)          348.6          (343, 354)          22.8
   US (DO)                       49,376            184.1             414.3          (407, 422)          501.7          (493, 510)          17.4
 US total                       549,968           1241.5             250.8          (249, 252)          330.2          (328, 332)          24.0
 B. Foreign trained
   Caribbean                     21,154             51.3             269.7          (260, 279)          363.7          (352, 376)          25.9
   Canada                         7,931             15.8             221.6          (210, 233)          324.7          (309, 341)          31.8
   Mexico + C America            11,502             28.3             273.3          (261, 286)          357.4          (342, 373)          23.5
   South America                  9,501             11.7             136.6          (127, 146)          214.3          (200, 228)          36.3
   Western Europe                14,673             20.7             156.8          (148, 166)          242.2          (229, 256)          35.2
   E Europe + Russia             12,185             18.8             171.1          (162, 180)          256.4          (243, 270)          33.2
   W, S, and C Asia              74,392            118.0             176.2          (172, 180)          257.8          (252, 264)          31.7
   SE and E Asia                 25,053             42.5             188.6          (181, 196)          291.1          (280, 302)          35.2
   Northern Africa                4,843             10.0             230.2          (205, 255)          344.1          (307, 381)          33.1
   W and C Africa                 4,177              8.1             214.3          (197, 232)          313.7          (289, 339)          31.7
   E and South Africa             2,671             3.3              137.4          (121, 154)          215.0          (191, 239)          36.1
   Oceania                         863              0.8               96.8           (75, 119)          178.0          (139, 217)          45.6
   Uncategorized                 3,384              3.6              118.0          (101, 135)          233.0          (200, 266)          49.4
 Foreign total                  192,329            332.8             192.3          (190, 195)          283.1          (279, 287)          32.1
 Total                          742,297           1574.3             235.7          (234, 237)          319.0          (317, 321)          26.1

Notes: The prescription statistics are raw averages; that is, they do not control for specialty or county of practice. Standard errors are clustered by
physician.




                                                                         47
                        Table S5: Opioid Prescriptions by Medical School Rank: General Practitioners
                                                                                      Opioid prescriptions

                                                                      Including zeroes                  Excluding zeroes

                               Unique           Total (in       Average per       95% CI of       Average per       95% CI of         Zeroes (%
                              physicians        millions)         phy-yr           average          phy-yr           average          phys-yrs)

 A. US trained
 Ranked
   1 (Harvard)                    947               1.5            180.2          (153, 207)          248.9         (214, 284)           27.6
   2-5                           3,175              6.6            232.7          (217, 248)          298.4         (279, 317)           22.0
   6-10                          4,029             11.7            321.9          (306, 338)          398.1         (379, 417)           19.1
   11-15                         4,447             13.9            346.4          (330, 363)          410.8         (392, 430)           15.7
   16-20                         3,693              9.8            295.1          (280, 310)          354.2         (337, 372)           16.7
   21-25                         4,890             15.6            354.6          (339, 370)          420.0         (403, 437)           15.6
   26-30                         4,610             16.3            393.3          (377, 410)          444.4         (427, 462)           11.5
   31-35                         4,718             21.3            500.9          (478, 524)          580.5         (555, 606)           13.7
   36-40                         7,625             26.2            382.4          (370, 394)          435.8         (423, 449)           12.3
   41-45                         4,719             15.8            372.0          (354, 390)          436.7         (417, 457)           14.8
   46-50                         6,295             24.5            432.5          (418, 447)          498.6         (482, 515)           13.3
   51-55                         6,762             26.2            430.2          (415, 445)          488.3         (472, 505)           11.9
   56-60                         4,839             21.9            503.8          (483, 525)          562.8         (540, 585)           10.5
   61-65                         5,107             19.8            431.6          (413, 451)          495.7         (475, 517)           12.9
   66-70                         4,463             16.3            406.7          (390, 424)          484.7         (466, 503)           16.1
   71-75                         7,645             38.7            562.5          (546, 579)          627.6         (610, 645)           10.4
   76-80                         4,228             19.0            499.9          (477, 523)          569.7         (545, 595)           12.3
   81-85                         3,801             18.1            529.5          (505, 554)          600.9         (575, 627)           11.9
   86-92                         6,452             31.8            546.9          (528, 566)          613.7         (593, 635)           10.9
 Unranked
   US (MD)                      23,363            100.8            479.4          (470, 488)          542.4         (533, 552)           11.6
   US (DO)                      25,020            120.5            534.9          (525, 545)          608.5         (597, 620)           12.1
 US total                       140,828           576.4            454.8          (451, 458)          522.9         (519, 527)           13.0
 B. Foreign trained
   Caribbean                     8,904             31.2            388.9          (375, 403)          466.1         (450, 482)           16.5
   Canada                        2,064              8.6            463.6          (432, 495)          579.8         (543, 617)           20.0
   Mexico + C America            4,203             16.3            431.0          (409, 453)          509.9         (485, 534)           15.5
   South America                 2,325              5.1            243.6          (226, 262)          327.5         (305, 350)           25.6
   Western Europe                3,501              9.8            310.2          (287, 333)          396.4         (368, 424)           21.8
   E Europe + Russia             4,451             11.3            281.8          (268, 296)          353.7         (337, 370)           20.3
   W, S, and C Asia             23,502             61.8            292.1          (284, 300)          384.4         (375, 394)           24.0
   SE and E Asia                 8,472             25.8            337.9          (324, 352)          434.2         (417, 452)           22.2
   Northern Africa               1,477              3.9            291.1          (262, 320)          393.6         (357, 431)           26.0
   W and C Africa                1,759             5.4             338.2          (307, 370)          454.0         (414, 494)           25.5
   E and South Africa             810              1.4             193.5          (166, 221)          278.1         (241, 315)           30.4
   Oceania                        138              0.3             202.7          (148, 257)          305.1         (232, 379)           33.6
   Uncategorized                 1,142             1.7             162.1          (142, 182)          272.9         (242, 304)           40.6
 Foreign total                  62,748            182.3            322.9          (318, 328)          414.9         (409, 421)           22.2
 Total                          203,576           758.8            414.1          (411, 417)          492.1         (489, 495)           15.8

Notes: Only GPs are included (physicians in general practice, family practice, and internal medicine). The prescription statistics are raw averages;
that is, they do not control for specialty or county of practice. Standard errors are clustered by physician.




                                                                        48
                                        Table S6: Opioid Prescriptions by Physician Specialty
                                                                                        Opioid prescriptions

                                                                        Including zeroes                  Excluding zeroes

                                  Unique           Total (in      Average per       95% CI of       Average per       95% CI of         Zeroes (%
                                 physicians        millions)       phys-yr           average         phys-yr           average          phys-yrs)

 General Practice                 203,576           758.8             414.1         (411, 417)          492.1          (489, 495)          15.8
 Orthopaedic Surgery               24,385           147.2             670.5         (661, 681)          750.6          (740, 761)          10.7
 Emergency Medicine                33,375           116.5             388.0         (384, 392)          429.7          (425, 434)           9.7
 Pain Medicine                      3,783            69.5            2040.2        (1947, 2133)        2454.7        (2349, 2560)          16.9
 Physical Med & Rehab               8,218            62.2             841.2         (805, 877)         1028.0         (985, 1071)          18.2
 Obstetrics & Gynecology           39,794            51.0             142.4         (140, 144)          166.1          (164, 168)          14.2
 Anesthesiology                    32,585            50.6             172.5         (162, 183)          460.6          (433, 488)          62.6
 General Surgery                   29,965            49.1             182.2         (179, 185)          224.9          (222, 228)          19.0
 Neurology                         14,092            30.9             243.3         (230, 256)          321.6          (305, 338)          24.3
 Rheumatology                       4,949            29.6             664.4         (636, 693)          775.4          (744, 807)          14.3
 Hematology & Oncology             19,156            28.7             166.2         (163, 170)          196.7          (193, 201)          15.5
 Neurological Surgery               5,540            19.5             391.2         (372, 410)          470.4          (448, 493)          16.8
 Urology                           10,099            17.6             193.8         (190, 198)          219.9          (216, 224)          11.9
 Otolaryngology                     9,588            17.3             200.7         (196, 205)          226.9          (222, 231)          11.5
 Plastic Surgery                    7,914            15.0             210.3         (205, 216)          237.9          (232, 244)          11.6
 Sports Medicine                    2,593            11.6             496.4         (474, 518)          552.9          (530, 576)          10.2
 General other                      6,593            10.9             183.2         (175, 191)          218.3          (209, 228)          16.1
 Geriatrics                         4,518             8.6             212.3         (198, 226)          275.2          (258, 293)          22.9
 Cardiovascular Disease            23,274             8.2              39.4          (38, 41)            51.0           (49, 53)           22.8
 Pediatrics                        50,584             7.5              16.6          (16, 17)            24.5           (24, 26)           32.5

Notes: The displayed specialties are the 20 specialties out of 57 specialties with the most opioid prescriptions collectively from 2006-2014. “General
Practice” includes physicians in general practice, family practice, and internal medicine. The prescription statistics are raw averages; that is, they
do not control for county of practice. Standard errors are clustered by physician.




                                                                         49
                            Table S7: Opioid Prescriptions by Medical School Rank Across Cohorts
 A. All physicians                                             Annual opioid prescriptions (including zeroes)

                                          (1)                   (2)                    (3)                    (4)                     (5)
 Graduation cohort:                       All                  1975                1976-1985              1986-1995               1996-2005

 Medical rank                         0.635***               1.242***               0.718***                 0.481**                0.264*
                                        (0.109)                (0.219)               (0.242)                 (0.240)                (0.143)
 (Medical rank)2                      -0.003***              -0.009***                -0.003                  -0.002                 -0.000
                                        (0.001)                (0.003)               (0.003)                 (0.003)                (0.002)
 Constant                            111.570***                29.659              185.029***                220.612                417.002
                                       (31.767)               (21.114)              (47.655)                (159.558)              (297.311)
 N (physician-years)                  3,635,532               675,396                 936,018               1,006,704              1,017,414
 R2                                     0.194                  0.181                   0.236                  0.232                  0.226

 B. General practitioners                                      Annual opioid prescriptions (including zeroes)

                                          (1)                   (2)                    (3)                    (4)                     (5)
 Graduation cohort:                       All                  1975                1976-1985              1986-1995               1996-2005

 Medical rank                         2.418***               3.551***               3.210***                2.073***               1.277***
                                        (0.292)                (0.745)                (0.613)                (0.547)                (0.410)
 (Medical rank)2                      -0.018***              -0.027***              -0.026***               -0.014**               -0.009**
                                        (0.003)                (0.009)                (0.007)                (0.006)                (0.004)
 Constant                            354.644***             354.397***             437.960***              375.733***             247.608***
                                        (6.264)               (16.873)               (12.799)               (11.540)                (8.794)
 N (physician-years)                   832,005                132,849                 232,596                244,278                222,282
 R2                                     0.178                  0.256                   0.261                  0.241                  0.264

 C. Pain medicine                                              Annual opioid prescriptions (including zeroes)

                                          (1)                   (2)                    (3)                    (4)                     (5)
 Graduation cohort:                       All                  1975                1976-1985              1986-1995               1996-2005

 Medical rank                          -2.825                 -40.905                 -4.020                 16.392                   7.412
                                      (9.272)                (69.125)                (32.154)               (21.533)                (11.196)
 (Medical rank)^2                      0.031                   0.093                   0.080                  -0.175                  -0.001
                                      (0.101)                 (0.878)                 (0.358)                (0.231)                 (0.113)
 Constant                           1355.253***            3964.478***             2343.257***            1575.692***                -71.116
                                     (199.171)              (1079.542)              (650.081)              (431.728)               (266.479)
 N (physician-years)                    15,318                   882                   2,790                  5,094                   6,552
 R2                                      0.353                  0.657                  0.613                  0.538                   0.425

Notes: The above table presents output from regressions of opioid prescriptions at the physician-year level on a quadratic in medical school rank
with year, specialty, and county fixed effects (Equation (2)) estimated separately across different graduation cohorts. Standard errors are clustered
by physician. Panel A includes all physicians; Panel B only includes GPs (physicians in general practice, family practice, and internal medicine);
Panel C only includes physicians specializing in pain medicine.




                                                                        50
       Table S8: Opioid Prescriptions by Medical School Rank Controlling for Specialty and County of Practice
                                                                            Annual opioid prescriptions

                                          Including zeroes                       Excluding zeroes                          I[zero]

                                     Coeff.               s.e.               Coeff.              s.e.             Coeff.              s.e.

 A. By medical school rank
   1 (Harvard)                           0                  -                    0                -                 0                   -
   2-5                                 1.91              (4.27)                0.33            (5.99)           -0.02***             (0.00)
   6-10                             16.30***             (4.42)             16.93***           (6.17)           -0.03***             (0.00)
   11-15                            17.00***             (4.57)              14.52**           (6.28)           -0.05***             (0.00)
   16-20                            23.00***             (4.54)             21.86***           (6.24)           -0.05***             (0.00)
   21-25                            18.49***             (4.50)             17.29***           (6.17)           -0.05***             (0.00)
   26-30                            30.99***             (4.84)             29.96***           (6.58)           -0.05***             (0.00)
   31-35                            34.27***             (5.27)             31.98***           (7.04)           -0.06***             (0.00)
   36-40                            25.37***             (4.69)             23.38***           (6.36)           -0.06***             (0.00)
   41-45                            25.95***             (5.06)             22.82***           (6.86)           -0.06***             (0.00)
   46-50                            27.99***             (4.54)             25.86***           (6.15)           -0.06***             (0.00)
   51-55                            37.16***             (4.54)             36.59***           (6.14)           -0.06***             (0.00)
   56-60                            38.65***             (5.26)             33.11***           (6.97)           -0.07***             (0.00)
   61-65                            31.48***             (4.95)             29.34***           (6.71)           -0.06***             (0.00)
   66-70                            17.83***             (4.99)             21.51***           (6.77)           -0.03***             (0.00)
   71-75                            49.85***             (5.15)             44.37***           (6.81)           -0.07***             (0.00)
   76-80                            38.96***             (6.34)             35.70***           (8.29)           -0.07***             (0.00)
   81-85                            36.86***             (5.99)             35.10***           (7.83)           -0.07***             (0.00)
   86-92                            41.75***             (5.25)             34.50***           (6.95)           -0.07***             (0.00)
   Unranked US (MD)                 39.89***             (4.03)             35.69***           (5.58)           -0.07***             (0.00)
   Unranked US (DO)                 85.63***             (4.95)             85.53***           (6.46)           -0.06***             (0.00)
   Foreign                          -14.07***            (3.79)               -4.55            (5.36)           0.02***              (0.00)
 B. By regions of training
 Rank 1-30                               0                  -                  0                   -                0                   -
 31-60                              14.10***             (1.73)            12.53***             (2.23)          -0.02***             (0.00)
 61-92                              19.67***             (2.00)            17.59***             (2.55)          -0.02***             (0.00)
 Unranked US (MD)                   22.49***             (2.21)            19.18***             (2.81)          -0.03***             (0.00)
 Unranked US (DO)                   67.99***             (3.61)            68.79***             (4.28)          -0.02***             (0.00)
   Caribbean                           5.88              (4.60)             14.96**             (5.92)          0.01***              (0.00)
   Canada                              -4.69             (5.36)             14.60**             (7.31)          0.07***              (0.00)
   Mexico + C America               29.99***             (5.90)            40.17***             (7.40)          -0.01***             (0.00)
   South America                    -46.63***            (4.66)           -40.44***             (6.77)          0.08***              (0.00)
   Western Europe                   -13.49***            (4.42)              -2.33              (6.45)          0.07***              (0.00)
   E Europe + Russia                -44.53***            (4.67)           -42.60***             (6.57)          0.05***              (0.00)
   W, S, and C Asia                 -47.78***            (2.40)           -40.53***             (3.30)          0.06***              (0.00)
   SE and E Asia                    -40.19***            (3.71)           -29.63***             (5.36)          0.07***              (0.00)
   Northern Africa                    -19.20            (11.81)               1.39             (16.90)          0.06***              (0.00)
   W and C Africa                   -38.97***            (8.47)             -19.44*            (11.70)          0.08***              (0.00)
   E and South Africa               -57.82***            (7.61)           -55.52***            (10.77)          0.07***              (0.01)
   Oceania                          -58.35***           (10.37)           -56.02***            (16.23)          0.14***              (0.01)
   Uncategorized                    -89.76***            (8.59)           -70.70***            (15.59)          0.20***              (0.01)

Notes: The prescription statistics control for specialty and county of practice and are relative to either Harvard (Panel A) or the top 30 schools
(Panel B). Standard errors are clustered by physician.




                                                                       51
    Table S9: Opioid Prescriptions by Medical School Rank Controlling for Specialty and County of Practice: GPs
                                                                               Annual opioid prescriptions

                                            Including zeroes                        Excluding zeroes                            I[zero]

                                       Coeff.               s.e.                Coeff.              s.e.              Coeff.                s.e.

 A. By medical school rank
   1 (Harvard)                             0                 -                     0                 -                   0                   -
   2-5                                   6.64             (15.31)                5.42             (19.72)            -0.03***             (0.01)
   6-10                               49.94***            (15.40)             50.82***            (19.72)            -0.05***             (0.01)
   11-15                              55.59***            (15.65)              47.53**            (19.83)            -0.08***             (0.01)
   16-20                              46.20***            (15.20)              39.53**            (19.35)            -0.08***             (0.01)
   21-25                              60.95***            (15.16)             51.25***            (19.30)            -0.08***             (0.01)
   26-30                              97.40***            (15.73)             87.96***            (19.73)            -0.10***             (0.01)
   31-35                             111.66***            (16.59)            103.54***            (20.69)            -0.09***             (0.01)
   36-40                              88.33***            (14.85)             78.90***            (18.92)            -0.10***             (0.01)
   41-45                              64.06***            (15.93)             52.70***            (20.09)            -0.08***             (0.01)
   46-50                              86.77***            (15.08)             77.79***            (19.12)            -0.10***             (0.01)
   51-55                             113.82***            (15.07)            105.32***            (19.09)            -0.10***             (0.01)
   56-60                             133.52***            (16.74)            116.44***            (20.65)            -0.11***             (0.01)
   61-65                              91.34***            (15.87)             77.10***            (19.91)            -0.10***             (0.01)
   66-70                              66.45***            (15.89)             73.15***            (20.02)            -0.06***             (0.01)
   71-75                             137.10***            (15.77)            119.81***            (19.70)            -0.11***             (0.01)
   76-80                              80.64***            (16.72)             64.85***            (20.68)            -0.09***             (0.01)
   81-85                             118.01***            (17.67)            106.02***            (21.62)            -0.10***             (0.01)
   86-92                             115.03***            (16.00)             92.48***            (20.01)            -0.11***             (0.01)
   Unranked US (MD)                   98.00***            (14.05)             79.71***            (18.16)            -0.11***             (0.01)
   Unranked US (DO)                  123.64***            (14.33)            120.13***            (18.41)            -0.09***             (0.01)
   Foreign                              15.47             (13.55)               31.14*            (17.73)              -0.02              (0.01)
 B. By regions of training
 Rank 1-30                               0                    -                   0                   -                  0                   -
 31-60                               46.39***              (4.56)             41.19***             (5.12)            -0.03***             (0.00)
 61-92                               51.28***              (4.95)             42.97***             (5.54)            -0.03***             (0.00)
 Unranked US (MD)                    44.58***              (5.44)             31.37***             (6.07)            -0.04***             (0.00)
 Unranked US (DO)                    71.10***              (6.06)             72.58***             (6.72)            -0.02***             (0.00)
   Caribbean                           15.01*              (7.73)             23.55***             (8.80)               0.00              (0.00)
   Canada                             35.91**             (15.25)             71.68***            (17.81)            0.05***              (0.01)
   Mexico + C America                69.48***             (11.24)             83.89***            (12.67)             -0.01**             (0.00)
   South America                     -93.09***             (9.67)            -79.11***            (11.85)            0.08***              (0.01)
   Western Europe                       2.84              (11.12)              22.31*             (13.52)            0.04***              (0.01)
   E Europe + Russia                 -37.95***             (7.72)            -26.09***             (9.00)            0.03***              (0.00)
   W, S, and C Asia                  -74.50***             (5.00)            -54.32***             (5.99)            0.07***              (0.00)
   SE and E Asia                     -27.10***             (7.73)               -7.07              (9.32)            0.05***              (0.00)
   Northern Africa                   -74.43***            (14.87)            -49.87***            (18.71)            0.09***              (0.01)
   W and C Africa                    -48.76***            (15.84)              -12.53             (19.83)            0.09***              (0.01)
   E and South Africa               -139.10***            (14.63)           -131.26***            (19.23)            0.13***              (0.01)
   Oceania                          -132.62***            (28.13)           -112.65***            (36.33)            0.16***              (0.03)
   Uncategorized                    -156.49***            (10.95)           -118.82***            (15.58)            0.23***              (0.01)

Notes: Only GPs are included (physicians in general practice, family practice, and internal medicine). The prescription statistics control for specialty
and county of practice and are relative to either Harvard (Panel A) or the top 30 schools (Panel B). Standard errors are clustered by physician.




                                                                          52
          Table S10: Opioid Prescriptions by Medical School Rank Excluding University-Affiliated Zip Codes
                                                              Annual opioid prescriptions (including zeroes)
                                                 All physicians                                              General practitioners
                                        (1)                             (2)                            (3)                            (4)

 Medical rank                        0.635***                       0.814***                        2.418***                       2.325***
                                      (0.109)                        (0.168)                         (0.292)                         (0.415)
 (Medical rank)2                    -0.003***                      -0.006***                       -0.018***                       -0.018***
                                      (0.001)                        (0.002)                         (0.003)                         (0.004)
 Constant                          111.570***                       93.507**                      354.644***                      391.920***
                                     (31.767)                       (36.805)                         (6.264)                         (9.011)
 Excl. uni. zips                        No                             Yes                             No                             Yes
 N (physician-years)                3,635,532                      1,922,193                        832,005                        539,064
 R2                                   0.194                          0.209                           0.178                          0.186

Notes: The above table presents output from regressions of opioid prescriptions at the physician-year level on a quadratic in medical school rank
with year, specialty, and county fixed effects (Equation (2)). Columns (1)-(2) include all physicians; Columns (3)-(4) only include GPs (physicians
in general practice, family practice, and internal medicine). Columns (2) and (4) exclude physicians whose practice address is in a zip code with a
university-affiliated hospital. Standard errors are clustered by physician.




                                    Table S11: Opioid Prescriptions and Deaths Involving Drugs
                                                                              ln(Deaths involving drugs per capita)

                                                                     (1)                                                   (2)

 ln(Opioid prescriptions per capita)                             0.286***                                              0.150***
                                                                  (0.026)                                               (0.040)
 County FEs                                                          No                                                   Yes
 N (county-years)                                                  22,801                                                22,801
 R2                                                                 0.118                                                0.706

Notes: The above table presents output from regressions of log deaths involving drugs per capita at the county-year year on log opioid prescriptions
per capita at the county-year level. All specifications include year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by county. We define “deaths involving
drugs” as both poisonings from drugs resulting in death as well as deaths in which drug dependence was indicated on the death certificate.




                                                                           53
