NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE LANDSCAPE OF US GENERIC PRESCRIPTION DRUG MARKETS, 2004-2016
Ernst R. Berndt
Rena M. Conti
Stephen J. Murphy
Working Paper 23640
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23640

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2017

Mr. Berndt and Mr. Murphy acknowledge research support from the National Institutes of Health,
National Institute on Aging, Grant R01AG043560, to the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ms. Conti acknowledges research support from The Commonwealth Fund and the American Cancer
Society. The University of Chicago’s Institutional Review Board deemed this study exempt. Data
support from Michael Kleinrock at QuintilesIMS is gratefully acknowledged, as are helpful discussions
on FDA regulatory matters with Kurt Karst of Hyman, Phelps and McNamara PC. Any opinions and
findings expressed here are those of the authors, are not necessarily those of the institutions with whom
they are affiliated, the research sponsors or the individuals providing information. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Ernst R. Berndt, Rena M. Conti, and Stephen J. Murphy. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Landscape of US Generic Prescription Drug Markets, 2004-2016
Ernst R. Berndt, Rena M. Conti, and Stephen J. Murphy
NBER Working Paper No. 23640
July 2017
JEL No. I11
ABSTRACT
Since the 1984 passage of the Waxman-Hatch Act, generic prescription drugs have become central
to disease treatment and generic drug entry and price competition has been vigorous in the U.S. Nonetheless,
recent policy concern has focused on potential supply inadequacy and price increases among selected
generic drugs. Details regarding the supply of generic drugs throughout the product life cycle are surprisingly
unstudied. Here, we examine manufacturer entry, exit, the extent of competition and the relationship
between supply structure and inflation adjusted prices among generic drugs. Our empirical approach
is descriptive and reduced form, following recent innovations on the older structure-conduct-performance
tradition. We employ quarterly national data on quantities, wholesale dollar sales and manufacturers
from QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective data, 2004Q4–2016Q3. Defining a market as the molecule-dosage-form,
we observe that median sizes of drug markets are predominantly small, with annual inflation adjusted
sales revenues of less than $10 million but increasing over time. The median number of manufacturers
in each market is about two, the mean about four. We find evidence to suggest decreasing numbers
of suppliers over our study period, particularly following implementation of the Affordable Care Act
in 2010 and the Generic Drug User Fee Amendments of 2012, attributable both to more exit and less
entry. Approximately 40 percent of markets are supplied by one manufacturer; the share of markets
supplied by one or two manufacturers is observed to increase over time and is more likely among non-oral
drugs and those belonging to selected therapeutic classes. We find evidence to suggest prices of generic
drugs are statistically significantly increasing over time, particularly following the implementation
of the 2010 Affordable Care Act and the 2012 Generic Drug User Fee Amendments. Price increases
are positively correlated with reduced manufacturer counts and alternative measures of increased supplier
concentration, holding all else constant. Our results suggest the market for generic drugs is largely
comprised of small revenue products the supply of which has tended towards duopoly or monopoly
in recent years. Therefore, it is surprising generic drug prices have not been observed to be higher
and potentially risen more over our study period. This issue merits further study; we suggest several
testable hypotheses based in economic theory.

Ernst R. Berndt
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-518
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
eberndt@mit.edu
Rena M. Conti
University of Chicago
Department of Pediatrics
and Public Health Sciences
5812 S. Ellis Street
Chicago, IL 60637
rconti@uchicago.edu

Stephen J. Murphy
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
murphystephenj@gmail.com

I.

INTRODUCTION
In the last two decades, a number of developments – changing health insurance coverage,

advances in the life sciences, and new regulatory initiatives – have interacted to shape changing
trends in various sectors within U.S. health care – hospitals, clinics and physician offices,
diagnostics, devices and biopharmaceuticals. The impact of these developments has been
especially evident for prescription pharmaceuticals. For example, for decades prescription drugs
comprised about 10% of total national health care expenditures, but recent data suggest they now
comprise more than 16% of total national expenditures and are expected to rise to comprise
approximately one out of every five dollars spent on health care by 2025.1 Innovation clearly
drives some of these trends; the past three decades have witnessed dramatic changes in the
availability of drugs effective in treating disease and more is expected in the coming decades.
While much public attention is focused on novel, on-patent “branded” drugs, the generic
prescription drug sector has witnessed dramatic changes. On the demand side, the Medicare
Modernization Act (enacted in 2003 and implemented in January 2006) increased senior citizen
eligibility for prescription drug coverage, thereby increasing the overall demand for prescription
drugs. Private prescription drug plans including those administering Medicare’s pharmacy
benefit have increasingly utilized tiered copayment formularies that incentivize incomeconstrained beneficiaries to treat chronic conditions with generic drugs.2 The Affordable Care
Act enacted in March 2010 further expanded demand for low cost generic drugs among nonMedicare eligible Americans by providing premium tax credit subsidies to expand commercial
insurance access and by expanding the Medicaid program to cover all adults with income below
138% of the federal poverty level. With patient prescription drug copayments for Medicaid and
other government programs frequently being zero or nominal,3 these coverage expansions
created additional demand for generic drugs.

1

These estimates tend to not count prescription drugs used in the inpatient setting, since hospitals are commonly
paid for such care using bundled payment. For estimated and projected national health expenditures 1960-2025 by
medical service type see https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-andReports/NationalHealthExpendData/NationalHealthAccountsProjected.html
2
For discussion, see Duggan and Scott Morton [2010], Duggan, Healy, Morton [2009] and Goedken, Urmie, Farris,
Doucette [2010].
3
In 2013 (2016), 20.1% (26.0%) of all prescriptions dispensed at retail or mail order were for generics with a zero
patient copayment, while 3.5% (3.9%) were for brands with a zero copayment. See QuintilesIMS Institute [2017],

2

On the supply side, in 2011 and 2012 an enormous amount of branded drug spending was
jeopardized by the expiration of market exclusivity (the so-called “patent cliff”), creating
opportunities for entry and expanded use of low cost generic drugs.4 Then, in July 2012, as
concerns began emerging on the safety and quality of imported generic drugs, Congress enacted
the Generic Drug User Fee Amendments (“GDUFA I”) as part of the Food and Drug
Administration Safety and Innovation Act. This policy committed the FDA to aggressively
eliminate its backlog of Abbreviated New Drug Applications (“ANDAs”) and complete its
reviews of new ANDA submissions in a timely manner.5
Together these developments resulted in a massive shift toward generic drugs, whose
share of all retail and mail order dispensed drugs increased from 36% in 1994 to 74.5% in 2009
and 87% in 2015.6 The evolving conventional wisdom involving generic drugs was that
extensive entry and price competition among generic manufacturers, facilitated by buying power
consolidation among insurers and pharmaceutical benefit management organizations, was
resulting in a virtuous circle: increasing access to safe and effective treatments for chronic
disease, and ever declining prices, offsetting at least to some extent the higher prices of newly
launched and existing branded drugs.7
This conventional wisdom began to fade in 2009 as a number of high-profile drug
shortages were reported disproportionately involving old, off-patent, largely non-orally
formulated drugs. Concerns were raised that perhaps generic profit margins had fallen too low,
buying power had become too concentrated, and buttressed by FDA inspections revealing
numerous plants were failing to comply with current good manufacturing provisions,
manufacturers were not maintaining their production facilities or were even actively exiting these
markets.8 Then in 2012-2013 a sharp trend reversal was first observed with prices of many

Chart 14, page 20 of 46. For an historic time series of commercial plan generic and brand copayment benefit
designs in the U.S., see Berndt and Newhouse [2012].
4
Aitken, Berndt, Cutler et al. [2016].
5
For an in depth economic examination of the intent and likely effects of GDUFA I see Berndt, Conti, Murphy
[2017].
6
Berndt and Aitken [2011], IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics [2016].
7
Aitken, Berndt, Cutler et al. [2016], Duggan and Scott Morton [2010], Berndt and Aitken [2011] and Frank and
Salkever [1997].
8
On these factors, see Woodcock and Wosinska [2013], Conti and Berndt [2014], Stomberg [2016], U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services [2011], and Yurukoglu, Liebman and Ridley [2017].

3

incumbent generic drugs increasing rather than decreasing,9 and growing rather than contracting
prescription drug expenditures.10 More recently, lay press reports, government investigations and
published studies have documented massive price increases for certain very old drugs that are the
standard of care in selected diseases.11
These trends raise a key empirical question on which we focus our attention: How
competitive are markets for generic drugs, and how has the competitive market structure varied
over time and across drug formulations and therapeutic classes? An empirical study of the
supply of generic drugs is particularly relevant to U.S. policy now that FDA regulatory changes
might have also increased the fixed costs of manufacturing generic drugs and created barriers to
entry among generic manufacturers with the July 2012 enactment of GDUFA I. 12,13
Empirical work on the structure of the generic drug industry has focused almost
exclusively on the period leading up to and immediately following generic entry. For example,
numerous reports suggest the number of entrants following brand loss of exclusivity (“LOE”)
increases with the dollar revenue volume of the drug pre-LOE, and that in the 24 months
following initial LOE, as the number of entrants increases, average generic prices for molecules
decline.14 While these studies typically focused on oral dosage forms, specialty drugs -including small molecule drugs formulated as injectables, infusibles and aerosols, physicianadministered to patients or otherwise distributed through specialty pharmacies -- are not immune
to the forces of generic competition. Conti and Berndt [2015] document significant price declines
with the entry of generic cancer specialty drugs, although the average number of entrants into
these drugs is observed to be smaller than previously noted among non-specialty drugs. They
speculate fewer entrants among these drugs might be related to higher fixed costs and economies
of scope in production.

9

For discussion of consolidation activities among generic drug manufacturers, see Barrett [2017], Harding [2010],
Herrick [2015, 2016] and Silverman [2014b].
10
See Aitken, Berndt, Cutler et al. [2016] for further details; also see Fein [2013, 2014 a,b,c, 2015 a,b, 2016] and
Herrick [2015, 2016].
11
See, for example, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Assistant Secretary for Planning and
Evaluation [2016], and the Special Report of the U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging [2016].
12
For a more detailed discussion of generic prescription drug manufacturer incentives entailed in GDUFA I, see
Stromberg [2016] and Berndt, Conti and Murphy [2017].
13
For a detailed discussion of GDUFA and its reauthorization as GDUFA II, see Berndt, Conti and Murphy [2017].
14
See, for example, Berndt and Aitken [2011] and Grabowski and Vernon [1996].

4

Less is known about the evolution of manufacturer competition years after LOE and
generic entry first occurs. Several observers have suggested exploitation of economies of scale
and scope from consolidation among generic manufacturers and increased reliance on outsourced
contract manufacturers might have reduced the number of entrants and increased the number of
molecule exits, particularly among drugs requiring specialized sterile manufacturing capacity.15
Yet, no empirical work we are aware of has examined generic manufacturer supply over time
and characterized manufacturer entry, exit and other measures of competition or compared the
robustness of competition in this sector to other health care and non-health care industries. This
echoes a notable lack of detailed data to document actual patterns of firm entry and exit in
important sectors of the U.S. economy.16 While the Census Bureau has systematically collected
counts of manufacturers and other suppliers across a wide range of products and services,
17,18,19,20,21,22

none of this data provides enough detailed information to identify and count

“generic” drug manufacturers distinct from all pharmaceutical manufacturers.23
In this research, we characterize the changing landscape of U.S. generic prescription drug
markets, 2004-2016, focusing on entry, exit, the extent of supplier competition and two measures
of market performance (overall sales revenues and pricing per molecule) using national quarterly
data from QuintilesIMS on all national prescription drug sales.24 Our conceptual framework is
based on the traditional structure-conduct-performance paradigm summarized by Tirole [1988],
the more recent firm entry and exit literature pioneered by Bresnahan and Reiss [1988, 1991],
and health care-specific market structure literature recently summarized by Gaynor, Ho and
Town [2015]. Our empirical approach is largely descriptive and reduced form.

15

See Woodcock and Wosinska [2013] and Conti and Berndt [2015].
For early work on this topic see McGuckin [1972]; Orr [1974]; Deutsch [1975]; Gorecki [1975, 1976].
17
https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/cbp/resources/2017_CBP_User_Guide.pdf
18
https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/economic-census.html
19
https://www.census.gov/ces/dataproducts/bds/
20
For a survey, see Dunne, Roberts and Samuelson [1988].
21
https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/susb/technical-documentation/methodology.html
22
See https://www.census.gov/ces/dataproducts/bds/publications.html for a listing of reports and presentations.
23
including those producing base ingredients or final fill and finished generic and branded prescription drugs.
24
Dave, Kesselheim, Fox, Qiu, and Hartzema [2017] use 2008-2013 Marketscan™ retrospective claims data to
examine prices and market competition for drugs classified as either single or multi-source generic over the entire
2008-2013 time period, but do not consider entry and exit of new brands, or entry of generics following the brand’s
LOE. The claims data contain mostly retail and mail order pharmacy claims but likely understate sales through
other channels such as long term care, hospitals, and federal facilities.
16

5

II.

BACKGROUND AND CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
The importance of firm entry and exit as determinants of market outcomes such as

product price, sales revenues and profits, is well recognized. Theoretical studies have examined
the implications of actual, potential and strategically deterred entry, while empirical studies have
analyzed correlations among variables measuring market outcomes and factors that hinder entry
or hasten exit of producers. A simple two-stage model of firm entry and competition has
provided a unifying framework for analyzing the potentially complex relationships among
market structure and outcomes across many industries, including empirical studies in anti-trust
enforcement, regulatory proceedings, and industrial organization research.25,26
Within this tradition, in the short run the number of firms is envisaged as being fixed,
with firms competing in product markets via price, quantity and quality choices that generate
firm profits for each incumbent as a function of market structure. The level of competition in
markets reflects product demand and cost factors including the degree of product differentiation
among firms, whether firms compete in prices, quantities or quality, regulatory or other structural
factors that may reinforce economic gains to scale or scope and/or facilitate rent seeking. In the
long run, the number of firms is viewed as endogenous, resulting from potential entrants each
making a decision on whether to enter the market given knowledge and expectations of
competition levels and determinants. Beginning with Bresnahan and Reiss [1988, 1991],
empirical studies based on this two-period framework have relied on a steady state zero-profit
assumptions to semi-structurally or structurally estimate relationships among the number of
firms entering and exiting and the nature of price competition in product markets. Within health
economics, the empirical approach to estimating relationships among market structure and
outcomes tends to remain reduced form (although there are some exceptions), in part due to the
presence of health insurance which complicates the usual neo-classical assumptions regarding
utility maximization and the nature of demand for medical care inputs and their prices.27

25

On these paradigms, see, for example, Berry and Reiss [2007], Bresnahan and Reiss [1988, 1991], Dafny, Duggan
and Ramanarayanan [2012], Dranove [2012], ch. 29 in Scherer [1990], and Scott Morton and Kyle [2012].
26
See Bresnahan and Reiss [1987, 1991], Berry [1992], Sutton [1991, 2007], and Berry and Reiss [2007].
27
Gaynor, Ho, Town [2015].

6

Here we follow the example of previous studies that rely on industry-specific data to
examine firm and product entry and exit, but we do so at a more disaggregated level. We define
a “product market” by molecule-dosage form that may be manufactured or marketed by multiple
suppliers, e.g., atorvastatin tablets marketed as brand Lipitor by Pfizer and as atorvastatin by
numerous generic manufacturers.28 Note that this aggregates over different strengths of the same
molecule dosage form, i.e., 10, 20 and 40 mg strengths of atorvastatin tablets marketed by
numerous generic manufacturers and by Pfizer as branded Lipitor. Specifically, we quantify the
number of firms selling specific molecule dosage forms of generic prescription drugs in the past
two decades for sale, and model entry and exit patterns over time conditional on generic industry
structure and product characteristics plausibly related to demand, or factors associated with
observed levels and trends in firm counts.
To construct these measures, we use a highly detailed, national data source that allows us
to count unique suppliers of all prescription drugs sold to U.S. consumers. Furthermore, we use
reduced form methods to relate these market characteristics to observed product prices and sales
revenues in the cross-section and over time. We assume that in the short-run prescription drug
suppliers pursue a non-cooperative, Bertrand pricing strategy with undifferentiated products,
resulting in an approximately linear relationship between price and stock and flow measures of
supplier counts or concentration measures.29
III.

METHODS

Data Sources
We obtained quarterly national data on the quantities sold, wholesale dollar sales and
suppliers of all prescription drugs approved for sale from QuintilesIMS’s National Sales
Perspectives™ (NSP) database between Q4 2004 and Q3 2016. NSP data derive from a
projected audit covering 100% of the national unit volume and dollar sales in all major classes of
trade and distribution channel for U.S. prescription pharmaceuticals. The sample is based on over
1.5 billion annual transactions. NSP provides information on each and every prescription drug by
specific chemical and branded names, formulation, dosage and the name of labeler (FDA’s

28
29

See Schmalensee [1989].
Dunne, Roberts and Samuelson [1988].

7

terminology for the owner of the New Drug Application or the ANDA in the Orange Book).30,31
The data derive from an audit of molecule purchases from manufacturers or wholesalers to
pharmacies or other distribution outlets, not retail pharmacy sales to patients.32
NSP reports “dollar sales” defined as the total amount paid for the purchase of a
molecule-dosage-form by quarter. We converted dollar sales into Q1 2016 U.S. dollars using the
Gross Domestic Implicit Price deflator.33 To the extent sales from wholesalers include
wholesaler margins and exclude off-invoice rebates paid by manufacturers to pharmaceutical
benefit managers and insurers, the NSP data overstate net revenues received by manufacturers.34
NSP also reports the volume of “standard units” measuring the number of single items
(such as vials, syringes, bottles, or packet of tablets/capsules) contained in a unit or shipping
package purchased by pharmacies or other distribution outlets. Standard units are calculated by
multiplying the number of units (e.g., 24 bottles) by the product size (50 tablets per bottle).
We excluded all over-the-counter products from the analysis, identified by the NSP
variable “rxotl”.
Definitions of Measured Variables
The principal units of analyses are, for a given molecule-dosage-form-quarter, its number
of standard units sold, its inflation-adjusted sales revenues, its supplier(s) and its inflation
adjusted price.

30

FDA identifies drugs based on NDCs that serve as a universal product identifier for drugs, based on The Drug
Listing Act of 1972. FDA publishes the listed NDC numbers and the information submitted as part of the daily
updated listing information in the NDC Directory. For a discussion of the FDA’s NDC classification system, see
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector General [2006].
31
The FDA’s Orange Book identifies the applicant of the Abbreviated New Drug Application (ANDA), and notes
that the actual manufacturer may differ from the ANDA applicant (also called the labeler) due to outsourcing of
manufacturing to contract manufacturers which is common in the U.S. generic drug industry. The ANDA applicant
may also differ from the marketer, due to licensing actions. The QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective data tracks
sales from suppliers’ invoice data, excluding sales from repackagers and drug compounding organizations. Our use
of the term “supplier” should therefore be interpreted as the number of distinct firms selling and marketing a
molecule dosage form. For further discussion, see Preface to the 37th Edition of the Orange Book [2017], available
online at https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/InformationOnDrugs/ucm129662.htm.
32
For a discussion of the flow of funds through the various parts of the pharmaceutical distribution system (e.g.,
manufacturers, pharmaceutical benefit managers, pharmacies, wholesalers, and health plans), see Dusetzina, Conti,
Yu and Bach [2017] and Sood, Shih, Van Nuys and Goldman [2017].
33
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/gdpdef/viewdata
34
For a discussion of rebates, see Aitken, Berndt, Cutler et al. [2016] and Dusetzina, Conti, Yu and Bach [2017].

8

We identified generic drugs using the following method: NSP contains a data field
denoting whether each molecule-dosage form-quarter has “generic, “branded” or “branded
generic” patent status. Within the QuintilesIMS classification scheme, “Branded generics” are
drugs belonging to the following categories:
(i)

Novel dosage forms of off-patent products, often in combination with another
molecule. These include line extensions of off-patent products such as those
formulated as “extended release” (XR) and “controlled release” (CR). An example of
a drug in this category in our sample is Concerta™, an extended release formulation
of methylphenidate hydrochloride, the active ingredient in the off-patent drug
Ritalin™ commonly used to treat attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.

(ii)

On patent with a trade name, but a molecule copy of an originator product FDA
approved under an existing NDA. These include drugs for which the formulation is
protected by its own patent and/or FDA approved through the 505b2 pathway.35 An
example of a drug belonging to this category in our sample is Proventil™, the
albuterol sulfate inhaler used to treat asthma symptoms. The albuterol sulfate active
ingredient is no longer patent-protected, but the FDA granted 3-year patent protection
to the makers of albuterol inhalers under 505b2 for reformulating with
hydrofluoroalkane propellants.36

(iii)

Off patent drugs with a trade name. Two examples of drugs belonging in this
category in our sample are Oxycontin™, a timed-release formulation of oxycodone
used to treat pain, and EpiPen, the epinephrine auto-injector for the treatment of
serious allergic reactions.

(iv)

Off patent without a trade name and commonly manufactured by a single source or
co-licensed from the NDA holder. These drugs include sterile hospital solutions.
We combined unit volume and dollar sales of branded generics and generics in all

quarters having non-zero quantities and sales revenues sold to create a generic aggregate. Using
this approach, we treat alternative dosage forms of the same molecule as distinct product
35
36

For a discussion of the 505b2 pathway, see https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/Guidances/ucm079345.pdf
See discussion by Hendeles, Colice, Meyer [2007].

9

markets, i.e. famotidine oral tablets or capsules comprise a distinct product market from
injectable famotidine formulations.
Among this universe of drugs, the NSP contains two variables denoting “manufacturers”:
“Corp” and “Mnf”. “Corp” is the alphanumeric name of the corporation, including subsidiaries,
identified on the sponsor-owned FDA-approved label appearing in the Orange Book (the ANDA
applicant), while “Mnf” is the product’s manufacturer, such as the “parent” corporation of a
multi-corporation firm.37 We choose to use “Mnf” as the main measure of generic drug supplier
and “Corp” as the sensitivity check on “Mnf”. We define all supplier measures described below
for Mnf and Corp separately.
For each molecule-dosage-form quarterly observation, we count the number of unique
Mnfs and Corps having positive unit volume and dollar sales revenue data in that quarter and
designate these variables as CountMnfs and CountCorps, respectively:
NTMnfs/NTCorpsi(t) = Total number of manufacturers or corporations supplying
molecule-dosage form i in quarter t. This includes manufacturers or corporations that
begin to supply i between t-1 and t, which we consider to be “entrants” into the supply of
molecule i.
We also create indicator variables called EntrantMnf/EntrantCorp if, immediately
following two quarters of zero unit volume and dollar sales, there are at least two quarters of
positive volume unit and sales data of the molecule by the Mnf/Corp; similarly, we create
indicator variables called ExitMnf/ExitCorp if, immediately following at least two quarters of
positive volume unit and sales data, there are at least two quarters of zero volume unit and sales
data for the molecule-Mnf/Corp:
EntrantMnf/EntrantCorpi(t) = number of firms that enter molecule i between quarter t-1
and t.
ExitMnf/ExitCorpi(t) = number of firms that exit molecule i between t-1 and t.

37

Manufacturers of ANDAs self-identify to the FDA annually on Form 2657.

10

Note that this definition of Exit likely excludes temporary production cessations, for the
Mnf/Corp could still sell from its inventory, generating positive volume unit and dollar sales
metrics recorded by NSP in that quarter.
We sum the number of EntrantMnf/EntrantCorp and ExitMnf/ExitCorp and values for
each molecule-dosage-form in each quarter to create NEntrantMnf/NEntrantCorp and
NExitMnf/NExitCorp:
NEntrantMnf/EntrantCorp(t) = åi EntrantMnf/EntrantCorpi(t).
NExitMnf/ExitCorp(t-1) = åi ExitMnf/ExitCorpi(t-1).
We also calculated molecule Herfindahl–Hirschman Indices (HHIs) of concentration by
quarter and therapeutic class.38 HHIs are a commonly-employed indicator of the extent of
competition within a specific market and defined time period. These HHIs were constructed
using Mnf shares measured in standard unit volume of the molecule-dosage-form sold:
HHIit = åNTMnfsi(t) sit2 where sit is the market share of manufacturer of molecule i in time t.
Note that shares are defined between 0 and 100 where the max value is 100 and therefore HHI
varies between 0 and 10,000. To facilitate interpretation, note that if the therapeutic class market
were on average supplied by two manufacturers (a duopoly) with each supplier having a 50%
market share, the HHI would be 5,000; any departure from equal shares would generate an HHI
greater than 5,000; for a therapeutic class on average supplied by three manufacturers (a
triopoly), equal shares across suppliers would yield an HHI of 3,327, and any departure from
each manufacturer having a 33.3% unit share would yield a higher HHI. According to the
Department of Justice horizontal merger guidelines, mergers in markets with pre-merger HHIs
above 1800 and involving an HHI increase of greater than 100 would likely invite close scrutiny
and possibly a challenge by the Department of Justice or the Federal Trade Commission.39
To calculate “net” inflation-adjusted prices per unit of molecule markets sold, we divided
molecule inflation-adjusted sales revenues by standard units sold in each quarter. The resulting
price estimates reflect the actual invoice prices pharmacies, hospitals and clinics pay for the

38

https://www.justice.gov/atr/herfindahl-hirschman-index. Last accessed last accessed 4 May 2017.
For a discussion of the U.S. horizontal merger guidelines and their enforcement, as well as Scott-Rodino required
public notification provisions, see Whinston [2007].
39

11

drugs, whether purchased directly from a manufacturer or indirectly via a wholesaler or chain
warehouse. Invoice line item discounts are included, but prompt-payment, bottom-line invoice
and 340B discounts are not included. Drug rebates paid by the manufacturer to an insurer or
intermediary are not reflected in these prices and are not publicly available.40
We characterize molecule markets by dosage form and therapeutic class. NSP data for
each molecule provides formulation codes to classify drugs into several categories: oral solid
tablets or capsules (“oral”); injectable or infusible products (“injectable”); topical preparations;
inhaled products, and “other” formulations (e.g. ocular drugs and patches) (“other”). In our
analyses, alternative molecule dosage forms serve as a surrogate for differing marginal costs of
production.41
NSP data for each molecule also contains a slightly modified version of the World Health
Organization’s 244 four-digit anatomic therapeutic classification (ATCs). We follow
QuintilesIMS’ own annual reports and report results by molecule therapeutic class using an
aggregated classification system related to the general target of biological activity, such as
“cardiovascular” or “antineoplastic and immunomodulating”. In our analyses, the therapeutic
class of a molecule is an implicit proxy for product demand.
Descriptive and Statistical Analyses
We undertake several alternative descriptive and statistical analyses. First, we tabulate
the total brand plus generic molecules, manufacturers, corporations, annual revenues, share
brand and generic revenues, and revenue share by dosage form, annually 2004-2016 (part-year
data for 2004 and 2016 are annualized by extrapolation). We then tabulate the same measures by
two-digit therapeutic class, averaged over the study time period. Limiting our focus to generic
drugs, we graph the median, mean, and interquartile range of revenues per moleculemanufacturer by study quarter first over all molecules and then disaggregated by molecule
dosage form.
Second, we graph the quarterly number and share of manufacturers entering and exiting
drug markets over time, separately for brands and generics, and then for generics by dosage

40

See Dusetzina, Conti, Yu and Bach [2017], and Aitken, Berndt, Cutler et al. [2016].
Previous work by Berndt and Conti [2016] suggests oral molecule forms tend to exhibit smaller marginal costs of
production compared to injectables, infusibles, topicals and inhalants.
41

12

form. Other things equal, we expect modestly greater numbers and shares of generic entrants
over time, as well as numbers and shares of generic exits over time (though perhaps increased
exit and decreased entry in the most recent years), and greater number and share exits from
markets where the manufacturing technology needed for production is highly specialized (e.g.,
non-orally formulated molecules), and where GDUFA user fees may also generate fixed costs.
Note that this implies an expectation of greater total churn (exit plus entrant) rates over time for
generics compared to brands.
Third, we graph the mean, median and interquartile range of the number of generic
manufacturers per molecule by study quarter over all molecules and then disaggregated by
molecule dosage form. We also plot concentration for generic drugs (measured by HHIs) at the
beginning and end of our study time period by therapeutic class. Due to the very large number
of blockbuster molecules experiencing LOE and initial generic entry since 2011,42 we expect
concentration measures such as HHI to decline over time, and by greater proportions in
therapeutic classes experiencing more extensive patent cliff events.
Fourth, we experiment with a number of simple reduced form regressions. First, at the
aggregate molecule level by quarter, we estimate ordinary least square regressions of
manufacturer exit and entry shares, separately, as a function of regulatory regime, where for
example, a 2% exit share implies a dependent variable measure of 2. We weight our regressions
by the number of active manufacturers within each molecule-formulation-quarter. We define
four regulatory and insurance coverage regimes: (1) before the Medicare Modernization Act
implementation Q4 2004 - Q4 2005 “Pre MMA”; (2) after the Medicare Modernization Act
implementation Q1 2006 - Q1 2010 “MMA”; (3) after ACA passage and implementation Q2
2010 - Q3 2012 “ACA”; and (4) after GDUFA I implementation Q4 2012 - Q3 2016 “GDUFA”.
We estimate these models including controls for drug characteristics, quarterly time passage and
molecule fixed effects. We expect entry to increase in both the ACA and GDUFA regimes,
given the ACA’s market expansion and the large number of blockbuster drugs experiencing LOE
that create opportunities for entrants, and we expect exits to increase in the ACA and GDUFA

42

For a list by year of generic drug approvals see U.S. Food and Drug Administration, “ANDA (Generic) Drug
Approvals – Previous Years,” available at
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/HowDrugsareDevelopedandApproved/DrugandBiologic
ApprovalReports/ANDAGenericDrugApprovals/ucm050527.htm.

13

regimes, given that the patent cliff creates opportunities for generic manufacturers to shift
production from old, mature generics to newly genericized molecules, and because of incentives
to exit brought about by the GDUFA user fees.
Fifth, we estimate molecule price levels on the log scale as a function of regulatory
regime, drug characteristics, counts of manufacturers or corporations supplying the molecule and
alternative measures of manufacturer concentration (HHI). Here we examine the pricing
trajectory of generic drugs over time, the responsiveness of their prices to regulatory regime, and
differences in price levels as a function of drug characteristics. Our dependent variable is
defined at the molecule-formulation-time level taking the log of the average price per standard
unit and estimated standard errors are clustered at the molecule market level. We expect pricing
levels to be higher for non-oral generics compared to oral generics due in part to their higher
fixed costs of production, holding all else constant. We expect pricing to be responsive to
manufacturer counts and concentration both between and within molecule, with prices increasing
in concentration and decreasing in manufacturer counts, holding all else constant.
RESULTS
Descriptive statistics
Putting the U.S. generic drug industry into context, in Table 1 we report descriptive
statistics of our sample of brand and generic manufacturers and molecule markets by year.
Approximately 500-650 manufacturers are in our data between 2004 through 2016. The count of
manufacturers increases roughly linearly over time. As expected, the number of corporations in
all years is slightly smaller than the number of manufacturers (average difference 123 over study
period) but tracks manufacturers in trend. These manufacturers/corporations sold approximately
1700 to 2250 unique molecule-dosage-form products, with the number of molecule-dosageforms increasing at a decreasing rate over our study period. Total inflation-adjusted annual sales
revenue derived from these molecules by these manufacturers ranged (over both brands and
generics) from approximately $295 billion in 2004 to $447 billion in 2016. Brands comprise a
larger share of annual sales revenue compared to generics in all years, but they decrease in
importance over time from 83% of annual sales revenue in 2004 to 74% of annual sales revenue
in 2016. While orally formulated generics comprise the largest category of generic sales revenue
in all years, this share declines from 67% in 2004 to 49% in 2016. At the same time, injectable

14

and other formulated generic drugs become increasingly important to annual sales revenue:
injectable sales revenue increase from 23% of total in 2004 to 38% in 2016 and other sales
revenue increases more modestly from 10% in 2004 to 13% in 2016.
Table 2 reports descriptive statistics of our sample by therapeutic category over the study
period. Interestingly, there is significant variation in both counts of manufacturers/corporations
and counts of molecules by therapeutic class. Most therapeutic classes have between 100 and
300 manufacturers (B= blood and blood forming organs, C= cardiovascular system, D=
dermatologicals, G= genito-urinary system and sex hormones, H= systemic hormones excluding
sex hormones, J= anti-infectives for systemic use, L= antineoplastic and immunomodulating
agents, N= nervous system, R= respiratory system, S= sensory organs and V= various), some
therapeutic classes appear to have fewer than 60 manufacturers or corporations (K= hospital
solutions and T= diagnostic agents) and a handful have larger than 300 (A= alimentary tract and
metabolism, and M= musculo-skeletal system). In terms of average annual revenues, the largest
therapeutic class is N= nervous system with about $53 billion, followed by A= alimentary track
and metabolism at about $44 billion, L= antineoplastic and immunomodulating agents at about
$43 billion, M= musculoskeletal system at almost $40 billion, and J= anti-infectives for systemic
use and C= cardiovascular disease at about $39 billion annually. By contrast, for K= hospital
solutions, average annual revenues are relatively tiny at just under $363 billion. Significant
variation occurs among therapeutic classes in branded revenue share ranging from 4% in K=
hospital solutions to over 90% in L= antineoplastic and immunomodulating agents and almost
90% in T= diagnostic agents. Similarly, there are significant revenue share variation across
therapeutic class by molecule formulation. In some therapeutic classes, generic drugs are largely
non-orally formulated (B= blood and blood forming organs, D= dermatologicals, H= systemic
hormones excluding sex hormones, K= hospital solutions, L= antineoplastic and
immunomodulating agents, M= musculoskeletal system, R= respiratory system, S= sensory
organ molecules, and T= diagnostic agents) or “other” formulated (D= dermatologicals, R=
respiratory system and S= sensory organs molecules).
Figure 1 reports our first set of results -- mean, median, and interquartile range of
quarterly revenue per generic molecule-dosage form-manufacturer sold (note that brands are
excluded from this figure). While median quarterly sales revenues are approximately $100K in
the early years of our study ($400K per year) and double to approximately $200K in the 3rd
15

quarter of 2016 ($800K per year), the 75th percentile of quarterly sales revenue per moleculemanufacturer is approximately $1 million in the early years of our study ($4 million per year)
increasing to approximately $1.5 million in the 3rd quarter of 2016 ($6 million per year).
Although median quarterly revenue per molecule-dosage-form-manufacturer appears to be
approximately stable between 2004 and 2013 and then appears to rise starting around 2014, the
75th percentile of revenue per molecule–manufacturer increases sharply in 2012, a year in which
the “patent cliff” was substantial, and a number of authorized generics experienced 180-day
exclusivity. The 25th percentile is relatively stable at less than $50K per quarter ($200K per
year). Most striking, however, is that in every quarter, the mean revenues per molecule-dosage
form-manufacturer is several times larger than the 75th percentile number, indicating that sales
revenues per molecule-manufacturer are extremely skewed. In the early years of our sample,
mean quarterly revenues were about $3 million per quarter, about three times larger than at the
75th percentile, while by the end of the 2004-2016 time period mean quarterly revenues were
about $4 million, still much larger than the approximately $1.5 million at the 75th percentile.
Hence, although the vast majority of molecule–dosage form-manufacturer sales revenues per
quarter are less than $1.5 million ($6 million annually) in 2016, a small number of much larger
sales revenue molecule-dosage form-manufacturer markets raise the quarterly mean to about $4
million ($16 million annually).
We also report these statistics by molecule-dosage-form (Figures 2, 3 and 4; note the use
of different vertical scales in these figures). In all years injectable or infusible molecules (Figure
3) exhibit larger median, mean and 75Th percentile sales revenue per manufacturer compared to
oral (Figure 2) and other dosage form products (Figure 4). Molecule dosage forms in the other
category exhibit a different periodicity of revenue -- stable or falling through 2013 and then
dramatically increasing beginning in late 2014. Therefore, the aggregate trends in sales revenue
per molecule-manufacturer reported in Figure 1 appear to be driven by orals and injectables.
However, in all three dosage forms, sales revenues per molecule-manufacturer are highly rightskewed, with the difference between mean and median being the largest in the other formulation.
Figures 5 through Figure 8 report our second set of findings, now focused on generic
manufacturer-molecule-dosage-form entry and exit patterns between 2004 and 2016. We find
different entry and exit patterns over time, and notably document decreased entry and increased
exit in the most recent time periods. Figure 5 reports the quarterly number of manufacturers of
16

molecules newly entering in our study sample over time on the left y-axis and the share of
entering manufacturers of molecules as a percentage of total active manufacturers-molecule pairs
in our study sample over time on the right y-axis (note that 2 on the right vertical scale is 2%),
aggregated over dosage forms. The number of entrants increases from about 150 per quarter to
just under 300 per quarter in 2013Q1 (close to the implementation of GDUFA I), and then falls
back to about 175 through 2016. Expressed in percentages, entrant share increases from about
2.5% to about 3.75% between 2004 and early 2013, and then falls to about 2.0% in 2015-2016.
Figure 6 plots the number of exits and share of incumbents exiting the molecule-generic
manufacturer-dosage-form market over time. Here, the time trend for product exits differs
sharply from that for product entrants. Unlike entrants whose numbers and share generally
increased up to late 2012 and then sharply decreased, for exits the number generally increases
over time from about 100 in the early quarters, peaking at about 210 in 2011Q2 and again in
2014Q2 and 2015Q1. Note that the first observed exit peak occurs in 2011, just before the patent
cliff. Also of note is that while the number and share of exits fell after the 2011 peak, both exit
measures were still larger than in the 2004-2007 time frame so that the overall time trend is one
of increasing exits over time.
By comparing numbers and shares in Figures 5 and 6 we find that in all quarters through
2014, the number and share of entrants is larger than the number and share of exits, but after
2014 they tend to converge. In particular, the number (share) of new manufacturer entrants is
about 150-200 (2.3-3%) between 2004 and 2012, increases to 270 (3.8%) in the first quarter of
2013 and then falls (in number to about 175, in share to 2%). Both the number and the share of
new manufacturers exhibit similar periodicity in their changes over time, suggesting stability in
the net number of manufacturers. Total quarterly exit plus entry churn rates are relatively stable
over the study period at about 4.5%, but the entry vs. exit composition shifts. Interestingly,
manufacturer exits are about 100 (1.5%) between 2004 and 2007 and then increase to
approximately 150-200 (2-2.6%) beginning in 2008 and continuing to increase thereafter,
although not linearly.
Figures 7 and 8 graph generic entry and generic exit share, respectively, by molecule
formulation over time. Here the numerator of the share is the number of unique molecule
market-manufacturer pairs by formulation entering or exiting U.S. supply (e.g. oral entrants or

17

exits) and the denominator is the number of incumbent manufacturers by formulation. As seen
in Figure 7, although there are a few outliers, in general the generic entry share for oral and
injectable dosage forms ranges from just under 2% to 4%, while that for other dosage forms is
occasionally greater than 4%, and spikes at 7% in 2013Q1.
As seen in Figure 8, generic exit share by molecule formulation is more variable and
more volatile over time than entry share. In particular, in most quarters but not in late 2013 -early 2014, the generic injectable exit share is less than that for oral and other forms. Until about
2013, the oral generic exit share is larger than that for injectable and other generic dosage forms,
and since 2013 oral and injectable generic exit shares have converged. While the exit share for
other generic dosage forms was generally in between that of oral and injectable generic dosage
forms until 2014, beginning around 2014 the other generic drug exit share increased several fold,
from around 2% to between 3% and almost 6% in 2015.
Thus while for both exits and entrants the aggregate generic share over all molecule
dosage forms was relatively stable over the 2004-2016 study period, abrupt movements in the
exit and entry share of “other” dosage forms have contributed to increased volatility in the latter
part of the study time period.
Figure 9 compares manufacturer entry share over time between drugs by patent status.
As expected, we observe more entrants among generics including branded generics compared to
brands throughout the study period. While the share of generic entrants falls beginning in late
2012, the share of branded entrants is larger post-2012 than earlier, and in the latter years of the
study time period the difference between brand and generic entry shares is much smaller than
earlier. Total brand plus generic entry share falls from about 6% in 2004 to about 4% in 2016.
Analogously, Figure 10 compares manufacturer exit share over time between drugs by
patent status. Generic exit share increases irregularly between 2004 and 2011 from about 1.5%
to about 3%, and then falls to about 2.5% after 2011. For brands the time trend in exit shares is
on balance falling, averaging about 1% over the entire time period, but exit shares spike upward
in 2008-2009, then fall to a low of less than 0.5% in 2012, and increase slowly to about 1.3%
since then.
A third set of results we report begins with Figure 11, which graphs the mean and
interquartile range of manufacturer counts per generic molecule by quarter during the study
18

period (note this figure only includes generic drugs). What we observe is that the number of
manufacturers per molecule dosage form is surprisingly small, implying that competition is
limited. In particular, the median number of manufacturers per molecule dosage form ranges
between 2 and 3 prior to 2008 and then falls to 2 after 2008. Interestingly the 75th percentile of
manufacturer counts of generic drugs is stable at 5-6 throughout the study period, while the mean
increases modestly from about 4.6 to about 5.0 between 2004 and 2016. Unlike what we
observed for revenues per molecule-manufacturer-dosage form in Figures 1 through Figure 4,
where the mean was much larger than revenues at the 75th percentile, for number of
manufacturer counts per molecule dosage form the mean is larger than the median, but the mean
is less than the value at the 75th percentile. Hence, while number of manufacturer counts is right
skewed, it is much less so than is the case with revenues per manufacturer-molecule market,
suggesting that the outlier revenue molecule per manufacturer product markets are likely
occurring in markets with a small number of manufacturers.
Figures 12, 13 and 14 report manufacturer per molecule counts by molecule dosage form
among generic and branded generic molecules only. In all quarters, the median number of
manufacturers of injectable drugs remains constant at 2; the median number of oral drugs ranges
between 2-3 with a decrease observed in 2009-2012 and then a recovery to 3 in 2013; the median
number of manufacturers of other generic drugs is initially 1 but increases to 1.5 or 2 in 2013 and
thereafter. For all dosage forms, means always lie below the 75th percentile values but above the
median. For orally formulated molecule markets, means gradually increase over time from just
over 5 to almost 6, for injectables the mean is stable at about 2.6 to 2.7, while for molecules in
the other formulation category the mean is generally falling over time from about 3.2 to about
2.8. In summary, the mean count of manufacturers per molecule of about 5 to 6 is about twice
that for injectable and other forms, both of which are about 2.8 towards the end of our study time
period.
The final set of results we report concerns the concentration of generic and branded
generic molecule markets which we quantify using two separate metrics. First, we examine the
share of generic drugs supplied by 1, 2 3 and 4 or greater manufacturers over the study period
and by dosage form. Figure 15 documents that approximately 39-40% of generic drug molecule
dosage forms are supplied by only one manufacturer and that that percentage grows to about
44% in early 2011, after which it falls back to about 40%. The share of molecules supplied by
19

two manufacturers grows over the study period as well from just about 11% to 13%, implying
that the share of generic molecule dosage forms supplied by one or two manufacturers increases
from just under 50% in 2004-2005 to just over 50% in 2016. Although the share of molecules
supplied by four or more suppliers decreases from about 40% to 39%, the share supplied by three
molecules decline slightly from about 9% to 8% between 2004 and 2016. An alternative
perspective emphasizes stability, noting that over the entire 2004-2016 time period, the share of
generic molecule dosage forms manufactured by one or two suppliers has remained relatively
constant at about 50%.
Figures 16, 17 and 18 repeats these calculations by generic drug dosage form.
Comparing across drug formulations, we find that “other” formulated drugs and injectables and
infusibles are in every quarter more likely to be supplied to the U.S. market by 2 or fewer
suppliers compared to oral generic drugs. Furthermore, the share of drug product markets in
both oral and non-orally formulated categories supplied by two or fewer manufacturers grows
over our study period; this trend appears more pronounced among non-orally formulated drugs.
An alternative way of quantifying market concentration is by computing the Herfindahl
Hirschman Index (HHI) metric in unit volume shares among generics by therapeutic classes.
Figure 19 plots manufacturer concentration among only generic drugs by molecule therapeutic
class in Q2 2005 (the “early period” on the horizontal axis) and in Q1 2016 (the “late period” on
the vertical axis). Classes above the 45 degree dotted line have increased concentration over
time, while those below that line represent decreased concentration over time. While molecules
belonging to numerous therapeutic classes became less concentrated over our study period (e.g.,
C= cardiovascular system, N= nervous, H= systemic hormonal excluding sex hormones, L=
antineoplastic and immunomodulating agents, M= muscolo-skeletal system, J= antiinfectives for
systemic use, S= sensory organs, and G= genito-urinary system and sex hormones), others
became more concentrated including K= hospital solutions and V= various. A number of
therapeutic classes did not experience any substantial change in manufacturer concentration
during the study period, including molecules in the following classes: A= alimentary tract and
metabolism, B= blood and blood forming organs, D= dermatologicals, T= diagnostic agents, and
R= respiratory system agents. Note that while concentration as measured by the HHI is
generally decreasing over time, as shown on the vertical axis, for most therapeutic classes HHI
concentration is far above 5,000. In only two therapeutic classes, N= nervous system and H=
20

systemic hormones excluding sex hormones is the HHI less than or slightly larger than 5,000 in
Q1 2016. Thus, concentration among manufacturers appears to have declined over time in most
therapeutic classes, yet generally concentration among manufacturers of generic drugs is very
high and above Department of Justice horizontal merger guideline thresholds.
In summary, U.S. generic molecule markets typically generate rather modest annual
revenues, have a small number of competitors, and are highly concentrated. Concentration of
suppliers appears either rather stable, or by some measures to be growing over time especially
among non-orally formulated generic drugs and among select therapeutic classes.
Reduced form regression results
We have also undertaken several preliminary multiple regression analyses. Table 3
reports the results of regressions of share of manufacturers exiting as a function of regulatory
regime, drug characteristics, time and the interaction of time passage and drug characteristics
where we limit the sample to generic and branded generic molecules and exclude brands. To
save on space, we suppress standard error estimates in this and subsequent tables, and cluster all
of our standard errors at the molecule level. In the Pre-MMA period, the share of manufacturers
exiting is about 1.552% (the constant term plus the pre-MMA coefficient in Column 1); during
the MMA period, the exit share increased to 1.891% (1.552 + 0.339), after MMA and during the
ACA period the exit rate increased to 2.368% (1.552 + 0.816), and since GDUFA
implementation in 2012Q4 it fell slightly to 2.306% (1.552 + 0.754). Manufacturer exits are
estimated to increase over time by 0.025 percentage points each quarter in the data (Column 3,
time trend coefficient). After controlling for molecule formulation and therapeutic class
(Column 2), the effect of regulatory regime passage, notably the ACA (0.948 percentage points)
and GDUFA implementation (0.896 percentage points) compared to Pre-MMA levels appears to
have a statistically significant positive effect on manufacturer exit share. Exit rates are higher
among oral formulations (0.494 percentage points) and injectables (0.199 percentage points)
compared to other formulation types (Column 3). Finally, columns 4 and 5 demonstrate the
heterogeneity in time trends of the exit share across therapeutic category and formulation type.
Table 4 reports results of repeating these regressions for manufacturer entry share into
molecule markets as a function of regulatory regime, drug characteristics, time and the
interaction of time passage and drug characteristics where the sample is limited to generic drug

21

molecules. Base level entry share of manufacturers into molecule markets amounts to 3.076% in
the Pre-MMA period (constant term in Column 1 plus Pre-MMA coefficient) and is about twice
that observed for exits (1.552% in Table 3). However, compared to Pre-MMA levels,
manufacturer entry decreases over time by 0.014 percentage points each quarter in the data
(Column 3, time trend coefficient). We also estimate declines in entry after MMA
implementation amounting to 0.251 percentage points and after GDUFA passage amounting to
0.431 percentage points (Column 1) compared to the Pre-MMA period. Less entry also occurs
among injectables (0.406 to 0.466 percentage points, Columns 2,3,4) compared to other
formulated molecule markets. More entry occurs among orals (0.313 to 0.370% more) compared
to other formulated molecules (Columns 2-4) holding all else constant. There is considerable
variation in average entry rates across therapeutic classes (Columns 2-5), and among therapeutic
class specific time trends (Column 4). The formulation specific time trend in entry rates is
declining for all three molecule formulation categories but is declining noticeably faster for
“other” formulations compared to injectable or oral formulations (Column 5).
Note that in terms of regulatory regime, while entry rates during the ACA and GDUFA
time periods are falling relative to the pre-MMA era (column 1 of Table 4), exit rates during the
ACA and GDUFA regimes are increasing relative to the pre-MMA era (column 1 of Table 3).
With entry rates declining and exit rates increasing during these most recent time periods, the
decline in concentration may be decelerating, or may even be reversed with concentration
increases. This raises issues concerning the impact of concentration on generic drug prices, to
which we now turn our attention.
Table 5 reports results of regressing log of price level as a function of regulatory regime,
log corporation or log manufacturer counts and drug characteristics among generic and branded
generic molecules. Column 1 includes regulatory regime fixed effects. In the Pre-MMA period
we estimate generic molecule price levels to be $0.926 per standard unit (exp^-0.082 in Column
1). Prices increase after MMA implementation, increase further following ACA implementation,
and again after GDUFA implementation (Columns 1 and 2) compared to the Pre-MMA period.
Of greater interest is the association between prices and concentration. A robust finding is that
the estimated elasticity of price with respect to corporation count ranges from -0.735 to -0.803
(Columns 2 through 6), while the estimated elasticity of price with respect to manufacturer count
is very similar, ranging from -0.710 to -0.777 (Columns 8 - 12). Assuming an estimated
22

elasticity of -0.75, a log change from three to two manufacturers is equal to -0.4955 log units,
implying a predicted price increase of -0.75x-0.4955 = 0.3716, or about a 37% price increase. It
is important to note that when we add fixed effects for molecule (Columns 7 and 13) the impact
of corporation or manufacturer count on price remains negative in sign, statistically significant,
but their estimated effect size is approximately halved. Therapeutic classes are observed to
exhibit large between class price variability. For example, therapeutic classes with high prices
(compared to those in the excluded class A= Alimentary class) include: L= antineoplastic and
immunomodulating agents, T= diagnostic agents, J= anti-infectives for systemic use and K=
hospital solutions (Columns 4 and 10), holding all else constant.
Finally, Table 6 reports results of regressing log of prices as a function of the log of
manufacturer concentration (log HHI), drug characteristics, regulatory regime and time passage
among generic drugs only. Pre-MMA prices per standard unit of generic molecules are observed
to be approximately a dollar. We also find increasing manufacturer concentration is associated
with statistically significant greater prices for generic drugs in all specifications (Column 2 - 7);
a 1% increase in the HHI manufacturer consolidation measures is associated with a 0.843 to
0.963 percentage point increase in price (Columns 2 - 7). Also notable are the coefficients on
drug characteristics and manufacturer concentration: holding all else constant, the prices of
injectable and other formulated generic molecules are more responsive to increasing
manufacturer concentration (Columns 8 - 12), even when controlling for molecule fixed effects
(Column 13).
SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION
In this study, we have examined entry, exit, the extent of competition and relationships
between industry structure and selected measures of market performance among all prescription
drugs in the U.S., using QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective data, 2004Q4 – 2016Q3.
Approximately 500-650 manufacturers supplied prescription drugs between 2004 and
2016, with the count of manufacturers increasing steadily over time. These suppliers sold
approximately 1700 to 2200 unique molecules, as the number increased at a decreasing rate over
the study period. Total annual sales revenue derived from these molecules by these brand and
generic manufacturers increased substantially over time, from approximately $300 billion in
2004 to $450 billion in 2016. Brands comprise a larger share of annual sales revenue compared

23

to generics in all years, but brands decrease in importance over time from 83% of annual sales
revenue in 2004 to 74% in 2016.
We have four sets of important, novel findings on the supply of generic drugs in the U.S.
First, quarterly sales revenues per quarter for a typical manufacturer-generic drug are
surprisingly small: Median quarterly sales revenues are approximately $100K in the early years
of our study ($400K annually) and double to approximately $200K in the 3rd quarter of 2016
($800K annually). The 75th percentile of quarterly sales revenue per molecule-manufacturer is
approximately $1 million in the early years of our study ($4 million per year) and increases to
approximately $1.5 million in the 3rd quarter of 2016 ($6 million per year). However, these
revenue data are extremely right skewed, with the mean values almost three times larger than the
75th percentile values. When paired with other research documenting that the number of distinct
molecules for which the sponsor has an approved ANDA is typically five or less,43 this research
suggests that the U.S. generic drug industry is populated by numerous relatively small firms,
with each of their small product portfolios capturing modest annual revenues. However, for a
small number of generic products and firms, revenues are much greater. We suspect this latter
category of generics drugs is largely comprised of generics having 180 day exclusivity,
“authorized generics” -- those manufactured by or licensed from the branded drug holder -- and a
select number of branded generics,44 although more research into this skewness is warranted.
A second set of findings concerns entry and exit numbers and rates, which have differing
time trends. The number of entrants and the entry rate increased to about 2013, but have
declined since then. By contrast, the number of exits and the exit rate have generally increased
over time. While entry numbers and entry rates are generally greater than exit numbers and exit
rates, the difference between them has decreased in recent years. Why the number of exits is
generally increasing over time merits further study, but we note this finding is consistent with the
observed decline in the number of active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) and final dosage form

43

See Berndt, Conti and Murphy [2017].
On 180 day exclusivity, see Berndt and Aitken [2011]. A detailed description of the availability, prices and
revenue generated by authorized generics may be found in Federal Trade Commission, “Authorized Generic Drugs:
Short-Term Effects and Long-Term Impact”, An Interim Report” [2011], A list of authorized generic drugs supplied
to the U.S. market and maintained by the FDA is available at https://www.fda.gov/drugs/
developmentapprovalprocess/howdrugsaredevelopedandapproved/approvalapplications/abbreviatednewdrugapplicat
ionandagenerics/ucm126389.htm.
44

24

(FDF) manufacturing facilities reported in Berndt, Conti and Berndt [2017] based on
manufacturer-supplied data from the FDA.
A third rather surprising result is that the median number of manufacturers producing in a
molecule market is between 2 and 3 up until 2007, and is 2 thereafter.45 The 25th percentile is 1
manufacturer, and the 75th percentile is 5-6 manufacturers. We find evidence to suggest
decreasing numbers of generic drug manufacturers over our study period, particularly following
implementation of the Affordable Care Act and GDUFA I, attributable both to more exit and less
entry over time. Furthermore, the share of generic drugs with only one manufacturer is
approximately 40 percent and has grown over time; non-orally formulated generic drugs are
much more likely to be supplied by 2 or fewer manufacturers than are oral generic drugs. Hence,
we conclude that U.S. generic drug markets should be considered in steady state to typically
involve only a small number of competitors. This conclusion contrasts rather sharply with
evidence presented by previous authors suggesting that generic competition is significant,
commonly involving four or more suppliers, in the first 24 months after loss of patent protection.
The fourth set of important findings we report is that while market concentration as
measured by the HHI has generally declined between the beginning and end of our study time
period, even in 2016Q2 in 13 of the 15 therapeutic classes we examined, average HHIs were
over 4,000 -- a level far above Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission thresholds
for generating scrutiny of any consolidation activities. Only in two of the 15 therapeutic classes
(nervous systems, and systemic hormones excluding sex hormones) was the 2016Q2 HHI
concentration metric less than or slightly greater than 5,000.
We also present evidence documenting inflation-adjusted prices of generic drugs have
increased over time and are inversely associated with limited supply competition in moleculedosage form product markets. These results are consistent with media reports of large prices of
certain “sole source” or “branded-generic” drugs.46,47,48

45

Although their research is based on a different data set restricted to molecules being either single-source brand or
multi-source generic throughout the 2008-2013 time period, Dave, Kesselheim, Fox et al. [2017] have recently
reported similar limited number of competitor findings in U.S. prescription pharmaceutical molecule markets.
46
See discussion by Rockoff [2016].
47
See discussion by Silverman [2014a].
48
For details see U. S. Department of Health and Human Services, Assistant Secretary of Policy and Evaluation,
[2016].

25

Our findings have several implications. First, we are intrigued by the implication of our
findings that many generic drug markets in the U.S. are supplied by monopolists. Some
therapeutic classes and molecule formulations appear to be long characterized by this market
structure. With such limited suppliers of generic drugs observed over our study time frame and
high levels of concentration, we wonder why prices of generic drugs and associated revenues
have not risen more dramatically over time than we have observed. This issue clearly merits
detailed further inquiry. Here we briefly offer several hypotheses.
One hypothesis is that with a small number of direct wholesaler purchasers,
pharmaceutical benefit management firms (PBMs) and group purchasing organizations,
competition among the small number of suppliers of each molecule is intense due in large part to
the fact that it resembles undifferentiated Bertrand competition, where prices are close to
marginal costs in spite of there being only a small number of competitors.49 We wonder whether
the increasing shift towards the use of generic drugs accelerated by consolidation among PBMs
and downstream purchasers whose buying power, utilization management tools and ability to
play generic manufacturers off against each other, has helped to establish and maintain
downward pressures on generic drug prices. The intensity of price competition among generics
is likely more intense than that among branded drug prices in numerous therapeutic classes with
multiple alternative therapies.50
A related hypothesis is that many generic molecule markets (particularly among oral
formulations) are contestable. In a contestable market, firms hold an option to enter, facilitated
by minimal entry (and exit) costs on short notice. When markets are contestable, even if there
are only a small number of actual suppliers, the prices of the products and associated revenues
may more closely resemble those resulting from competitive markets compared to monopolies or
duopolies.51 One institutional characteristic hindering contestability in the U.S. is the entry cost

49

For further discussion of this competition, see Berndt, McGuire and Newhouse [2012] and Berndt and Newhouse
[2011].
51

Contestable markets and their implications are discussed in, inter alia, Economics Online [2017]. Note that recent
widely publicized price increases for very old drug molecules apparently occurred in cases where no previously
exited manufacturer still owned an approved ANDA, and thus barriers to entry were very high, i.e., the market was
not contestable. See U.S. Senate Committee on Aging [2016] for further details on these markets.

26

of obtaining an ANDA – whose direct costs have been estimated to be in the range of $1 - $5
million.52
However, for those firms holding an ANDA but having temporarily exited the market,
the threat of reentry might credibly facilitate contestability. Specifically, the threat of reentry
could act to discipline incumbents’ pricing behavior, for if prices were to increase far beyond
competitive levels the temporarily exited manufacturer may choose to reenter.
This raises the question of how costly generic drug market discontinuation or complete
withdrawal are.53 Although sometimes used interchangeably, product discontinuations and
product withdrawals are two distinct actions. With either a letter to the FDA or the filling out of
a form, the ANDA holder can inform the FDA that it will be discontinuing the marketing of a
product. The discontinuation can be temporary or indefinite. The holder continues to hold the
ANDA while the product is discontinued and can inform the FDA at a later date that it will
resume marketing the product. What the FDA will require of the ANDA holder before it can
resume marketing legally depends on, among other things, the duration of the discontinuation,
and the extent to which new manufacturing facilities and marketing activities will differ from
pre-discontinuation. If under resumed marketing the manufacturing process will be altered
considerably and be at a new facility, or involve a new formulation, the FDA may require an
inspection and perhaps even approval of a prior approved supplement. If the duration of the
discontinuation is short and there is no meaningful change from pre-discontinuation
manufacturing and marketing activities, then marketing can resume with little delay, need for
inspection or other formalities. Under GDUFA I, even if the discontinuation involved closing an
entire active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) or final dosage form (FDF) manufacturing facility,
the ANDA holder would continue to be assessed annual API and FDF facility fees during the
duration of the discontinuation period. Under the proposed 2017 reauthorized Generic Drug
User Fee program (GDUFA II), the ANDA holder pays an ANDA Holder Program Fee while the
product is discontinued, but there are ways in which this annual carrying cost can be

52

See Berndt and Aitken [2011] for references estimating generic ANDA entry costs.
We are indebted to Mr. Kurt Karst of Hyman, Phelps and McNamara PC for helpful discussion on these
definitions and issues, but are solely responsible for any errors or inaccurate interpretations.
53

27

minimized.54 Note that under GDUFA II, the annual cost to a firm of indefinitely discontinuing
marketing a product could be quite low, and much lower than under GDUFA I.
In contrast to a discontinuation, an ANDA holder can inform the FDA it is withdrawing
the product. Withdrawal is permanent, and implies that the FDA’s approval of the initial ANDA
is rescinded. Under both GDUFA I and GDUFA II, no annual user fees are assessed on
withdrawn ANDAs. After accumulating a number of withdrawn ANDAs, the FDA typically
publishes a list of withdrawn products in the Federal Register and in the “Additions/Deletions
for Prescription Drug Product List” in its periodic issues of the Orange Book, but in that list it
does not distinguish discontinued from withdrawn ANDAs. Hence, based only on Orange Book
information, a potential entrant cannot distinguish between withdrawn and discontinued ANDA
products, although the identity of withdrawn products might be obtained by scavenging through
Federal Register announcements.
What do these provisions imply for reentry costs that might support the existence of
contestable generic drug markets? Note the option value cost of withdrawal is much larger than
that of discontinuation since the former requires a new ANDA. Regarding discontinuation,
under GDUFA II, the annual costs of hibernating are smaller than under GDUFA I -- under
GDUFA I the annual API and FDF facility fees could be substantial. Under GDUFA II, the
annual ANDA Program User fees could be mitigated by parking the ANDAs in a repository (see
previous footnote). Under both GDUFA I and GDUFA II, the height of reentry barriers depends
on the duration of the discontinuation and the need to alter post-discontinuation from prediscontinuation manufacturing and marketing activities. For incumbent manufacturers, the
extent to which potential entrants could discipline incumbents’ incentive to increase prices would
depend on how much information the incumbent had regarding which ANDAs were withdrawn
vs. discontinued, and for discontinued ANDAs, how long since the discontinuation occurred and
how radically different would manufacturing be post-discontinuation from pre-discontinuation.

54

In the 28 June 2017 FDA Blog, “ANDA Arbitrage & the New ANDA Holder Fee Under GDUFA II”, Kurt Karst
writes how a company called ANDA Repository LLC could temporarily “park” discontinued ANDAs and pool them
so it took advantage of lower per-ANDA annual fees for ANDA sponsors holding 20 or more ANDAs, and then
returned control of the ANDA to the original ANDA holder when it wanted to resume marketing). FDA publishes
the cumulative list of discontinued products in a cumulative supplement “Additions/Deletions for Prescription Drug
Product List” in its periodic issues of the Orange Book.

28

Although the semblance of the generic drug industry under GDUFA I and GDUFA II
merits additional study, based on this preliminary analysis we conclude that the U.S. generic
drug market does in fact have some likeness to a contestable market, but the semblance likely
varies considerably across the various molecule-dosage-form markets and over time related to
regulatory regime. How this limited likeness to contestable markets has interacted with demand
shifts due to undifferentiated Bertrand price competition in the presence of highly concentrated
buying power from wholesalers, PBMs and pharmacy chains and, in turn, impacted generic price
setting are very important issues inviting further theoretical and empirical research.
A third implication of our findings is that while the Waxman-Hatch Act is founded on the
assumption of the desirability of establishing competition through lowering initial entry costs,
less policy focus has been placed on the long-term maintenance of competition in generic
prescription drug markets. Over time, several forces may act to erode the latter. Alleged anticompetitive activities among generic manufacturers and between generic and branded firms
include raising entry barriers by, for example, “pay for delay” agreements.55 Our results provide
suggestive evidence that federal policies in pursuit of worthy goals, including ACA and GDUFA
I, might have inadvertently eroded generic competition through increased user fees that increased
entry barriers and incentives to exit.56 Some observers have considered the FDA’s increased
intensity of inspecting foreign and domestic manufacturing sites for compliance with good
manufacturing practices as contributing to plant closings and drug shortages.57 Future research
should more closely examine the intended and unintended effects of these and other policies on
generic drug competition.
Antitrust policy is but one long established tool expressly aimed at maintaining
competition in consumer product markets. An important issue raised by our findings is the
adequacy of the current Hart-Scott-Rodino $80.8 million minimum threshold for required premerger public reporting of acquisition transactions to the Federal Trade Commission and
Department of Justice.58 We find here that generic molecule markets typically involve less than
$600K in annual sales revenues and include only 2-3 competitors; consolidation among such

55

For further discussion, see Hemphill and Sampat [2012].
For further discussion, see Berndt, Conti and Murphy [2017].
57
Woodcock and Wosinska [2015] and Stomberg [2016].
58
See Federal Trade Commission [2017].
56

29

small firms could likely involve transactions less than $80 million, failing to trigger the HartScott-Rodino threshold in spite of generating potential adverse impacts in small but already
concentrated markets, resulting in near-monopolies of generic drug markets with minimal if any
public scrutiny. Over time such activity could substantially increase concentration of many (or
even most) established generic drugs into a very small number of competitors.
Recent Congressional deliberations have raised the issue of whether the FDA should be
required to provide expedited review of ANDA applications whenever the generic molecule
market has very little competition, defined as three or fewer manufacturers.59 Our finding that
the median number of competitors in a generic molecule market is two and that over 50 percent
of generic molecules are supplied by two or fewer one manufacturer suggests that the FDA
would likely find this mandate to result in it being required to grant expedited review status to a
very large share of ANDA submissions. This raises the issue of whether the anticipated fees
collected by generic manufacturers to fund GDUFA’s reauthorization will be adequate to meet
the potential FDA workload induced by this new review mandate. More fundamentally, U.S.
federal policy has only limited experience and modest success in introducing more competition
between potential suppliers once the structure of product markets has evolved to become a
monopoly, duopoly or limited oligopoly. Those experiences have primarily involved the
Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission or state-level attorneys general.60
There is little precedent for using tools at the disposal of the FDA to increase generic
competition.
Our results are preliminary and their limitations suggest potentially fruitful areas for
future research. Regarding data integrity, there appear to be a fairly substantial number of mnf x
molecule x quarter triads with suspiciously low revenues; approximately 10% of mnf x mlist x
quarter triads have less than $1,000 dollars in revenue. QuintilesIMS staff informed us there are
no minimal cutoff thresholds governing whether to report non-zero sales. Use of alternative
arbitrary cutoff values in sales revenue or unit volumes could establish robustness of our
findings. Rather than the number of firms that is exiting or entering, another possible metric is
59

Prescription Drug and Health Improvement Act of 2017: Senator Al Franken. (Accessed on April 19, 2017 at
https://www.franken.senate.gov/files/documents/170209PrescriptionDrugandHealthImprovementActof2017OnePag
er.pdf).
60
For discussion of the use of U.S. antitrust policy to promote competition across economic sectors, see Scherer and
Ross [1990], chapters 9 through 17, and Carlton and Perloff [2005], chapters 16 through 20.

30

the percent of the market that is exiting or entering, since this alternative would weight
differentially the significance of small, possibly falsely, recorded data generating spurious entry
and exit. Previous industrial economics studies have reported the sales contribution of new firms
in the first year in which they are observed and the sales contribution of exiting firms in the last
year in which they were observed to the product market.61 Based on this measure, one could
define average size of entering firm relative to incumbents and the average size of exiting firms
relative to non-exiting firms and correlate this with price levels and trends over time.
Another potentially fruitful area of research involves further categorizing manufacturer
“type” by identifying the annual revenue, country of incorporation, year of incorporation,
organizational structure (standalone corporation or subsidiary of another firm, publicly traded or
privately held) and the existence and timing of mergers and acquisitions among manufacturers
using the SDC Platinum, a collection of databases on companies registered in the U.S. and a
product of Thomson Reuters Financial Securities Data. These categorizations could be crosschecked using a web search of all listed manufacturers, trade press and financial services reports
(including annual Parexel industry reports), with the presence, date and type of consolidation
being noted for each firm. This could provide information on the roles of consolidations and
merger and acquisitions on measures of concentration, and ultimately on price levels, price
changes and revenues.
Finally, future research might explore use of semi-structural and structural models to
relate cross-sectional and dynamic market structure to observed pricing and revenue trends
among generic drugs under conditions of imperfect competition.62 To circumvent issues of
endogeneity, one could limit the sample to triopolies, and examine the price and aggregate output
effects of exits that result in a duopoly, or entrants that result in a four-firm market.

62

See Dunne, Klimek, Roberts, Xu [2009], Pesendorfer and Schmidt-Dengler [2003], Bajari, Benkard, and Levin
[2007], Pakes, Ostrovsky and Berry [2007], and Aguirregabiria and Mira [2007].

31

REFERENCES
Aguirregabiria, V. and P. Mira [2007], "Sequential Estimation of Dynamic Discrete Games”,
Econometrica, 75(1):1-53.
Aitken, M., E.R. Berndt, D.M. Cutler, M. Kleinrock and L. Maini [2016], “Has The Era Of Slow
Growth for Prescription Drug Spending Ended?”, Health Affairs 35(9):1595-1603.
Barrett, J. [2017], “Generic Drug Companies Seek Consolidation Amid Pricing Pressures”,
Pharmacy Times, January 19. Available online at
http://www.pharmacytimes.com/publications/issue/2017/january2017/generic-drug-compani...
Bajari, P., C. L. Benkard, and J. Levin [2007], "Estimating Dynamic Models of Imperfect
Competition”, Econometrica, 75(5):1331-1370.
Berndt, E.R. and M.L. Aitken [2011], “Brand Loyalty, Generic Entry and Price Competition in
Pharmaceuticals in the Quarter Century after the 1984 Waxman-Hatch Legislation”,
International Journal of the Economics of Business, 18(2):177-201, July.
Berndt, E.R., R.M. Conti and S.J. Murphy [2017], “The Generic Drug User Fee Amendments:
An Economic Perspective”, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, Working
Paper No. 23642, August.
Berndt, E.R., T.G. McGuire, J.P. Newhouse [2011], “A Primer on the Economics of Prescription
Pharmaceutical Pricing in Health Insurance Markets”, Forum for Health Economics and Policy,
November, 14(2), Article 10. Available online at http://www.bepress.com/fhep/14/2/10.
Berndt, E.R. and J.P. Newhouse [2012], “Pricing and Reimbursement in U.S. Pharmaceutical
Markets”, ch. 8 in Patricia M. Danzon and Sean N. Nicholson, eds., The Oxford Handbook on
the Economics of the Biopharmaceutical Industry, New York: Oxford University Press, 201-265.
Berry, S. and P. Reiss [2007], “Empirical Models of Entry and Market Structure”, ch. 29 in Mark
Armstrong and Robert Porter, eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization, Vol. 3, Amsterdam:
North-Holland Elsevier, 1845-1886.
Bresnahan, T.F. and P. Reiss [1988], “Do Entry Conditions Vary Across Markets?”, Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 833-871.
Bresnahan, T.F. and P. Reiss [1991], “Entry and Competition in Concentrated Markets”, Journal
of Political Economy 99:977-1009.
Carlton, D.W. and J.M. Perloff [2005], Modern Industrial Organization, Fourth Edition, Boston:
Pearson Addison Wesley.
Conti, R.M. and E.R. Berndt [2014], “Specialty Drug Prices and Utilization After Loss of U.S.
Patent Exclusivity, 2001-2007”, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research,
Working Paper No. 20016, March. Available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20016..
Dafny, L., M. Duggan and S. Ramanarayanan [2012], “Paying a Premium on Your Premium?
Consolidation in the U.S. Health Insurance Industry”, American Economic Review, April,
102(2):1161-1185.
Dave, C.V., A. S. Kesselheim, E. R. Fox, P. Qiu, A. Hartzema [2017], “High Generic Drug
Prices and Market Competition: A Retrospective Cohort Study”, Annals of Internal Medicine,
July. doi:10.7326/M16-1432.
32

Deutsch, L.L. [1975], “Structure, Performance, and the Net Rate of Entry into Manufacturing
Industry”, Southern Economics Journal, 41:450-456.
Dranove, D. [2012], “Health Care Markets, Regulators and Certifiers”, ch. 10 in Mark V. Pauly,
Thomas G. McGuire, and Pedro P. Barros, eds., Handbook of Health Economics, Vol. 2,
Amsterdam: North Holland Elsevier, 639-690.
Duggan, M., and F.M. Scott Morton [2011], “The Medium Term Impact of Medicare Part D on
Pharmaceutical Prices”, American Economic Review, May, 101(3):387-392.
Duggan, M., P. Healy, and F.M. Scott Morton [2008], “Providing Prescription Drug Coverage to
the Elderly: America's Experiment with Medicare Part D”, Journal of Economic Perspectives,
Fall, 22(4):69-92.
Duggan, M. and F.M. Scott Morton [2010], “The Effect of Medicare Part D on Pharmaceutical
Prices and Utilization”, American Economic Review, March, 100(1):590-607.
Dunne, T., M.J. Roberts, and L. Samuelson [1988], "Patterns of Firm Entry and Exit in U.S.
Manufacturing Industries”, The Rand Journal of Economics, 19(4):495-515.
Dusetzina, S.S., R.M. Conti, N. Yu, P.B. Bach [2017], “Are Rebates in Part D Increasing Costs
for Patients and Medicare?”, Journal of the American Medical Association - Internal Medicine,
May 30.
Economics Online [2017], “Contestable Markets”. Available online at
http://www.economicsonline.co.uk/Business_economics/Contestable_markets.html.
Federal Trade Commission [2017], “HSR threshold adjustments and reportability for 2017”,
Premerger Notification Office Staff, Bureau of Competition, February 7.
Federal Trade Commission [2011], “Authorized Generic Drugs: Short-Term Effects and LongTerm Impact”, August. Available online at www.ftc.gov/opa/2011/08/genericdrugs.html.
Fein, A.J. [2013], “Retail Generic Drug Costs Go Up, Up, and Away”, Drug Channels,
November 19. Available online at http://www.drugchannels.net/2013/11/retail-generic-drrugcosts-go-up-up-and.html.
Fein, A.J. [2014a], “Retail Generic Drug Inflation Reaches New Heights”, Drug Channels,
August 12. Available online at http://www.drugchannels.net/2014/08/retail-generic-druginflation-reaches.html.
Fein, A.J. [2014b], “Winners and Losers from Generic Drug Inflation”, Drug Channels, August
13. Available online at http://www.drugchannels.net/2014/08/winners-and-losers-from-genericdrug.html.
Fein, A.J. [2014c], “In the Third Quarter, Retail Generic Drug Inflation Kept on Truckin’”, Drug
Channels, November 18. Available online at http://www.drugchannels.net/2014/11/in-thirdquarter-retail-generic-drug.html.
Fein, A.J. [2015a], “Retail Generic Drug Inflation Eases, but the FDA Keeps Prices High”, Drug
Channels, April 15. Available online at http://www.drugchnnels.net/2015/04/retail-genericdrug-inflation-eases-but.html.

33

Fein, A.J. [2015b], “The Retail Generic Drug Inflation Slowdown: It’s Real”, Drug Channels,
August 25. Available online at http://www.drugchannels.net/2015/08/the-retail-generic-druginflation.html.
Fein, A.J. [2016], “The FDA Is Finally Ending Generic Inflation – and Hurting Wholesaler
Profits”, Drug Channels, February 10. Available online at
http://www.drugchannels.net/2016/02/the-fda-is-finally-ending-generic.html.
Fein, A. J. [2017], “Drug Channels News Roundup, May 2017: Express Scripts, WBAD, DIR
Fees, JAMA, and #Asembia17 Photos”, Drug Channels, May 31. Available online at
http://www.drugchannels.net;2017/05/drug-channels-news-roundup-may-2017.html.
Frank, R.G. and D.S. Salkever [1997], “Generic Entry and the Pricing of Pharmaceuticals”,
Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 6(1):75-90.
Gaynor, M., K. Ho, R.J. Town [2015], “The Industrial Organization of Health-Care Markets”,
Journal of Economic Literature, June, 53(2):235-284.
Goedken, A.M., J.M. Urmie, K.B. Farris, W.R. Doucette [2010], “Impact of Cost Sharing on
Prescription Drugs Used by Medicare Beneficiaries”, Research in Social and Administrative
Pharmacy, June, 6(2):100-9.
Gorecki, P.K. [1975], “The Determinants of Entry by New and Diversifying Enterprises in the
UK Manufacturing Sector, 1958-1963: Some Tentative Results.” Applied Economics, 7:139-147.
Gorecki, P.K. [1976], “The Determinants of Entry by Domestic and Foreign Enterprises in
Canadian Manufacturing Industries: Some Comments and Empirical Results”, Review of
Economics and Statistics 58:485-488.
Grabowski, H., J.M. Vernon [1996], “Longer Patents for Increased Generic Competition in the
US”, PharmacoEconomics 10 Suppl. 2:101-123.
Harding, D. [2010], “Gaining Market Share in the Generic Drug Industry Through Acquisitions
and Partnerships”, White Paper, Thomson Reuters, December. Available online at
thomsonreuters.com.
Hemphill, C.S. and B.N. Sampat [2012], “Evergreening, Patent Challenges, and Effective
Market Life in Pharmaceuticals”, Journal of Health Economics, 31, pp. 327-339.
Hendeles, L., L. Colice, R.J. Meyer [2007], “Withdrawal of Albuterol Inhalers Containing
Chlorofluorocarbon Propellants”, N Engl J Med, 356:1344-1351, March 29, 2007.
Herrick, D.M. [2015], “What Is Increasing the Cost of Generic Drugs? (Part I: The Supply
Chain”, Dallas, TX: National Center for Policy Analysis, Policy Report No. 371, September.
Available online at www.ncpa.org.
Herrick, D.M. [2016], “Regulatory and Legal Reasons for Generic Drug Price Hikes”, Statement
for the Record, Developments in the Prescription Drug Market, Hearings before the United
States House of Representatives, Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, February 4.
Available online at www.ncpa.org.
IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics [2016], “Medicine use and Spending in the U.S.: A
Review of 2015 and Outlook to 2020,” April.

34

Karst, K.R. [2017], “ANDA Arbitrage & the New ANDA Holder Program Fee Under GDUFA
II”, Hyman, Phelps & McNamara, P. C., FDA Law Blog, June 28.
McGuckin, R. [1972], “Entry, Concentration Change, and Stability of Market shares.” Southern
Economics Journal 38:363-370.
Orr, D. [1974], “The Determinants of Entry: A Study of the Canadian Manufacturing Industries”,
Review of Economics and Statistics 56(1):58-66.
Pakes, A., M. Ostrovsky and S. Berry [2007], "Simple Estimators for Parameters of Discrete
Dynamic Games (with Entry/Exit Examples)”, The Rand Journal of Economics, 38(2):373-399.
Pesendorfer, M. and P. Schmidt-Dengler [2003], “Identification and Estimation of Dynamic
Games”, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 9726, May.
Available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/29726.
QuintilesIMS Institute, Medicines Use and Spending in the U.S.: A Review of 2016 and Outlook
to 2021, May 2017, 46 pp. Available online at www.quintilesimsinstitute.org.
Rockoff, J.D. [2016], “Mylan faces scrutiny over EpiPen price increases”, The Wall Street
Journal, August 24. Available online at https://www.wsj.com/articles/mylan-faces-scrutiny-overepipen-price-increases-1472074823).
Scherer, F.M. and D. Ross [1990], Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance,
Third Edition, Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Schmalensee, R. [1989], “Inter-Industry studies of Structure and Performance”, ch. 16 in Richard
Schmalensee and Robert D. Willig, eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization, Amsterdam:
North Holland, 1989, pp. 951-1009.
Scott Morton, F.M. and M. Kyle [2012], “Markets for Pharmaceutical Products”, ch. 12 in Mark
V. Pauly, Thomas G. McGuire, and Pedro P. Barros, eds., Handbook of Health Economics, Vol.
2, Amsterdam: North Holland Elsevier, 763-823.
Scott Morton, F.M. [1999], “Entry Decisions in the Generic Pharmaceutical Industry”, RAND
Journal of Economics 30(3):421-440.
Silverman, E. [2014a], “Lawmakers probe “staggering” price hikes for generic drugs”, WSJ
Pharmalot, October 2. Available online at
http://blogs.wsj.com/pharmalot/2014/10/02/lawmakers-probe-staggering-price-hikes-for-genericdrugs/).
Silverman, E. [2014b], “Drug Prices, Generics and M&A: What to Watch in 2015”, WSJ
Pharmalot, December 29.
Sood, N., T. Shih, K. Van Nuys and D. Goldman [2017], “The Flow of Money Through the
Pharmaceutical Distribution System”, paper presented at the Brookings Institution, Washington
DC, April 10, 2017.
Stomberg, C. [2016], “Drug Shortages, Pricing, and Regulatory Activity”, Cambridge, MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 22912, December. Available online
at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22912.
Sutton, J. [1991], Sunk Costs and Market Structure, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

35

Sutton, J. [2007], “Market Structure: Theory and Evidence”, ch. 35 in Mark Armstrong and
Robert Porter, eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization, Volume 3, Amsterdam: North Holland
Elsevier, 2301-2368.
Tirole, J. [1988], The Theory of Industrial Organization, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Assistant Secretary of Planning and Evaluation
(ASPE) [2011], “Economic Analysis of the Causes of Drug Shortages”. Issue Brief, October.
Available online at http://aspe.hhs.gov/sp/reports/2011/DrugShortages/ib.shtm.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Assistant Secretary of Planning and Evaluation
(ASPE) [2016], “Understanding Recent Trends in Generic Drug Prices”. Issue Brief, January
27. Available online at https://aspe.hhs.gov/pdf-report/understanding-recent-trends-genericdrug-prices.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector General [2006], “The Food
and Drug Administration’s National Drug Code Directory”, August, OEI-06-05-00060.
U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging [2016], “Sudden Price Spikes in Off-Patent
Prescription Drugs: The Monopoly Business Model that Harms Patients, Taxpayers, and the U.S.
Health Care System”, Special Report, December. U.S. Government Printing Office. Available
online at www.aging.senate.gov.
Whinston, M.D. [2007], “Antitrust Policy Toward Horizontal Mergers”, ch. 36 in in Mark
Armstrong and Robert Porter, eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization, Volume 3,
Amsterdam: North Holland Elsevier, 2369-2440.
Woodcock, J. and M. Wosinska [2013], “Economic and Technological Drivers of Sterile
Injectable Drug Shortages”, Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics 93(2):170-176. Available
online at http://www.nature.com/clpt/journal/v93/n2/full/clpt20122220a.html.
Yurukoglu, A., E. Liebman, and D.B. Ridley [2017], “The Role of Government Reimbursement
in Drug Shortages”, American Economic Journal Economic Policy, May 9(2):348-382.
Available online at https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.20160035.

36

Figures and Tables

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of Biopharmaceutical Manufacturers and Molecule
Year
Count
Count
Count
Annual
Brand
Generic
Oral
of
of Mnf
of Corp Revenue Revenue Revenue Revenue
Molecules
(Mil)
Share
Share
Share
(%)
(%)
(%)
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016

1716
1797
1854
1895
1960
2063
2106
2147
2131
2195
2225
2245
2158

517
545
555
565
562
572
583
589
609
621
633
652
651

408
437
428
442
437
449
459
463
478
497
509
521
526

295249
296272
314382
317832
317622
332008
345717
351710
334160
343403
385600
428482
446491

83
82
80
80
79
78
76
74
72
71
72
73
74

17
18
20
20
21
22
24
26
28
29
28
27
26

67
66
64
63
62
61
59
58
54
51
52
51
49

Markets by Year
Injectable Other
Revenue Revenue
Share
Share
(%)
(%)
23
24
25
26
27
27
28
29
32
34
34
36
38

10
10
10
11
11
12
12
13
14
15
14
13
13

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Annual revenue data is for brands plus generics, deflated by the Gross Domestic Product implicit
deflator (2016Q1 = 1.000). Part-year data for 2004 and 2016 annualized by linear extrapolation.

37

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics of Biopharmaceutical Molecule Markets
ATC1
Count
Count
Count
Avg.
Brand
Generic
of
of Mnf
of Corp
Annual
Rev
Rev
Molecules
Rev
Share
Share
(Mil)
(%)
(%)
A
B
C
D
G
H
J
K
L
M
N
R
S
T
V

611
178
232
260
164
44
258
34
206
240
192
315
160
57
565

369
184
260
208
208
131
235
25
152
330
263
283
130
43
121

318
150
205
180
171
107
179
28
114
267
202
238
109
40
134

44472
20463
39456
7442
17911
6478
38863
363
42525
39914
53061
26107
7310
1976
1650

81
82
74
31
57
53
74
4
92
73
76
80
60
89
82

19
18
26
69
43
47
26
96
8
27
24
20
40
11
18

by Therapeutic Category
Oral
Injectable Other
Rev
Rev
Rev
Share
Share
Share
(%)
(%)
(%)
63
33
94
13
70
45
62
0
28
42
95
24
1
3
87

36
66
5
0
7
55
37
99
72
48
3
3
1
92
8

1
1
1
87
23
1
1
1
0
9
2
73
98
5
5

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Annual revenue data is for brands plus generics, deflated by the Gross Domestic Product implicit
deflator (2016Q1 = 1.000). Part-year data for 2004 and 2016 annualized by linear extrapolation. ATC1 is
a QuintilesIMS slightly modified and aggregated version of the World Health Organization’s 244 four-digit
anatomic therapeutic classification scheme. See text for legend of ATC1 codes.

38

Figure 1: Mean, Median, and Interquartile Range of Quarterly Revenue per Generic Molecule-Dosage
Form-Manufacturer Sold in the U.S. by Quarter-Year

Revenue per Molecule-Manufacturer Pair

Revenue ($1,000's)
1000
2000
3000

4000

Mean and Interquartile Range per Generic Mnf

0

Mean
75
50
25

2004q3

2007q3

2010q3
Date

2013q3

2016q3

Only includes Branded-Generic and Generic data.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Revenues are deflated by the Gross Domestic Product implicit deflator (2016Q1 = 1.000).

39

Figure 2: Mean, Median, and Interquartile Range of Quarterly Revenue per Generic Molecule-Dosage
Form-Manufacturer Sold in the U.S by Quarter-Year, Oral Formulated Drugs Only

Mean and Interquartile Range Per Generic Mnf

Revenue ($1,000's)
1000
2000
3000

4000

Revenue Per Molecule-Mnf Pair: Oral

0

Mean
75
50
25

2004q3

2007q3

2010q3
Date

2013q3

2016q3

Only includes Branded-Generic and Generic data.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Revenues are deflated by the Gross Domestic Product implicit deflator (2016Q1 = 1.000).

40

Figure 3: Mean, Median, and Interquartile Range of Quarterly Revenue per Generic Molecule-Dosage
Form-Manufacturer Sold in the U.S by Quarter-Year, Injected or Infused Formulated Drugs Only

Mean and Interquartile Range Per Generic Mnf

Revenue ($1,000's)
4000 6000 8000

10000

Revenue Per Molecule-Mnf Pair: Injectable

0

2000

Mean
75
50
25

2004q3

2007q3

2010q3
Date

2013q3

2016q3

Only includes Branded-Generic and Generic data.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Revenues are deflated by the Gross Domestic Product implicit deflator (2016Q1 = 1.000).

41

Figure 4: Mean, Median, and Interquartile Range of Quarterly Revenue per Generic Molecule-Dosage
Form-Manufacturer Sold in the U.S by Quarter-Year, “Other” Formulated Drugs Only

Revenue Per Molecule-Mnf Pair: Other

Revenue ($1,000's)
1000
2000
3000

4000

Mean and Interquartile Range Per Generic Mnf

0

Mean
75
50
25

2004q3

2007q3

2010q3
Date

2013q3

2016q3

Only includes Branded-Generic and Generic data.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Revenues are deflated by the Gross Domestic Product implicit deflator (2016Q1 = 1.000).

42

4

Mnf-Molecule Entry Through Time

2005q1

2

100

2.5

3
3.5
As Share of Active

Number of Entrants
150
200
250

300

Figure 5: Generic Manufacturer-Molecule-Dosage Form Entry Patterns between 2004 and 2016 by
Quarter-Year

2008q1

2011q1
Date
Entry

2014q1

2017q1

Entry Share

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Generics only, including branded generics but excluding brands. On right vertical axis, share =
2 implies a 2.0% share, 2.5 a 2.5% share, etc. Entrant defined as manufacturers of molecules observed
immediately following two quarters of zero unit volume and dollar sales, followed by at least two quarters of
positive unit volume and sales data of the molecule.

43

Figure 6: Generic Manufacturer-Molecule-Dosage Form Exit Patterns between 2004 and 2016 by QuarterYear

2004q3

1

50

1.5

Number of Exits
100
150

2
2.5
As Share of Active

3

200

Mnf-Molecule Exits Through Time

2007q3

2010q3
Date
Exits

2013q3

2016q3

Exit Share

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Generics only, including branded generics but excluding brands. On right vertical axis, share = 2
implies a 2.0% share, 2.5 a 2.5% share, etc. Exit defined as manufacturers of molecules that are observed
to have at least two quarters of zero unit volume and dollar sales, following at least two quarters of positive
unit volume and dollar sales.

44

Figure 7: Generic Entry Share Disaggregated by Molecule Dosage Form-Quarter-Year

0

Share of Active (%)
2
4
6

8

Generic Entry Share of Active Mnf-Molecule Pairs by Formulation

2005q3

2008q1

2010q3
Date
Oral
Other

2013q1

2015q3

Injectable

Source: Authors calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Generics only, including branded generics but excluding brands. Entrant defined as manufacturers
of molecules observed immediately following two quarters of zero unit volume and dollar sales, followed by
at least two quarters of positive unit volume and sales data of the molecule.

45

Figure 8: Generic Exit Share Disaggregated by Molecule Dosage Form-Quarter-Year

0

Share of Active (%)
2
4

6

Generic Exit Share of Active Mnf-Molecule Pairs by Formulation

2004q3

2007q3

2010q3
Date
Oral
Other

2013q3

2016q3

Injectable

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Generics only, including branded generics but excluding brands. Exit defined as manufacturers of
molecules that are observed to have at least two quarters of zero unit volume and dollar sales, following at
least two quarters of positive unit volume and dollar sales.

46

Figure 9: Manufacturer Entry Share Over Time between Drugs by Patent Status

0

1

Share of Active (%)
2
3

4

Entry Share of Active Mnf-Molecule Pairs

2005q1

2008q1

2011q1
Date
Branded

2014q1

2017q1

Generic

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Generics include branded generics. On left vertical axis, share 2 refers to a 2.0% share, share 3
refers to a 3.0% share, etc. See Figure 5 legend for definition of entrant.

47

Figure 10: Manufacturer Exit Share Over Time between Drugs by Patent Status

0

Share of Active (%)
1
2

3

Exit Share of Active Mnf-Molecule Pairs

2004q3

2007q3

2010q3
Date
Branded

2013q3

2016q3

Generic

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Generics include branded generics. On left vertical axis, share 2 refers to a 2.0% share, share 3
refers to a 3.0% share, etc. See Figure 6 legend for definition of exiting molecule product.

48

Figure 11: Mean and Interquartile Range of Manufacturer Counts per Generic Molecule Dosage Form by
Quarter-Year

Number of Generic Mnfs. Producing a Molecule

Number of Manufacturers
2
3
4
5

6

Mean and Interquartiule Range

1

75
Mean
50
25

2004q3

2007q3

2010q3
Date

2013q3

2016q3

Only includes Branded-Generic and Generic data.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Generics only, including branded generics but excluding brands. Number of manufacturers of
molecule defined as: For each molecule-dosage form quarterly observation, the number of unique manufacturers supplying positive unit volumes and reporting positive dollar sales revenue in that quarter are
counted.

49

Figure 12: Manufacturer per Molecule Counts among Oral Generic Drugs by Quarter-Year

Number of Generic Mnfs. Producing a Molecule

Number of Manufacturers
2
4
6
8

10

Mean and Interquartile Range - Oral

0

75
Mean
50
25

2004q3

2007q3

2010q3
Date

2013q3

2016q3

Only includes Branded-Generic and Generic data.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Generics only, including branded generics but excluding brands. Number of manufacturers of
molecule defined as: For each molecule-dosage form quarterly observation, the number of unique manufacturers supplying positive unit volumes and reporting positive dollar sales revenue in that quarter are
counted.

50

Figure 13: Manufacturer per Molecule Counts among Infused or Injected Generic Drugs by Quarter-Year

Number of Generic Mnfs. Producing a Molecule

Number of Manufacturers
2
3

4

Mean and Interquartile Range - Injectable

1

75
Mean
50
25

2004q3

2007q3

2010q3
Date

2013q3

2016q3

Only includes Branded-Generic and Generic data.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Generics only, including branded generics but excluding brands. Number of manufacturers of
molecule defined as: For each molecule-dosage form quarterly observation, the number of unique manufacturers supplying positive unit volumes and reporting positive dollar sales revenue in that quarter are
counted.

51

Figure 14: Manufacturer per Molecule Counts among Other Dosage Form Generic Drugs by Quarter-Year

Number of Generic Mnfs. Producing a Molecule

Number of Manufacturers
2
3

4

Mean and Interquartile Range - Other

1

75
Mean
50
25

2004q3

2007q3

2010q3
Date

2013q3

2016q3

Only includes Branded-Generic and Generic data.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Generics only, including branded generics but excluding brands. Number of manufacturers of
molecule defined as: For each molecule-dosage form quarterly observation, the number of unique manufacturers supplying positive unit volumes and reporting positive dollar sales revenue in that quarter are
counted.

52

Figure 15: Share of Molecules by Number of Generic Manufacturers

10

Share of Molecules (%)
20
30
40

50

Share of Molecules With X Generic Mnfs.

2004q3

2007q3

2010q3
Date
1 Mnfs.
3 Mnfs.

2013q3

2016q3

2 Mnfs.
4+ Mnfs.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Generics only, including branded generics but excluding brands. Number of manufacturers of
molecule defined as: For each molecule-dosage form quarterly observation, the number of unique manufacturers supplying positive unit volumes and reporting positive dollar sales revenue in that quarter are
counted.

53

Figure 16: Share of Oral Molecule Formulations by Number Generic Manufacturers

10

Share of Molecules (%)
20
30
40

50

Share of Molecules With X Generic Mnfs: Oral

2004q3

2007q3

2010q3
Date
1 Mnfs.
3 Mnfs.

2013q3

2016q3

2 Mnfs.
4+ Mnfs.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Generics only, including branded generics but excluding brands. Number of manufacturers of
molecule defined as: For each molecule-dosage form quarterly observation, the number of unique manufacturers supplying positive unit volumes and reporting positive dollar sales revenue in that quarter are
counted.

54

Figure 17: Share of Injectable Molecule Formulations by Number Generic Manufacturers

10

Share of Molecules (%)
20
30
40

50

Share of Molecules With X Generic Mnfs: Injectable

2004q3

2007q3

2010q3
Date
1 Mnfs.
3 Mnfs.

2013q3

2016q3

2 Mnfs.
4+ Mnfs.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Generics only, including branded generics but excluding brands. Number of manufacturers of
molecule defined as: For each molecule-dosage form quarterly observation, the number of unique manufacturers supplying positive unit volumes and reporting positive dollar sales revenue in that quarter are
counted.

55

Figure 18: Share of Other Molecule Formulations by Number Generic Manufacturers

10

Share of Molecules (%)
20
30
40
50

60

Share of Molecules With X Generic Mnfs: Other

2004q3

2007q3

2010q3
Date
1 Mnfs.
3 Mnfs.

2013q3

2016q3

2 Mnfs.
4+ Mnfs.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Generics only, including branded generics but excluding brands. Number of manufacturers of
molecule defined as: For each molecule-dosage form quarterly observation, the number of unique manufacturers supplying positive unit volumes and reporting positive dollar sales revenue in that quarter are
counted.

56

Figure 19: Average Manufacturer Concentration among Only Generic Drugs by Therapeutic Class in Q2
2005 and Q1 2016

9000

HHI by ATC1 Beginning and End of Sample
T

K

8000

B
A

V

HHI Late
6000 7000

D
S

R

G
J

LM

5000

C

H

4000

N
4000

5000

6000

7000

8000

9000

HHI Early
ATC1 Therapy Code

45 Degree

Only includes Branded-Generic and Generic data.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Generics only, including branded generics but excluding brands. Herfindahl-Hirschman Index
(HHI) based on shares between 0 and 100. Aggregate HHI by ATC1 therapeutic class (see text for legend),
averaged over all molecules in that therapeutic class. Points above 45 degree line are classes that have become
more concentrated over time, based on the average HHI in the class, while points below the 45 degree line
have become less concentrated. A market with an HHI of 10,000 may still have competition from a branded
product.

57

Table 3: Regression Results on Generic Exit Share

1 PreMMA
2 MMA
3 ACA
4 GDUFA
ALL OTHERS
INJECTABLE
ORAL
A
B
C
D
G
H
J
K
L
M
N
R
S
T
V
Time Trend
A ⇥ Time Trend
B ⇥ Time Trend
C ⇥ Time Trend
D ⇥ Time Trend
G ⇥ Time Trend
H ⇥ Time Trend
J ⇥ Time Trend
K ⇥ Time Trend
L ⇥ Time Trend
M ⇥ Time Trend
N ⇥ Time Trend
R ⇥ Time Trend
S ⇥ Time Trend
T ⇥ Time Trend
V ⇥ Time Trend
ALL OTHERS ⇥ Time Trend
INJECTABLE ⇥ Time Trend
ORAL ⇥ Time Trend
Constant
Clusters
R-sqr
Obs.
⇤

p < 0.10,

⇤⇤

p < 0.05,

⇤⇤⇤

(1)
Exit Share

(2)
Exit Share

0.000
0.339⇤⇤⇤
0.816⇤⇤⇤
0.754⇤⇤⇤

0.000
0.354⇤⇤⇤
0.949⇤⇤⇤
0.897⇤⇤⇤
0.000
0.200
0.500⇤⇤⇤
0.000
-0.483⇤⇤⇤
-0.398⇤⇤⇤
0.106
-0.596⇤⇤⇤
-0.319⇤
-0.362⇤⇤⇤
-0.461
-0.604⇤⇤⇤
-0.041
-0.599⇤⇤⇤
2.345⇤⇤⇤
0.233
-0.127
2.677⇤⇤⇤

(3)
Exit Share

(4)
Exit Share

(5)
Exit Share

0.000
0.208
0.502⇤⇤⇤
0.000
-0.490⇤⇤⇤
-0.404⇤⇤⇤
0.105
-0.601⇤⇤⇤
-0.320⇤
-0.368⇤⇤⇤
-0.471
-0.613⇤⇤⇤
-0.043
-0.610⇤⇤⇤
2.360⇤⇤⇤
0.239
-0.117
2.642⇤⇤⇤
0.025⇤⇤⇤

0.000
0.304⇤
0.596⇤⇤⇤
0.000
-0.682⇤⇤
-0.197
0.081
-0.083
-0.106
0.033
-0.984⇤
-0.341
0.343
-0.223
1.492⇤⇤⇤
0.795⇤⇤
-0.805
-1.174⇤⇤

0.000
0.339
0.891⇤⇤⇤
0.000
-0.495⇤⇤⇤
-0.402⇤⇤⇤
0.109
-0.602⇤⇤⇤
-0.325⇤
-0.371⇤⇤⇤
-0.483
-0.616⇤⇤⇤
-0.051
-0.606⇤⇤⇤
2.331⇤⇤⇤
0.249
-0.113
2.577⇤⇤⇤

0.026⇤⇤⇤
0.033⇤⇤⇤
0.018⇤⇤⇤
0.030⇤⇤⇤
0.006
0.017
0.010
0.046⇤
0.016
0.010⇤
0.011⇤⇤
0.071⇤⇤⇤
0.006
0.056⇤
0.149⇤⇤⇤

1.552⇤⇤⇤

1.035⇤⇤⇤

1.041⇤⇤⇤

0.939⇤⇤⇤

0.036⇤⇤⇤
0.031⇤⇤⇤
0.021⇤⇤⇤
0.771⇤⇤⇤

2273
0.001
77797

2273
0.013
77797

2273
0.013
77797

2273
0.015
77797

2273
0.014
77797

p < 0.01

58

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Generics only, including branded generics but excluding brands. See legend in Figure 6 for definition
of exiting molecule products, and text for definition of regulatory regimes. Ordinary least squares estimates
with standard errors clustered at the molecule level. To save on space, standard errors are not reported.
Column 1 regresses the molecule-manufacturer exit share on dummies for regulatory regime. Column 2
adds dummies for formulation type and ATC1 therapeutic class. Column 3 adds a single linear time trend.
Column 4 deletes simple linear time trend and adds interaction terms between time trend and ATC1 class.
Column 5 replaces time trend and ATC1 interaction terms with time trend and formulation interaction
terms.

59

Table 4: Regression Results of Generic Entry Share

1 PreMMA
2 MMA
3 ACA
4 GDUFA
ALL OTHERS
INJECTABLE
ORAL
A
B
C
D
G
H
J
K
L
M
N
R
S
T
V
Time Trend
A ⇥ Time Trend
B ⇥ Time Trend
C ⇥ Time Trend
D ⇥ Time Trend
G ⇥ Time Trend
H ⇥ Time Trend
J ⇥ Time Trend
K ⇥ Time Trend
L ⇥ Time Trend
M ⇥ Time Trend
N ⇥ Time Trend
R ⇥ Time Trend
S ⇥ Time Trend
T ⇥ Time Trend
V ⇥ Time Trend
ALL OTHERS ⇥ Time Trend
INJECTABLE ⇥ Time Trend
ORAL ⇥ Time Trend
Constant
Clusters
R-sqr
Obs.
⇤

p < 0.10,

⇤⇤

p < 0.05,

⇤⇤⇤

(1)
Entry Share

(2)
Entry Share

0.000
-0.251
-0.016
-0.431⇤⇤

0.000
-0.267
-0.100
-0.650⇤⇤⇤
0.000
-0.414⇤
0.363⇤
0.000
0.085
-0.060
0.048
-0.132
-0.634⇤
0.359
-0.239
0.762⇤
-0.217
0.332
0.046
-0.554⇤⇤
-1.122⇤⇤⇤
4.448⇤⇤⇤

(3)
Entry Share

(4)
Entry Share

(5)
Entry Share

0.000
-0.414⇤
0.362⇤
0.000
0.083
-0.064
0.044
-0.136
-0.641⇤
0.359
-0.245
0.767⇤
-0.222
0.330
0.028
-0.555⇤⇤
-1.122⇤⇤⇤
4.430⇤⇤⇤
-0.014⇤⇤⇤

0.000
-0.476⇤⇤
0.304
0.000
-0.096
-0.066
0.246
-0.977⇤
-0.629
0.920
-0.581
1.017
-0.591
0.420
0.727
-0.420
-0.893
7.344⇤⇤⇤

0.000
-0.714⇤
-0.002
0.000
0.085
-0.065
0.038
-0.137
-0.637⇤
0.358
-0.240
0.764⇤
-0.217
0.326
0.048
-0.566⇤⇤
-1.121⇤⇤⇤
4.492⇤⇤⇤

-0.009
-0.002
-0.009
-0.018⇤
0.022⇤
-0.009
-0.030⇤⇤
0.003
-0.018
0.006
-0.012
-0.042⇤⇤⇤
-0.016⇤
-0.018
-0.101⇤⇤⇤

3.076⇤⇤⇤

2.811⇤⇤⇤

2.846⇤⇤⇤

2.758⇤⇤⇤

-0.025⇤⇤⇤
-0.014⇤
-0.011⇤⇤
3.127⇤⇤⇤

2276
0.000
78295

2276
0.008
78295

2276
0.007
78295

2276
0.008
78295

2276
0.007
78295

p < 0.01

60

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 2016Q3. Generics only, including branded generics but excluding brands. See legend in Figure 5 for definition
of entrant share, and text for definition of regulatory regimes. Ordinary least squares estimates with standard
errors clustered at the molecule level. To save on space, standard errors are not reported. Column 1 regresses
the molecule-manufacturer entry share on dummies for regulatory regime. Column 2 adds dummies for
formulation type and ATC1 therapeutic class. Column 3 adds a single linear time trend. Column 4 deletes
simple linear time trend and adds interaction terms between time trend and ATC1 class. Column 5 replaces
time trend and ATC1 interaction terms with time trend and formulation interaction terms.

61

62

⇤⇤

p < 0.05,

⇤⇤⇤

p < 0.01

Yes
No
No
No
No
2281
0.11
67416

1.028⇤⇤⇤
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
2281
0.32
67416

0.000
0.989⇤⇤⇤
0.659⇤⇤⇤
0.999⇤⇤⇤
1.877⇤⇤⇤
1.384⇤⇤⇤
2.698⇤⇤⇤
2.576⇤⇤⇤
4.119⇤⇤⇤
1.223⇤⇤⇤
0.575⇤⇤⇤
0.262⇤⇤
-0.707⇤⇤⇤
3.575⇤⇤⇤
1.016⇤⇤⇤
0.133

-0.798⇤⇤⇤

(4)
Log Price

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
2281
0.45
67416

0.382

-0.803⇤⇤⇤

(5)
Log Price

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
2281
0.54
67416

-0.281⇤⇤⇤

-0.732⇤⇤⇤

(6)
Log Price

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
2281
0.94
67416

0.526⇤⇤⇤

-0.378⇤⇤⇤

(7)
Log Price

No
No
No
No
No
2281
0.11
67416

0.647⇤⇤⇤

-0.720⇤⇤⇤
0.000
0.081⇤⇤⇤
0.337⇤⇤⇤
0.724⇤⇤⇤

(8)
Log Price

Yes
No
No
No
No
2281
0.12
67416

1.012⇤⇤⇤

-0.721⇤⇤⇤

(9)
Log Price

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
2281
0.32
67416

0.000
0.987⇤⇤⇤
0.660⇤⇤⇤
0.997⇤⇤⇤
1.871⇤⇤⇤
1.374⇤⇤⇤
2.689⇤⇤⇤
2.574⇤⇤⇤
4.100⇤⇤⇤
1.217⇤⇤⇤
0.588⇤⇤⇤
0.251⇤
-0.688⇤⇤⇤
3.576⇤⇤⇤
1.017⇤⇤⇤
0.111

-0.773⇤⇤⇤

(10)
Log Price

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
2281
0.45
67416

0.700⇤⇤⇤

-0.777⇤⇤⇤

(11)
Log Price

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
2281
0.54
67416

0.669⇤⇤⇤

-0.707⇤⇤⇤

(12)
Log Price

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
2281
0.94
67416

0.518⇤⇤⇤

-0.374⇤⇤⇤

(13)
Log Price

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 - 2016Q3. Generics only, including branded
generics but excluding brands. Prices adjusted for inflation using GDP deflator with 2016Q1 = 1.000. See legend for Figure 11 for definition of
manufacturer count, and text for corporation count and regulatory regimes. Ordinary least squares estimates with standard errors clustered at the
molecule level.

p < 0.10,

No
No
No
No
No
2281
0.02
67416

Date FE
ATC1 FE
ATC2 FE
ATC3 FE
Molecule FE
Clusters
R-sqr
Obs.

⇤

0.668⇤⇤⇤

-0.082
No
No
No
No
No
2281
0.11
67416

0.000
0.075⇤⇤⇤
0.331⇤⇤⇤
0.719⇤⇤⇤

-0.737⇤⇤⇤

-0.736⇤⇤⇤

0.000
0.101⇤⇤⇤
0.401⇤⇤⇤
0.751⇤⇤⇤

(3)
Log Price

Table 5: Regression Results of Log Inflation-Adjusted Generic Price on Supplier Counts
(2)
Log Price

Log Corp
Log Mnf
1 PreMMA
2 MMA
3 ACA
4 GDUFA
A
B
C
D
G
H
J
K
L
M
N
R
S
T
V
Constant

(1)
Log Price

63

p < 0.10,

⇤⇤

p < 0.05,

⇤⇤⇤

p < 0.01

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
2281
0.45
79641

0.000
1.654⇤⇤⇤
-1.235⇤⇤⇤
0.000
0.467⇤⇤⇤
0.152
0.125
1.549⇤⇤⇤
0.540⇤
1.252⇤⇤⇤
0.313
2.297⇤⇤⇤
0.505⇤⇤⇤
0.367⇤⇤
0.251⇤
-1.585⇤⇤⇤
1.825⇤⇤⇤
0.568⇤⇤⇤
0.746⇤⇤⇤

0.920⇤⇤⇤

(4)
Log Price

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
2281
0.51
79641

0.778⇤⇤⇤

0.000
1.487⇤⇤⇤
-1.188⇤⇤⇤

0.965⇤⇤⇤

(5)
Log Price

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
2281
0.57
79641

1.087⇤⇤⇤

0.000
1.082⇤⇤⇤
-1.588⇤⇤⇤

0.926⇤⇤⇤

(6)
Log Price

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
2281
0.86
79641

1.240⇤⇤⇤

0.000
1.022⇤⇤⇤
-1.570⇤⇤⇤

0.843⇤⇤⇤

(7)
Log Price

No
No
No
No
No
2281
0.38
79641

0.576⇤⇤⇤

1.589⇤⇤⇤
0.895⇤⇤⇤
0.676⇤⇤⇤
0.000
0.127⇤⇤⇤
0.424⇤⇤⇤
0.839⇤⇤⇤
0.000
2.159⇤⇤⇤
-1.216⇤⇤⇤

(8)
Log Price

Yes
No
No
No
No
2281
0.38
79641

1.022⇤⇤⇤

0.000
2.162⇤⇤⇤
-1.213⇤⇤⇤

1.589⇤⇤⇤
0.896⇤⇤⇤
0.678⇤⇤⇤

(9)
Log Price

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
2281
0.46
79641

0.000
1.598⇤⇤⇤
-1.409⇤⇤⇤
0.000
0.462⇤⇤⇤
0.109
0.137
1.524⇤⇤⇤
0.501⇤
1.213⇤⇤⇤
0.266
2.268⇤⇤⇤
0.468⇤⇤⇤
0.304⇤⇤
0.247⇤
-1.564⇤⇤⇤
1.791⇤⇤⇤
0.508⇤⇤
0.866⇤⇤⇤

1.288⇤⇤⇤
1.006⇤⇤⇤
0.775⇤⇤⇤

(10)
Log Price

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
2281
0.51
79641

0.857⇤⇤⇤

0.000
1.425⇤⇤⇤
-1.333⇤⇤⇤

1.256⇤⇤⇤
0.999⇤⇤⇤
0.848⇤⇤⇤

(11)
Log Price

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
2281
0.57
79641

1.172⇤⇤⇤

0.000
1.007⇤⇤⇤
-1.740⇤⇤⇤

1.245⇤⇤⇤
0.943⇤⇤⇤
0.808⇤⇤⇤

(12)
Log Price

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
2281
0.86
79641

1.367⇤⇤⇤

0.000
0.954⇤⇤⇤
-1.829⇤⇤⇤

1.176⇤⇤⇤
0.961⇤⇤⇤
0.657⇤⇤⇤

(13)
Log Price

Source: Authors’ calculations based on QuintilesIMS National Sales Perspective database, 2004Q4 - 2016Q3. Generics only, including branded
generics but excluding brands. Prices adjusted for inflation using GDP deflator with 2016Q1 = 1.000. See legend for Figure 19 and text for definition
of Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI), and text for definition of regulatory regimes. Ordinary least squares estimates with standard errors clustered
at the molecule level.

⇤

No
No
No
No
No
2281
0.02
79641

Date FE
ATC1 FE
ATC2 FE
ATC3 FE
Molecule FE
Clusters
R-sqr
Obs.

Yes
No
No
No
No
2281
0.37
79641

0.831⇤⇤⇤

0.384⇤⇤⇤

0.055
No
No
No
No
No
2281
0.37
79641

0.000
2.351⇤⇤⇤
-0.908⇤⇤⇤

0.000
0.122⇤⇤⇤
0.424⇤⇤⇤
0.849⇤⇤⇤
0.000
2.349⇤⇤⇤
-0.910⇤⇤⇤

0.000
0.107⇤⇤⇤
0.445⇤⇤⇤
0.836⇤⇤⇤

0.894⇤⇤⇤

0.892⇤⇤⇤

Log HHI
ALL OTHERS ⇥ Log HHI
INJECTABLE ⇥ Log HHI
ORAL ⇥ Log HHI
1 PreMMA
2 MMA
3 ACA
4 GDUFA
ALL OTHERS
INJECTABLE
ORAL
A
B
C
D
G
H
J
K
L
M
N
R
S
T
V
Constant

(3)
Log Price

(2)
Log Price

Table 6: Regression Results of Log Inflation-Adjusted Generic Price on Log Concentration
(1)
Log Price

