                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         ESTIMATING THE VALUE OF HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCIAL AID:
                    EVIDENCE FROM A FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                       Christian Belzil
                                       Arnaud Maurel
                                       Modibo Sidibé

                                     Working Paper 23641
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23641


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2017




We would like to thank the Social Research and Demonstration Corporation (SRDC) for allowing
us to use the data, which has been developed within the “Willingness to Borrow” project, and
may be obtained directly from SRDC. Christian Belzil acknowledges financial support from the
ANR “Investissement d'Avenir Labex Ecodec”. We thank Peter Arcidiacono, Lance Lochner,
Claude Montmarquette, Basit Zafar, and seminar participants at Cornell, CREST, Paris School of
Economics, Toulouse School of Economics, as well as participants at the 2015 World Congress
of the Econometric Society (Montreal), and the 2017 North American Winter Meetings of the
Econometric Society (Chicago) for useful comments. Brian Clark, Melina Hillion and Jintao Sun
provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Christian Belzil, Arnaud Maurel, and Modibo Sidibé. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Estimating the Value of Higher Education Financial Aid: Evidence from a Field Experiment
Christian Belzil, Arnaud Maurel, and Modibo Sidibé
NBER Working Paper No. 23641
August 2017
JEL No. I22,I23,J24

                                          ABSTRACT

Using data from a Canadian field experiment on the financial barriers to higher education, we
estimate the distribution of the value of financial aid for prospective students, and relate it to
parental socio-economic background, individual skills, risk and time preferences. Our results
point out that a considerable share of prospective students are affected by credit constraints. We
find that most of the individuals are willing to pay a sizable interest premium above the
prevailing market rate for the option to take up a loan, with a median interest rate wedge equal to
6.6 percentage points for a $1,000 loan. The willingness-to-pay for financial aid is highly
heterogeneous across students, with preferences and in particular discount factors, playing a key
role in accounting for this variation.

Christian Belzil                                 Modibo Sidibé
CREST                                            Department of Economics
5 Avenue Henri Le Chatelier                      Duke University
91120 Palaiseau                                  213 Social Sciences Building
France                                           Box 90097
and Ecole Polytechnque and IZA                   Durham, NC 27708
christian.belzil@polytechnique.edu               modibo.sidibe@duke.edu

Arnaud Maurel
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences Building
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
apm16@duke.edu
1       Introduction
Despite inconclusive evidence, many education policies are based on the premise that
borrowing constraints preclude students from a modest background to access and
persist in higher education. Quantifying the importance of credit constraints in this
context is a particularly challenging task, primarily because in most datasets one
cannot directly identify the set of students who are constrained. In this paper, we
propose a novel empirical strategy based on the estimation of the distribution of the
willingness-to-pay for higher education financial aid.
    We specify and estimate an educational financing decisions model using data from
a field experiment that was conducted in several Canadian high schools between
2008 and 2009. The experiment consists of a sequence of choices between a cash
payment and various types of financial aid: single loan, single grant and hybrid
package composed of a loan and a grant.1 Loan conditions were similar to the Federal
Canadian Student Loan Program. Financial aid packages varied from $500 - $4,000
and represented a high fraction of yearly tuition at any of the Canadian universities.2
Therefore, these financial packages remove or reduce any potential liquidity constraints
by providing education financing ahead of high-school graduation. As a consequence,
prospective students facing liquidity constraints are likely to attach a significant value
to the opportunity of receiving a loan at the market rate, while those who do not
perceive financial constraints will regard those opportunities as redundant. In the
paper we use this observation to test for the existence of frictions in the market for
college loans.
    We formulate the decision to accept a financial aid package as an intertemporal
problem. The structure of our model is simple and may be described as follows. Young
individuals, endowed with Constant Relative Risk Aversion (CRRA) preferences, must
    1
     This experiment uses tools from standard lab experiments and applies them to a sample of
individuals drawn from the population of interest. As such, it qualifies as an “artefactual field
experiment” as defined in Harrison and List (2004).
   2
     Amounts are in Canadian dollars. The average tuition was equal to $2,180 for Quebec, $5,667
for Ontario, $3,228 for Saskatchewan, and $5,064 for Manitoba, over the period covered by the
experiment. Similarly, the average US in-state tuition fees charged by public 4-year institutions for
2007-2008 were US $6,200 according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (Spotlight on Statistics: Back
to College, 2010).



                                                 1
weigh the increase in utility generated by the acceptance of a cash payment against the
expected future gain generated by a specific financial aid package. Although we do not
observe the post high-school graduation decisions of agents, we can use information
on their revealed preferences to infer the utility gains of accepting different financial
aid packages. We derive the willingness-to-pay for financial aid opportunities, and use
those estimates to uncover the distribution of the individual-specific additional rates
of interest that each individual would be willing to pay to secure financial aid.
    To the extent that education financing decisions are made prior to actual college
enrollment, the decision to accept a financial aid package depends not only on the
perceived magnitude of borrowing constraints, but also on the subjective probability
of enrolling in higher education, as well as beliefs over other future outcomes such
as probability of dropping-out from college. Understanding financial aid acceptance
therefore requires taking into account both heterogeneity in risk aversion and discount
factors, as well as financial resources provided by the family. Since the experiment
was also designed to infer fundamental preference parameters for risk and time, it
provides a unique opportunity to address this important question and allows us to
separate the effects of preferences from other components such as skills, and parental
background on the probability to accept financial aid. In the paper we investigate the
role played by risk aversion and discount factors, which, thanks to the panel nature of
the data, are allowed to be individual-specific, by including them as determinants of
higher education financing decisions.
    The majority of our sample attaches a significant value to the option of accessing
higher education loans, and would be willing to trade sizable increases in current
consumption in return for the option to take up a $1,000 loan at the market interest
rate in the near future. Notably, our estimates indicate that the median high school
student would be willing to pay an interest rate premium of 6.6 percentage points on
top of the prevailing market rate to secure a $1,000 loan, consistent with the existence
of substantial frictions in the market for college loans. The willingness-to-pay for
financial aid is also found to be highly heterogeneous across students, while remaining
non-negligible for the vast majority of the population. Overall, these results point to
the existence of credit constraints which affect a large share of high school students in
Canada.


                                           2
    In terms of public policy, our estimates can be more generally interpreted as
uncovering the willingness-to-pay for a counterfactual expansion in higher education
financial aid offers. Since the set of financial aid offers include grants, our estimates
also speak to the value of a significant reduction in university tuition fees. Students
attach high values to grants. For instance, our estimation results imply that the
median agent would be willing to trade a $400 increase in current consumption against
a $1,000 reduction in tuition in the future.
    Individual-specific discount factors as well as risk aversion parameters, which are
very dispersed across students, play an important role in explaining the willingness-to-
pay for higher education financial aid. A variance decomposition analysis shows that
these individual preference parameters are more important than all other determinants.
For instance, they are about six times more important than parental education, parental
income and numeracy test score in explaining the willingness-to-pay for a $1,000 loan.
These findings highlight the importance of collecting data on individual time and risk
preferences to improve our understanding of educational financing decisions and, more
generally, of higher education demand.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide an overview
of the related literature and detail our contributions. The design of the field experiment
and a summary of the data are discussed in Section 3. Sections 4 and 5 describe the
model and the econometric specification. Section 6 discusses the identification and
the estimation procedure. The estimation results are presented in Section 7. Finally,
Section 8 concludes.


2     Background literature and contributions
The existence and the intensity of credit constraints are among the most important
issues guiding public policies aimed at stimulating human capital formation such as
loans, grants and work study programs (see Lochner and Monge-Naranjo, 2012, 2016,
and Heckman and Mosso, 2014 for recent surveys). In the education context, credit
constraints denominate any barrier hindering potential students to finance tuition fees
or consumption. At the empirical level, testing for the presence of credit constraints
is challenging since borrowing restrictions are not observed in standard data sets. As

                                            3
a consequence, most of the papers have used indirect approaches.
    One can distinguish four main strands in this literature. A first set of papers argue
that one reason why the estimated returns to schooling using standard instrumental
variable techniques may be larger than the OLS estimates is that the subpopulation of
compliers tend to be more credit constrained, and thus face larger returns to schooling
at the equilibrium (see, e.g., Lang, 1993, and Card, 1995). A second strand of papers
test for the importance of credit constraints by estimating short-term effects of parental
income on the probability of enrolling in higher education, controlling for long-run
factors such as ability (see, e.g., Cameron and Heckman, 1998, Carneiro and Heckman,
2002, and Belley and Lochner, 2007). The third one estimates or calibrates structural
models in which credit constraints are explicitly represented, as in Keane and Wolpin
(2001), Cameron and Taber (2004), Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2011) and Johnson
(2013). Finally, Cameron and Taber (2004) and Brown, Scholz, and Seshadri (2012)
analyze various other testable implications of the existence of credit constraints. With
the notable exceptions of Belley and Lochner (2007), Lochner and Monge-Naranjo
(2011) and Brown et al. (2012), most of these studies conclude against the existence
of a significant role played by credit constraints. 3
    Recently, alternative approaches based on direct measures of credit constraints
have been proposed. Although access to these measures provides a clear advantage to
researchers, they are typically obtained at the expense of external validity. In addition,
while quantifying the overall importance of education financing barriers in the economy
requires evaluating their impact prior to actual college enrollments, direct measures are
generally obtained from a sub-population of individuals who have already enrolled in
higher education. A key reference in this literature is Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner
(2008), who designed a survey of college students enrolled at Berea College (Kentucky)
in order to identify those who are credit constrained and to analyze differences in
college drop-out decisions. While a non-trivial fraction of the students declare that
they would like to borrow money at a fair interest rate to increase their consumption
   3
    The intuition of Belley and Lochner (2007) is that changes across the 1979 and 1997 cohorts
of the NLSY in the effect of income quantiles on college enrollment provide evidence in favor of
credit constraints. Their argument is primarily based on the observation that college attendance
rate among the low ability individuals has increased more over time for students coming from high
income families.


                                               4
while in school, the authors conclude that the majority of college attrition is explained
by factors other than access to credit.4
    In this paper, we follow another route and use rich data from a college education
financing field experiment conducted among Canadian high school students to address
this question. Importantly, this experiment provides us with direct measures of the
opportunity cost of refusing various types of higher education financial aid packages.
This unique feature of the data allows us to estimate the distribution of the monetary
values associated with the option to take up college loans at the prevailing market
interest rate, and then investigate the existence and intensity of credit market imper-
fections in this context. Indeed, in the absence of credit constraints, one would expect
these values to be small or negligible. On the other hand, large values associated
with the option to take up college loans are indicative of credit constraints that are
anticipated by the students at the end of high school.
    Our study is also related to the experimental literature dealing with the estimation
of risk and time preferences, including Coller and Williams (1999), Holt and Laury
(2002), Andersen, Harrison, Lau, and Rutstrom (2008) and Andreoni and Sprenger
(2012) (see Frederick, Loewenstein, and O’Donoghue, 2002, for a survey). In our
paper, we estimate nonparametrically the joint distribution of risk aversion parameters
and discount factors. This is possible thanks to the large number of choices that are
recorded for each individual, which allows us to treat both risk aversion parameters
and discount factors as individual fixed-effects. It is worth noting that, in this
respect, our approach stands in sharp contrast to most of the dynamic discrete choice
literature, where one generally imposes the restriction that all agents share the same
discount factor and the same degree of risk aversion.5 The results obtained in this
paper provide clear evidence that discount factors and risk aversion parameters are
highly heterogeneous across individuals, and, most importantly, that heterogeneity in
   4
      Recent work by Delavande and Zafar (2014) investigates the role played by credit constraints in
the context of university choice in Pakistan. The authors address the identification issue by directly
eliciting from the individuals the university they would have chosen in the (counterfactual) absence
of financial constraints, and find that those constraints play an important role.
    5
      Notable       exceptions        include     Arcidiacono, Sieg, and Sloan       (2007)       and
Brodaty, Gary-Bobo, and Prieto (2014), who allow for heterogeneous discount factors and
relative risk aversion, respectively.



                                                  5
preferences plays a central role in explaining the willingness-to-pay for higher education
financial aid.


3       Data
The data used in the paper comes from “The Millenium Foundation Field Experiment
on Education Financing”. The field experiment was conducted from October 2008
to March 2009. The sample, which consists of 1,248 Canadian full time senior high
school students (or students enrolled in CEGEP, the equivalent of senior year of
high school in Quebec), was drawn from both urban and rural sites across Canada.
The students were between 16 and 18 years old at the time of the experiment. The
experiment was funded by the Canada Millennium Foundation, a public enterprise
created by the Canadian federal government, and was carried jointly by The Social
Research and Demonstration Corporation (SRDC, Ottawa, Canada) and the Centre
Interuniversitaire de Recherche en Analyse des Organisations (CIRANO, Montreal,
Canada).6
    The experiment was conducted using pen and paper choice booklets as well as
simple random sampling devices like bingo balls and dice. Project cost considerations
suggested that participants be drawn from locations with convenient travel connections
from the SRDC Ottawa and CIRANO Montreal offices. Manitoba, Saskatchewan,
Ontario and Quebec were the selected provinces. The implementation team was able
to carry out work in urban and rural schools in each of the four provinces.7 Table A4
    6
      See Montmarquette and Johnson (2015), who designed the experiment used in the present paper,
for an extensive description of the Millenium Field Experiment. In this paper the authors estimated
a reduced-form model of the decision to take up loans. They focus on the notion of loan aversion,
and conclude against the existence of sizable loan aversion in this context.
    7
      Experiment staff was granted access to the high schools and cooperated with student services
staff to recruit and schedule senior students. Sessions took place during school hours (over two
days). Participation to a Web survey and parental consent were required to participate in the
experimental session. The experimental sessions were held in controlled environments including
classrooms, libraries, career counseling rooms, activity rooms and auditoriums. All rooms were held
on the campus where the student attended classes. The planned optimal number of participants per
session was between 20 and 25 allowing the entire urban subject pool to be contained in 50 sessions.
A total of 75 sessions were conducted with 50 as the maximum number of participants in any session.
For showing up on time, each participant received a $20 fee. Supplementary information regarding
aspects of the experiment that we do not model may be found in Montmarquette and Johnson (2015).


                                                 6
in Appendix A provides a descriptive overview of our sample.8
    The experiment consists of three parts. First, students must answer a set of
questions aimed at measuring their rate of time preference. In those questions,
individuals are offered a choice between two payments of different values to be made
at different points in time. In our analysis we use the 24 questions that provide a
cash payment within a day or a week (see Table A1 in Appendix A). A second set
of questions relate to the measurement of risk attitudes. Specifically, students are
presented with a sequence of 55 binary choices between two lotteries in which risk is
objectively stated (see Table A2). Finally, the third group of questions is a sequence
of choices between a cash payment to be paid within one week from the day the
experiment was carried, and the option to take up a specific financial aid package
covering future educational expenses. These questions play a key role in our empirical
strategy. Should the student decide to exercise this option, the financial aid package
is to be paid conditional on enrolling in a full-time program at any higher education
institution in the country (within two years).9 Importantly, choices were incentivized
as students were paid for one randomly drawn decision at the end of the session.
    Overall, three types of financial aid packages were offered, namely grants, loans
and hybrid loans which combine a loan and grant. In the paper we use a total of
17 financial aid decisions for each respondent, with 5 choices with a single loan offer,
7 choices with a single grant offer, and 5 hybrid loan offers. These decisions are
summarized in Table A3 in Appendix A.10
    Cash alternatives varied from $25 to $700, while grants and loans varied from $400
to $4,000. The variations in cash amounts and in the nature and the size of financial
   8
     Although the first objective of the designers of the experiment was not to achieve national
representativity, comparison with nationally representative data from the Youth In Transition Survey
(YITS) suggests that the resulting sample is largely representative of the subpopulation of Canadian
youths who have obtained at least a high school degree. Belley, Frenette, and Lochner (2014) provide
a detailed discussion of the YITS data in the context of post-secondary attendance decisions in
Canada. See also Hansen and Liu (2013) who report the characteristics of individuals from the YITS
sample separately by schooling level. Overall, the composition of our sample is qualitatively similar
to the respondents of the YITS who have obtained at least a high school degree.
   9
     Over this period in Canada, the transition rate from high school to higher education was around
85% (see Belley et al., 2014).
  10
     It is worth noting that more than 98% of the individuals in our sample did not exhibit any
violation of transitivity of preferences, supporting the idea that respondents took the survey seriously.



                                                   7
aid packages play a crucial role in our analysis. At the outset, it should be clear that
these amounts are quite significant in the Canadian context. For instance, over the
period considered, a grant of $2,000 in 2008 would have covered 65% of yearly fee at
University of Western Ontario and Queen’s University, and almost 100% at McGill
University and Université de Montréal. Importantly for our empirical strategy, loans
in the experiment were offered at the same interest rate as in the Federal Canadian
Student Loan Program. At the time of the experiment, this rate, which we sometimes
simply refer to in the paper as the “market rate”, was equal to 5.7%.11 In Appendix
A we provide additional details about how the grants and loans were administered as
part of the experiment.


3.1     Describing the take-up rates
To describe the sensitivity of individual take-up to financial aid structure and cash
payments, we plot below the take-up rates associated with various combinations of
grants and loans, against specific cash payments. In Figure 1, the take-up rates are
those obtained when the alternative cash payment was $25 and $700, respectively.12
As expected, the take-up rates are inversely related to the amount of cash payment.
For instance, 90% of individuals opted for a $1,000 grant when offered a $25 cash
payment, while only 40% opted for a $1,000 grant when offered a cash payment of
$700. Those differences in take-up rates are very similar for the three financial aid
packages considered in this figure ($1,000 grant, hybrid $1,000 loan combined with
$1,000 grant, and $1,000 loan). Figure 2 reports the take-up rates for various sizes and
types of financial aid packages and for a $300 cash payment. This figure shows that,
for all three types of packages, take-up rates increase with the size of the financial aid.
However, the increase in take-up rates is relatively modest after $1,000. Figure 2 shows
that the marginal increase in take-up rates for additional financing is relatively small,
  11
      The interest rates of the loans offered through the experiment were also similar to the rates
offered by Canadian Charter banks such as the Royal Bank, the Toronto Dominium Bank and the
Bank of Montreal, within their private education loan programs. For students enrolled in specific
fields such as Medicine or Engineering, private education loans were sometimes offered at lower rates
than federal loans. For more details, see the Annual Report about the Canadian Student Loans
Program (Human Resources and Skills Development Canada, 2010-2011).
   12
      L stands for loan and G for grant.



                                                 8
with take-up rates respectively equal to 76% for a $2,000 grant and 84% for a $4,000
grant, against 68% for a $1,000 grant and 39% for a $500 grant. An explanation for
those take-up rates being significantly below 1 even for a $4,000 grant is that not all
individuals in our sample intend to enroll in higher education, and as a consequence,
some individuals will always value more current consumption over higher education
financing opportunities. Besides, even some of the students expecting to enroll in
higher education may choose a significantly smaller amount of cash payment over the
option to take up a grant as the latter can be used to pay for educational expenses only.
A similar pattern can be observed for single loan offers, as the take-up rate for $1,000
loan is 11%, compared to 17% and 24% for $2,000 and $4,000 loans, respectively.
    Figures 1 and 2 also show that take-up rates for a grant of value x are very similar,
and in fact always slightly higher, than for a hybrid financial package offering an
additional loan of value x. This pattern likely reflects the fact that taking up a
hybrid financial aid package in practice entails taking up both the loan and the grant
associated with it, and thus paying the interests on the loan component. Depending
on the expected future consumption profile as well as the existence and intensity of
credit constraints, individuals may rationally attach a higher value to a grant offer
than to a hybrid package adding a loan to the grant. Besides, that the take-up rates
for single loan offers increase with the loan amounts, while take-up rates for hybrid
packages are lower than for grants, points to the future value of financial aid being
non-linear in post-college repayment amounts. The choice model we consider in the
next section allows for such non-linearities.




                                           9
                               Figure 1: Take-up rates

           1.00




           0.75
Take−up rate




                                                                             Cash
           0.50                                                                25$
                                                                               700$




           0.25




           0.00

                  $1000 G       $1000 L + $1000 G          $2000 L
                            Financial Aid package




                       Figure 2: Take-up rates against $300

           1.00




           0.75
Take−up




                                                                            Type
           0.50                                                               Grant
                                                                              Hybrid
                                                                              Loan



           0.25




           0.00

                   1000          2000               3000             4000
                                  Amount



                                               10
4     The model
In this section we present a simple choice model which, combined with our experimental
data, will allow us to quantify the willingness-to-pay for financial aid opportunities.
Namely, we assume that preferences over consumption are represented by a CRRA
utility function. For each student i, the utility of consumption c is given by:
                                       1−θ
                                        c i
                                                 if θi 6= 1
                                      
                                      
                                      
                            u(c, θi ) =  1 − θi                                        (1)
                                        log(c), if θ = 1
                                        
                                                     i


where θi denotes the individual-specific risk aversion parameter.
    The large number of questions available from the experiment (96 in total) allows us
to treat relative risk aversion rate as well as the annual discount factors as individual-
specific parameters. Because individuals differ not only in their preferences, but
also in their financial resources, we further allow for individual specific consumption
endowments. In the rest of the section we follow the structure of the experiment and
present the choice equations separately for each group of questions.


4.1    Time preference
A first set of questions (indexed by q = 1, . . . 24) is devoted to measuring the subjective
discount rate and consists of a sequence of choices between two alternatives: an early
cash payment denoted by a0q to be paid t0q months from now, and another cash
payment denoted by a1q , and to be paid t1q months from now. We denote by Yiq a
dummy variable which is equal to 1 if individual i chooses the early cash payment.
Questions differ with respect to the amount of the cash payment, and the periods at
which the earlier or later cash payments would be paid.
    We express individual i’s probability to choose consumption at period t0q versus




                                            11
period t1q using a simple two-period consumption model:
                         (
                                                                        
       Pr(Yiq = 1) = Pr βi (t0q )[u ci + a0q , θi − u ci , θi ]
                                                                                                     )
                                                                                       
                                        +βi (t1q )[u ci , θi − u(ci + a1q , θi ] + εiq > 0               (2)



    where εiq is an idiosyncratic preference shock and ci the individual background
consumption. The distributional assumptions and specification of the background
consumption are discussed in Section 5. Finally, the individual discount rate applied
for a payment to be received tq months from now is assumed to be given by:

                                                             1
                                        βi (tq ) =           tq
                                                     1+      12
                                                                  · ri

where ri denotes the individual annual subjective interest rate.



4.2     Risk aversion
A second set of questions relate to the measurement of the degree of relative risk
aversion. In each of these questions, individuals are offered to choose between two
alternatives, namely a lottery offering a10q with probability pq and a20q with probability
1−pq , and another lottery offering a11q with probability pq and a21q with probability 1−pq .
Questions differ according to the state contingent cash payments (a10q , a20q , a11q , a21q ) and
probabilities (pq , 1 − pq ).13 The generic choice probability for the first alternative is
given by:
                                    
                                                                                           
               Pr(Yiq = 1) = Pr pq · u(ci +               a10q , θi )   − u(ci +   a11q , θi )           (3)
                                    
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                        
                                   +(1 − pq ) · u(ci + a20q , θi ) − u(ci + a21q , θi ) + εiq > 0
                                                                                                          

  13
     As is standard in the experimental literature, we assume that individuals consume the windfall
gain immediately upon reception.

                                                     12
       where εiq is an idiosyncratic preference shock, and q = 25, . . . 79.


4.3        Choices between consumption and education financing
The third group of questions is a sequence of choices between a cash payment to
be paid within one week, and a specific financial aid package covering educational
expenses.
    In order to interpret individual choices between cash payments and educational
financial aid, we specify a stylized two-period model. Period 0 refers to the time
when high school students are asked to choose between consumption and an education
financing package, while period 1 refers to the residual life-cycle starting from high
school graduation. For each choice, individuals must decide between a cash payment
and a financial aid package which is to be paid conditional on higher education
enrollment in period 1.
    This structure of the model is as follows. Let a0q and a1q be the cash payment and
financial aid transfer in question q. The potential financial aid offer (a1q ) offered in
period 0 and to be paid at the beginning of period 1 is characterized by a two-element
vector, denoted by (gq , `q )0 where gq is the amount of the grant and `q the amount of
the loan.14 The choice variable Yiq is equal to 1 when an individual chooses financial
aid a1q , and 0 if she accepts consumption a0q . As a consequence, the initial period
consumption c0iq is given by

                                     c0iq = ci + a0q · (1 − Yiq )

   The period 0 utility, denoted by W (.), of accepting or rejecting the financial aid is
then given by:

                             W (Yiq = 1) = u(ci , θi ) + ε1iq                                        (4)
                             W (Yiq = 0) = u(ci + a0q , θi ) + ε0iq                                  (5)

       where ε0iq and ε1iq represent choice specific preference shocks.
  14
    For instance, an offer consisting of a grant has an entry equal to 0 for `, while a loan has an entry
equal to 0 for g. A hybrid offer that includes both a grant and a loan has a positive entry for both.



                                                   13
    Because we do not have data on actual choices exercised in subsequent periods, we
focus on the estimation of the difference between future components of the utilities
of accepting and rejecting financial aid. The intertemporal utilities of accepting and
rejecting financial aid are given by u(ci , θi ) + ε1iq + βi EViq (Yiq = 1) and u(ci + a0q , θi ) +
ε0iq + βi EViq (Yiq = 0), respectively, where the future components EViq (Yiq = 1) and
EViq (Yiq = 0) are the expected lifetime utilities associated with each choice.
    In practice, expected future value terms associated with each alternative Yiq ∈ {0, 1}
depend on individual beliefs about a range of future outcomes, some of them being
alternative specific. Notably, those beliefs include the subjective probabilities of
enrolling in higher education conditional on receiving the financial aid offer a1q , and
conditional on not receiving the financial aid offer, for the alternatives Yiq = 1 and
Yiq = 0 respectively. The expected future value terms in principle also depend on
the perceived availability of higher education financing opportunities outside of the
experiment, as well as possibly on beliefs over other future outcomes such as the
probability of dropping-out from college. As those outcomes are not observed in
the data, we treat those future components as unknown functions of parental socio-
economic background and individual skills, as well as risk and time preferences. A
key advantage of this approach relative to a more standard dynamic discrete choice
model is that it avoids strong and untestable restrictions regarding the beliefs of the
individuals and their evolution over the life cycle.15
    Under these assumptions, agent i’s probability to accept the financial aid package
proposed at question q is given by
                                                                                   
                                                                                   
            Pr(Yiq = 1) = Pr u(ci , θi ) − u(ci + a0q , θi ) + βi · ψiq + εiq > 0              (6)
                                                                                   

   where ψiq = EViq (Yiq = 1) − EViq (Yiq = 0) denotes the expected future utility gain
associated to accepting financial aid, and εiq = ε1iq − ε0iq .
  15
    An alternative approach would be to elicit beliefs about counterfactual future schooling
choices and consumption paths. In the higher education context, notable references include
Arcidiacono, Hotz, and Kang (2012), Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2014), Wiswall and Zafar
(2015a, 2015b) and Zafar (2013) who use subjective expectations data to examine the determi-
nants of college major choice.




                                               14
5      Specification
In the following, we assume that the idiosyncratic shocks are independent across
individuals and questions, and identically distributed within each of the three groups
of questions following a normal distribution with mean zero. We summarize in the
rest of the section the specification of the background consumption and the expected
future utility gain of accepting financial aid.


5.1     Background consumption
Until now, we have simplified the exposition by considering for each individual a
unique background consumption variable ci . However in order to capture contextual
differences across groups of questions, we allow the background consumption levels, and
therefore also the marginal utility of consumption to vary across groups of questions.16
Specifically, for each group of questions k (where k ∈ {1, 2, 3} indexes the questions
related to time preference, risk aversion and education financing, respectively), we
denote the individual background consumption by cki , which is assumed to depend on
a vector of individual and family background characteristics denoted by Zi :

                                         cki = exp(γk Zi )                                        (7)

    The vector Zi includes an intercept and a set of individual characteristics, namely
gender, parental income (20-40K, 40-60K, 60-80K, 80-100K and more than 100K
Canadian dollars per year), parental education (high school, vocational college and
college) of the respondent of the parental survey, Canadian citizenship, place of
residence (Quebec, Ontario, Saskatchewan, and a dummy for rural location) and
family composition (existence of siblings younger or older than 18).17 This flexible
specification allows each of these characteristics to have different weights within each
group of questions.
  16
     In practice, allowing ci to be specific to each of the three groups of questions proved important
in fitting the financial aid choice data.
  17
     There are 269 individuals with missing income data, and 146 individuals with missing education
data. We use a Gibbs sampling algorithm to impute those missing information using age, gender,
location, income, education, citizenship variables in the full sample.



                                                 15
5.2      Approximation of the future component
The expected future utility gain of accepting financial aid (ψiq ) is a key component
of the model. Standard structural dynamic estimation would require to posit a
parametric form of the utility of potential future schooling choices as well as all the
probability distributions that characterize the subjective beliefs of agents about future
returns to education and experience. In this paper, we take another route and assume
instead that the future component may be approximated by a parametric function
that depends on the loan and grant amounts, time and risk preference parameters,
skills (as measured by numeracy test scores), geographical location, parental income
and education. We estimate this function using a flexible polynomial incorporating
those variables in level and square as well as various interactions.18


6      Identification and estimation
In this section we first discuss the sources of identification of the key parameters of
the model, before turning to the estimation procedure.


6.1      Identification
We start by informally discussing the sources of identification of the individual time
preference and risk aversion parameters, before turning to the parameters of the
expected future utility gain of accepting financial aid. We highlight below the main
features of the experiment and of the model that are key to identification. While the
experiment does provide us with separate sources of identification for those different
sets of parameters, (point-)identification remains parametric in the sense that it relies
  18
    The exact specification is given in Appendix B. Interaction between risk aversion and discount
factor, squared terms in those preference parameters, and dummies for the existence of siblings
younger or older than 18 are excluded from this specification as they were not statistically significant
when we allowed them to enter the future component. Our approach is in line with Geweke and Keane
(2000), who advocate the estimation of the future component of the value function using a polynomial
which records the movement of state variables implied by the law of motion. However, in contrast with
Geweke and Keane (2000), we account for heterogeneity in individual preferences and incorporate
time and risk preference parameters in the polynomial.




                                                  16
on the distributional assumptions made on the idiosyncratic shocks.19
    First, the risk aversion parameters are primarily identified from the sequence of
choices described in Section 4.2 between two lotteries that differ in the cash payments
and the probabilities associated with each payment. Importantly, variation across
individuals in time preferences does not confound the identification of the risk aversion
parameters here since all of the state-contingent cash payments are immediate.
    The main sources of identification of the individual discount rates are the choices
between earlier and later cash payments that are described in Section 4.1. However,
given that in our model individuals are endowed with non-linear CRRA preferences
over consumption, part of this variation may of course also reflect heterogeneity across
individuals in risk aversion. This highlights the importance of having access to choices
that only depend on risk aversion, and not on discount factors.
    Finally, having identified the time and risk preference parameters from the choices
described above, the expected future utility gains of accepting financial aid (versus
cash payment) are identified from the choices between immediate cash payment
and education financial aid that are modeled in Section 4.3. Specifically, under our
parametric assumptions, the expected future utility gains associated with the various
types of financial aid are identified using the variation in take-up rates across discount
rates. It is interesting to note that individual-specific discount rates effectively play
the role of an exclusion restriction in this context, in that they only affect the choices
through the future component of the utility. As such, aside from being of interest
in its own right, the distribution of discount rates plays an important role in the
identification of the willingness-to-pay for different financial aid packages.


6.2     Estimation
The model is estimated by maximum likelihood under the assumption that the
error terms are independent across individuals and across questions, and identically
distributed within each group of equations following a normal distribution with
  19
    This should not come as a surprise since binary choice models are generally not point-identified
without making distributional assumptions on the error term. Note that this is true even if the
parameters of interest are not individual-specific (see, e.g., Magnac and Maurin, 2008).



                                                17
mean zero.20 Under these assumptions and keeping the conditioning on background
characteristics and numeracy score implicit, the log-likelihood is given by:21

               1,248
                X X  96
                          Yiq log(Pr(Yiq = 1)) + (1 − Yiq ) log(1 − Pr(Yiq = 1))
                i=1 q=1


where for each group of questions the choice probabilities Pr(Yiq = 1), which are given
in Equations (2), (3) and (6) above, take a probit form.22


7      Results
We present the estimation results as follows. The first part is devoted to the distri-
butions of risk aversion and discount factors, and of the background consumption
levels. The second part discusses the estimates of the expected future utility gain of
accepting financial aid, for various types of financial packages. In the third part, we
present the model fit. We introduce and discuss the willingness-to-pay for financial
aid in Part 4, and then discuss the implications of these results in terms of credit
constraints. Finally, we investigate the relative importance of family background
characteristics, individual skills as well as time and risk preferences as determinants
of the willingness-to-pay for financial aid.23
  20
      Although the error terms are assumed to be independent across questions, individual choices are
correlated across questions through the individual-specific risk and time preference parameters, and
of course via their observed background characteristics too.
   21
      In practice, we use a multi-step procedure to derive starting values in the region of the global
optimum. The first step consists of estimating risk aversion and background consumption parameters
using the subset of questions designed to elicit risk preferences. Holding those parameters fixed, we
then estimate individual discount rates using the time preference questions. Finally, we estimate in
a final step the future component of accepting the different types of financial aid using the school
financing decisions. We use the outcomes of these three steps as starting values to estimate the full
model via a single step maximum likelihood. Standard errors are estimated using bootstrap with 500
replications.
   22
      Our framework corresponds to a binary choice panel data model with fixed effects, where the
longitudinal dimension is given by the various questions q. Our MLE estimator is therefore in principle
subject to the incidental parameter problem (Neyman and Scott, 1948). However, in practice we
expect the incidental parameter bias to be negligibly small here given the large number of questions
that are used in the estimation (96 overall for each individual).
   23
      Estimation results for the background consumption parameters associated with the financial aid
questions are reported in Appendix C. Estimation results for the other background consumption as


                                                  18
7.1     The distributions of risk aversion, discount factors and
        background consumption
The empirical distributions of the estimated degrees of relative risk aversion, (θi )i ,
and discount factors, (βi )i , are reported in Figure 3, while Table 1 describes the
joint distribution of the estimated relative risk aversion parameters and discount
factors. Starting with risk aversion, 97.2% of the estimated risk aversion parameters
are significant at 5%, thus leading to the rejection of risk neutrality (θ = 0) for the vast
majority of the individuals in the sample. The distribution of risk aversion is skewed
to the right and is characterized by a substantial degree of dispersion, as indicated by
the inter-decile range (0.40 for the first decile and 0.85 for the last decile). Risk loving
behavior (θ < 0), however, is limited to 16 individuals out of 1,248. Regarding the
external validity of these results, it is worth noting that the median of the estimated
risk aversion parameters (0.64) fits in the range of the relative risk aversion parameters
that have been estimated, using observational data, in the literature on dynamic
schooling choices. For instance, Keane and Wolpin (2001) estimate a smaller risk
aversion coefficient (0.49), while Belzil and Hansen (2004) and Sauer (2004) find
larger degrees of risk aversion (0.93 and 0.77, respectively). Particularly relevant for
us is the paper by Brodaty et al. (2014), who, unlike the previous studies, estimate a
dynamic model of schooling decisions that allows for heterogeneous degrees of relative
risk aversion across individuals. In their paper, the estimated risk aversion coefficients
range between 0.6 and 0.9.24
    Turning to the time preferences, the discount factors are also found to be quite
dispersed. The distribution is skewed to the left with its median (0.83) being larger
than its mean (0.75). The empirical distribution of discount factors is essentially
bimodal, with around 10% of our sample having an estimated discount rate lower
than 0.33, while another 40% of the sample has discount rate higher than 0.87. This
points to the co-existence of a myopic sub-population and a set of forward-looking
individuals endowed with large discount factors of about 0.9. It is interesting to note
well as the future component parameters are available from the authors upon request.
  24
     Our estimates exhibit a larger degree of heterogeneity across individuals, which may be partly
due to the fact that we estimate the risk aversion parameters more flexibly than Brodaty et al. (2014)
who assume the existence of a small number of heterogeneity types.



                                                 19
             Figure 3: Histogram of the risk aversion and discount factors




         0.075
                                                                   0.04
Percentage




                                                          Percentage




         0.050


                                                                   0.02

         0.025




         0.000                                                     0.00
                 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00                              −0.5    0.0    0.5     1.0    1.5
                       Discount factor                                        Risk aversion factor
                   Notes: (i) The range of the risk factor has been restricted from -0.5 to 1.5
                   to improve display, excluding a total of 24 individuals. (ii) The binwidth
                   has been set to 0.02.




                                                       20
Table 1: Discount factor and risk aversion

                Discount     Risk
                Factor       Aversion
    Min         0.00         -1.60
    1st Dec.    0.33         0.40
    1st Quart. 0.72          0.52
    40th Pct.   0.80         0.60
    Median      0.83         0.64
    Mean        0.75         0.73
    SD          0.27         1.00
    60th Pct.   0.87         0.68
    3rd Quart. 0.91          0.75
    9th Dec.    0.96         0.85
    Max         1.00         16.82
    Correlation -0.14




   Table 2: Background consumption

     Discount Risk       Financial
     Questions Questions Questions
Mean 3.21      0.58      237.30
SD   36.37     1.02      274.75




                   21
that our mean value matches that of Andersen et al. (2008) who report, using data
from an artefactual field experiment conducted in Denmark among adults aged 19 to
75, an estimate of 0.75 (under a risk neutrality assumption), while being lower than
the value estimated under risk aversion (0.9).25
     Our data also allows us to examine the joint distribution of risk aversion and
discount factors. Table 1 reports a negative correlation (-0.14, significant at 1%)
between the discount rate and relative risk aversion. In the experimental economics
literature, risk and time preferences are generally not elicited jointly and for this reason
there exists only few estimates of the correlation between risk aversion and discount
factors. A notable exception is Andersen et al. (2008), who discuss the bias affecting
discount factor estimates when individuals are erroneously assumed to be risk neutral,
and show that the joint elicitation of risk and time preferences results in lower discount
rates estimates. Andersen et al. (2008) consider the joint distribution of risk aversion
and discount rates using a parametric model in which both risk aversion and discount
rates depend on observed heterogeneity and an orthogonal unobserved heterogeneity
term. Consistent with our results, they report a weak positive correlation between
risk aversion and impatience.
     Finally, in our model, the level of background consumption allows us to capture
differences in consumption levels due to heterogeneity in family background. As
discussed earlier, background consumption is allowed to differ across groups of questions
as well. Our estimates indicate that the consumption levels that are used to evaluate
cash payments differ markedly across questions. For example, the mean reference
consumption is around $3 for discount rate questions, 50 cents for relative risk aversion
choices, and $237 for financial aid questions. The background consumption levels for
the financial aid questions are also highly dispersed across individuals.
     Having estimated the time and risk preferences for each individual in the sample,
it is interesting to examine whether these parameters could be predicted by standard
background characteristics. Table 3 below reports the results from a linear regression
  25
     Some of the papers estimating dynamic models of schooling decisions also attempt to estimate the
discount factor. Notably, Keane and Wolpin (1997) estimate for their baseline model a discount factor
(0.85) that is very close to the median of our estimated distribution (0.83). See Magnac and Thesmar
(2002) who provide sufficient conditions under which the discount factor is identified in the context
of dynamic discrete choice models.



                                                 22
of the estimated individual-specific degrees of relative risk aversion and discount
factors on a set of socio-economic background and demographic characteristics. The
main takeaway from this table is that those characteristics only account for a very
small fraction of the variation in risk aversion parameters and discount factors, the
R2 ’s for both regressions being low (0.016 and 0.085, respectively). Nonetheless, it is
worth noting that females are significantly less forward looking and more risk averse
than males. Immigrants also tend to be less forward looking, while children of college
educated parents have a lower degree of risk aversion, although the coefficient is only
significant at the 10% level. Finally, residents of Saskatchewan, which is the poorest
region in the sample, have significantly lower discount rates.
    At any rate, these results show that discount rates and risk aversion parameters are
economic primitives which are mostly left unexplained by standard background and
demographic characteristics. To the extent that, as discussed in Section 7.3.4, discount
rates and risk aversion play a dominant role in explaining the willingness-to-pay for
financial aid, this highlights the importance in this context of eliciting these preference
parameters.




                                            23
    Table 3: Understanding individual preferences

                                             Regression
                                            β           θ
                                              ∗∗∗
                    Const                0.685      0.857∗∗∗
                                         (0.042)    (0.162)
Parental            Drop-out               Ref.       Ref.

Education           High-school            0.018       −0.157
                                          (0.030)      (0.116)
                    Vocational College     0.009       −0.080
                                          (0.038)      (0.149)
                    College                0.034       −0.189∗
                                          (0.028)      (0.110)
Parental            0-20K                   Ref.         Ref.

Income              20-40K                 0.023         0.202
                                          (0.037)       (0.144)
                    40-60K                 0.034         0.074
                                          (0.035)       (0.135)
                    60-80K                −0.030         0.104
                                          (0.036)       (0.142)
                    80-100K                0.020         0.142
                                          (0.037)       (0.144)
                    +100K                  0.030         0.157
                                          (0.036)       (0.139)
                    Rural                 0.043∗∗       −0.101
                                          (0.021)       (0.081)
                   Female                −0.076∗∗∗      0.118∗∗
                                          (0.015)       (0.057)
                Immigrant                −0.141∗∗∗       0.191
                                          (0.031)       (0.121)
Province            Ontario                 Ref.          Ref.

                    Quebec                 0.002        −0.047
                                          (0.019)       (0.075)
                    Manitoba              −0.005        −0.060
                                          (0.021)       (0.082)
                    Saskatchewan         −0.123∗∗∗       0.107
                                          (0.026)       (0.103)
                    R2                     0.085         0.016
                 Num. obs.                 1,248         1,248
 Notes: (i) Least squares weighted by the inverse of the stan-
 dard errors of the estimated individual preference parameters,
 ii) standard errors reported in parenthesis, iii) ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,
 ∗∗ p   < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1.
7.2       The expected future gain of financial aid
In this subsection, we focus on the relevant decision variables between cash payment
and financial aid. Specifically, Table 4 compares the distribution of the expected
discounted future utility gain against the period 0 utility of accepting a cash payment,
for various types of financial aid packages and cash payments. Period 0 utility gains
of accepting a cash payment (denoted by ∆(.)) are evaluated as the difference in the
initial period utility of consumption evaluated at the reference consumption level
(ci ) plus a cash payment, and the initial period utility evaluated at the reference
consumption level.

Table 4: Utilities of consumption and expected discounted future gain of financial aid

                     ∆(c100 )     ∆(c300 )    ∆(c700 )     βψ(`1000 )     βψ(`2000 )     βψ(g1000 )     βψ(g2000 )
    Min                 0             0          0             0              0              0               0
    1st Dec.           32            83        157            2.8            2.8            47              96
    1st Quart.         48           122        223            15             19             148           237
    40th Pct.          58          144         260            29             36            186            282
    Median             66           156        280            40             50             206           305
    Mean               74           167         303           62             68             210            301
    SD                144          152         282           144            142            167             190
    60th Pct.          73          173         305            55             64            227            330
    3rd Quart.         84           198        345            77             86             263            370
    9th Dec.          103           229        407           117            122             321           438
    Max               4281         4282        7599          3048           3014           3214           3448
      Notes: (i) ∆(cx ) = u(ci + x) − u(ci ), (ii) βψ(`1000 ) (resp. βψ(`2000 )) denotes the expected discounted
      future utility gain associated with a $1,000 (resp. $2,000) loan, (iii) βψ(g1000 ) (resp. βψ(g2000 )) denotes
      the expected discounted future utility gain associated with a $1,000 (resp. $2,000) grant.




    First, as expected, for a given amount of financial aid, the median value of a grant
exceeds the value of a loan. The median future utility gain of a $1,000 grant is more
than 5 times as high as the expected utility gain of a $1,000 loan, while the median
gain associated with a $2,000 grant is 6 times as large as the expected gain of a $2,000
loan. More generally, the distribution of the discounted expected future utility gains
for a grant first-order stochastically dominates that of the expected future gains for
a loan. Second, the utility gain associated with a grant increases with its size, with
the distribution of the utility gains of a $2,000 grant dominating that of a $1,000
grant. A similar pattern holds for loans. This result shows that, in most parts of

                                                          25
the distribution, the interest costs are not high enough to make a $2,000 loan less
attractive than a $1,000 loan. Finally, the discounted expected future utility gains of
the financial aid packages vary a lot across individuals, with the ratio of interdecile
range over the median ranging from 1.1 (for a $2,000 grant) to as much as 2.9 (for a
$1,000 loan).
    We now examine the utility gains of accepting a cash payment. The distributions
of the utility gains associated with a $300 and $700 cash payments dominate that
of both types of loans. This is also true throughout most of the distribution of the
utility gains associated with a smaller $100 cash payment. On the other hand, the
sign of the value of immediate cash versus grant varies across the distribution, with
the median utility gain of accepting a $700 cash payment ranging between the median
gain of a $1,000 grant and that of a $2,000 grant.
    Taken together, these results already provide suggestive evidence that the willingness-
to-pay for financial aid packages is heterogeneous across high school students. However,
our estimates allow us to go beyond the marginal distributions of utility gains associ-
ated with cash payments and financial aid, and directly compute individual-specific
willingnesses-to-pay for the different types of financial aid packages that are pro-
posed in the experiment. We report and discuss the estimated distributions of the
willingness-to-pay for various types of financial aid packages in Section 7.3.


7.3     Borrowing constraints and the value of financial aid
7.3.1   Measurement

In this section, we combine the observed choices between cash transfers and financial
aid packages with our model to evaluate the monetary values associated with the
option to take up the various types of financial aid. Before doing so, it is important to
examine the ability of our model to fit the financial aid decisions from the experiment.
Table A6 in Appendix D reports the empirical frequencies of financial aid acceptance
and the predicted probabilities, for each of the 17 financial aid choices to exercise.
Our model generally fits the data reasonably well, with a couple of exceptions. Most
notably, we underestimate the take-up rates of a $1,000 grant and of the hybrid package
($1,000 loan and $1,000 grant) against a $700 cash payment, while we overestimate


                                           26
the take-up rates for a $2,000 loan against a $25 cash payment.26
    In the following, we estimate individual-specific values of each type of grant, loan
and hybrid loan that are proposed in the context of the experiment. Put into a public
policy perspective, these estimates can be interpreted as uncovering the willingness-
to-pay for a counterfactual expansion in higher education financial aid offers. In that
sense, the experiment we use in the paper allows us to go beyond take-up rates by
exploring the intensive margin of the demand for college financial aid.
    We choose to pay specific attention to the willingness-to-pay for loans, which,
unlike the willingness-to-pay for grants, are a natural measure of the tightness of
individual borrowing constraints. While constrained students may attach a significant
value to the opportunity of taking up a loan at the market rate, unconstrained students
should only attach small or negligible values to those redundant opportunities.27
    Specifically, let cm
                       iq be the incremental level of consumption that makes individuals
indifferent between current consumption (ci + cm     iq ) and the financial aid package at
question q. For such a value, we have

                                  u(ci , θi ) + βi ψiq = u(ci + cm
                                                                 iq , θi )                        (8)

       After a few steps of algebra, we obtain:
                                                                  
                      exp
                               1
                               1−θi
                                      log (1 − θi )βi ψiq + c1−θ
                                                             i
                                                                 i
                                                                          − ci   if θi 6= 1
              cm
               iq =                                                                               (9)
                      exp (βi ψiq + log(ci )) − ci
                      
                                                                                 if θi = 1

   cm
    iq is the maximum consumption increase that one would be willing to trade in
order to secure the financial aid package. Throughout the rest of the paper, we use
  26
     In order to examine the importance of allowing for heterogeneous time and risk preference
parameters, we also have estimated a constrained specification of our model with homogeneous
discount factors and relative risk aversion parameters (results available from the authors upon
request). While the estimated discount factor and risk aversion parameters (equal to 0.78 and 0.67,
respectively) are close to the mean of the corresponding empirical distributions from our preferred
specification, the fit of this restricted model is much less satisfactory.
  27
     In principle, the willingness-to-pay for loans may also capture the hassle cost associated with
student loan application outside of the experiment. However, for the case of Federal student loans
in Canada, the (online) application process requires filling one form only, and is overall fairly easy
and quick. As a result, and in contrast with the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA)
process in the United States, the hassle cost seems unlikely to play a major role in this context.


                                                     27
cm
 iq as the individual-specific measure of the willingness-to-pay for the financial aid
package offered in question q.

7.3.2    Willingness-to-pay for financial aid

In Table 5 below, we summarize the distributions of the estimated willingness-to-pay
for the three types of financial aid packages (loans, grants and hybrid loans) of sizes
$1,000 and $2,000.28 Our results indicate that the median high school student would
be willing to forego a $58.6 increase in current consumption to secure a $1,000 loan at
the market interest rate in the near future. The willingness-to-pay for a $1,000 loan is
highly heterogeneous across students, with an interdecile range equal to $180. While
a quarter of the students are willing to sacrifice more than $116 for the option to take
up a $1,000 loan, students in the bottom quartile are only willing to sacrifice less
than $20. In the next subsection we will examine how much of this heterogeneity is
attributable to risk and time preference parameters, skills, as well as family background,
socio-economic and geographical characteristics.

                     Table 5: The distribution of willingness-to-pay

            Quantiles               $1, 000                         $2, 000
                       Loan         Grant     Hybrid       Loan     Grant     Hybrid
            1st Dec.   4.26         50.81      55.43        5.95    128.4       118
            1st Quart. 20.29        245.4      239.7       33.55    458.6      359.1
            Median     58.58        396.1      372.2       82.26    678.4      504.7
            3rd Quart. 116          556.1      509.1       141.7    923.1      664.2
            9th Dec.   183.9        721.8      649.8       207.9    1199       828.1
              Note: Amounts are in Canadian dollars.




    Put into a public policy perspective, a grant is equivalent to a tuition reduction,
or a higher education subsidy. Not surprisingly, the value of a grant is typically much
larger. The median student would be willing to trade in $396 increase of their current
  28
    For the ease of exposition, we focus hereafter on financial aid packages of sizes $1,000 and
$2,000. Estimation results for alternative amounts of financial aid are available from the authors
upon request.



                                               28
consumption for the option to take up a $1,000 grant. Contrary to loans, only a small
proportion of the population attaches low values to grant availability. For instance,
less than 10% of the students would sacrifice less than $50 for a $1,000 grant, while
around half of them would do so for a $1,000 loan. More generally, for both amounts
of financial aid ($1,000 and $2,000), the distribution of the willingness-to-pay for a
grant stochastically dominates that of a loan.
    Turning to the hybrid packages, adding a loan to a grant generally has a small
negative impact on the value of the package. This pattern holds true in most parts
of the distributions of the willingness-to-pay. In practice, taking up a hybrid loan
involves taking up both the grant and the loan components of the package. As a result,
how much students are willing to trade for a hybrid package versus a single grant
depends on the incremental value of a loan, as well as on the interest cost associated
with it. Our results indicate that, in this context, the latter effect dominates. At any
rate, this provides additional evidence that our model fits the descriptive patterns
previously reported in Section 3 (Figure 2).
    Finally, for loans, grants as well as hybrid loans, the value of the package generally
increases with the size of the financial aid. Specifically, the distribution of the
willingness-to-pay for a $2,000 loan (grant) stochastically dominates that of a $1,000
loan (grant), while a ($2,000 loan, $2,000 grant) hybrid loan also dominates that of a
($1,000 loan, $1,000 grant) hybrid loan. In particular, the results for loans provide
suggestive evidence that, at least for a subset of the students in the sample, getting
access to a $1,000 loan is not enough to remove higher education credit constraints.
    One can quantify the magnitude of, and heterogeneity in credit market imperfec-
tions by converting the willingness-to-pay for any given loan into the interest rate
wedge that students would be willing to pay on top of the prevailing (r0 = 5.7%)
market interest rate in order to secure the option to take up that loan. Specifically,
for a given loan of size l and willingness-to-pay cm , we define the effective interest rate
as the interest rate, denoted by r1 (l, cm ), such that:

                           (1 + r1 (l, cm )) (l − cm ) = (1 + r0 )l                    (10)

where l − cm is the principal of the loan net of the willingness-to-pay, and (1 + r0 )l is
the total repayment (principal plus interest fees). Note that r1 (l, cm ) is larger than r0

                                             29
for any positive willingness-to-pay cm . We report in Table 6 below the distribution of
the interest rate wedges (r1 (l, cm ) − r0 ) associated with a $1,000 loan and a $2,000
loan:




                                          30
        Table 6: The distribution of interest rate wedges (in percentage points)

                            Quantiles       $1, 000 loan      $2, 000 loan
                            1st Dec.            0.45              6.02
                            1st Quart.          2.19              7.50
                            Median              6.58              10.2
                            3rd Quart.          13.9              13.8
                            9th Dec.            23.8              18.0
               Note: Interest rate wedges are computed with respect to the prevailing
               market interest rate of 5.7%.




    These results indicate that most of the students in our sample are willing to pay a
sizable interest rate premium above the prevailing market rate for the option to take
up a loan. The median interest rate premium students would be willing to pay is large
and equal to 6.58 (10.2) percentage points for a $1,000 ($2,000) loan, respectively.29
As expected given the results on the willingness-to-pay for loans documented earlier,
the interest rate premia also exhibit much heterogeneity across students. For the case
of $1,000 loans, the interest wedge ranges from 0.45 to 23.8 percentage points for the
first and the last decile, respectively. Overall, these results point to the existence of
credit constraints, in the form of frictions in the market for college loans, which affect
a substantial share of high school students in Canada. Our estimates further show
that a non-negligible fraction of high school students attach pretty large values to the
option to take up a college loan.30 From a policy standpoint, our findings indicate
that expanding higher education financial aid may in fact be socially desirable in
this context, in spite of the Canadian higher education system being already heavily
subsidized.31
  29
     Interest rate wedges are lower for a $1,000 loan than for a $2,000 loan from the third quartile.
This pattern is consistent with the willingness-to-pay increasing less with the amount of the loan in
the top part of the distribution.
  30
     To the extent that some individuals in the sample are likely to have low, or even zero subjective
probabilities of enrolling in college, our results effectively provide a lower bound on the value attached
to financial aid expansion among those students who anticipate enrolling in higher education. In
practice 9.6% of the individuals in the sample have refused all financial offers that included a grant,
presumably indicating a very small subjective probability of attending higher education for those
students.
  31
     In Appendix E, we report the distribution of the willingness-to-pay separately for Ontario and

                                                   31
7.3.3    Statistical decomposition

We now examine the determinants of the value attached to financial aid. Before
estimating marginal effects, we evaluate the relative importance of the main compo-
nents of the willingness-to-pay for financial aid, namely (i) preference parameters (risk
aversion and discount factors), (ii) skills (numeracy test score), (iii) family background
characteristics (parental income and education) and (iv) other socio-economic and
geographical variables such as gender, province, an indicator for living in a rural area,
and family composition.
    Understanding the determinants of the willingness-to-pay for financial aid is impor-
tant from a policy standpoint. Notably, if skills or family background characteristics
play an important role in this decomposition then these results may provide some guid-
ance regarding the optimal targeting of higher education financial aid opportunities.
On the other hand, if most of the variation in willingness-to-pay is attributable to risk
and time preferences, then identifying who would benefit more from an expansion in
higher education financial aid would prove much more challenging as these preferences
are typically unknown to the policy maker.
    Since our model is highly non-linear, there are multiple possible ways to decompose
the willingness-to-pay. In the following we simply regress linearly the willingness-to-
pay on various sets of characteristics. We then compute the adjusted coefficient of
determination (Adjusted R2 ) associated with each specification, and divide it by the
Adjusted R2 obtained when all four groups of determinants (i)-(iv) are included. The
corresponding ratio can be interpreted as a measure of the relative importance of each
group of variables.
    As we did before, we focus our analysis on the willingness-to-pay for a $1,000 loan
and a $1,000 grant. The decomposition results are reported in Table 7. We highlight
two main takeaways. First, as indicated by the ratios of adjusted R2 (0.52 for loans
and 0.61 for grants), time and risk preference parameters are more important than
all other determinants taken together. This is true for both loans and grants. A
Québec. Our estimates are consistent with the institutional differences across these two provinces. In
particular, the distribution of the willingness-to-pay for a $1,000 loan in Ontario dominates almost
everywhere the distribution in Québec, consistent with higher levels of (net) tuition fees in Ontario
than in Québec.



                                                 32
second noteworthy finding is the low incremental explanatory power of numeracy test
scores and parental background variables. For the case of a $1,000 loan, the relative
explanatory power increases by about 15% (from 0.52 to 0.60), while it increases by
less than 7% only (from 0.61 to 0.65) for a $1,000 grant. Overall, these results provide
evidence that time and risk preference parameters play a dominant role in accounting
for the variation across individuals in willingness-to-pay for financial aid. As such,
our findings highlight the importance of collecting data on individual time and risk
preferences to improve our understanding of educational financing decisions. Next, we
report and discuss the marginal effects associated with those preference parameters,
as well as with the numeracy scores and background characteristics.

                              Table 7: Statistical decomposition

                                             cm (`1000 )                    cm (g1000 )
                                       (1)    (2)    (3)       (4)   (1)    (2)    (3)    (4)
        Ratio Adjusted R2             0.52   0.52 0.60          1    0.61   0.61 0.65      1

        Risk and Discounting           Yes    Yes        Yes   Yes   Yes    Yes    Yes    Yes

        Individual Skills                     Yes        Yes   Yes          Yes    Yes    Yes

        Parental education and in-                       Yes   Yes                 Yes    Yes
        come

        Geography and Family                                   Yes                        Yes
        structure




7.3.4    Explaining the willingness-to-pay

We now turn to the marginal effects of parental background variables and other
observed attributes and preferences on the willingness-to-pay for financial aid. Table
8 below reports the average marginal effects for two types of financial aid packages,
namely a $1,000 loan and a $1,000 grant.32
  32
    The fact that the magnitudes of the marginal effects tend to be larger for a $1,000 grant than for
a $1,000 loan partly reflects the difference in scale across both outcomes, with the standard deviation
of the willingness-to-pay for a $1,000 grant being equal to $223, against $77 for a $1,000 loan.

                                                    33
Table 8: Explaining the willingness-to-pay (Average Marginal Effects)

                                        cm (`1000 )      cm (g1000 )
                θ                       3.70∗∗∗           6.03∗∗∗
                                        (0.89)             (0.13)
                β                       33.57∗∗∗          49.60∗∗∗
                                        (9.70)            (10.30)

                Numeracy                −0.07∗∗           0.75∗∗∗
                                        (0.04)            (0.14)

                0-20K                   Ref.                Ref.

                20-40K                  −1.10∗∗∗         −0.38∗∗
                                        (0.23)            (0.19)
                40-60K                  2.40∗∗∗          −0.69∗∗∗
                                        (0.30)            (0.13)
                60-80K                  −0.42∗∗           2.50∗∗∗
                                        (0.23)            (0.41)
                80-100K                 −0.78∗∗∗           0.09
                                        (0.13)            (0.08)
                +100K                   0.13             −0.54∗∗∗
                                        (0.07)            (0.13)

                Drop-out                Ref.                Ref.

                High-school             -0.64               1.70
                                        (0.14)             (0.28)
                Vocational College      0.59                2.10
                                        (0.59)             (0.65)
                College                 -0.26               0.70
                                        (0.25)             (0.32)

                Ontario                 Ref.                Ref.

                Quebec                  -0.58               -0.20
                                        (0.12)             (0.05)
                Manitoba                1.10                 1.70
                                        (0.20)             (0.26)
                Saskatchewan            2.10                -0.97
                                        (0.34)             (0.17)
         Notes: (i) The entries in this table are computed as the
         sample averages of the marginal effects evaluated at the
         observed values of the vector of covariates (Average Marginal
         Effects), (ii) marginal effects in standard deviation units
         for all continuous characteristics (θ, β, and Numeracy), (iii)
         standard errors reported in parenthesis, (iv) ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p <
         0.05, ∗ p < 0.1.
    We first examine the effects of parental income. There is a large empirical
literature on the relationship between parental income and schooling attainment
(Heckman and Mosso, 2014). Economists have long debated on the magnitude of
the causal effects of parental income on educational outcomes, in particular college
enrollment. Identifying those effects is a complicated task as family income is also
likely correlated with individual abilities, as well as preferences for schooling. The
experiment used in this paper allows us to go beyond evaluating the impact of parental
income on schooling attainment as we can directly quantify how the willingness-to-pay
for education financial aid, a measure that increases with the anticipated intensity
of credit constraints, vary with family income. Doing so is also an important step
towards evaluating the effectiveness of publicly provided financial aid policies that are
meant to equalize opportunities across income groups. The results reported in Table 8
illustrate the differences in willingness-to-pay across income classes, using as a reference
those who earn $20,000 or less. The results indicate that the willingness-to-pay for a
$1,000 loan is non-linear and non-monotonic as the highest willingness-to-pay is found
for the $40,000-$60,000 income group. However, the marginal effects across income
groups are very small. For instance, on average, young individuals raised in families
earning $40,000-$60,000 would only be willing to pay $2.4 more for the option to take
up a $1,000 loan, relative to the lowest income reference group. This is consistent
with the very low explanatory power associated with parental education and income
that was documented in Table 7. A similar pattern holds for grants. The highest
willingness-to-pay for a $1,000 grant is found for students from the $60,000-$80,000
income group, who would pay only $2.5 more than those from the reference group.
Consistent with the low explanatory power of those characteristics, the marginal
effects of parental education on the willingness-to-pay for a $1,000 loan and a $1,000
grant are also generally very small.
    The co-existence of positive and sizable values attached to loans and grants,
documented in Section 7.3.2 (Table 5), with the quasi-independence of the willingness-
to-pay with respect to parental income indicates two important features of the Canadian
higher education financing system. First, the median Canadian high school student
is not satiated with financial aid opportunities, and the expected marginal utility
of financial aid is non-negligible. Second, it does appear that the higher education


                                            35
public policies in place in Canada are successful in equalizing the marginal utility
of financial aid opportunities across various income groups, as differences in family
income have pretty much no impact on the value that young individuals would attach
to a counterfactual expansion in higher education financial aid opportunities.
    Finally, as was already noted in the previous section, there is clear evidence that
individual differences in the willingness-to-pay for financial aid are mostly explained
by deep (time and risk) preference parameters. We now discuss their marginal effects.
The effect of the discount factor is easily predictable as the structure of the experiment
implies that the benefit of financial aid can only be experienced in the future while the
cash payment is practically immediate. Indeed, as shown in Table 8, the marginal effect
of the discount factor on the willingness-to-pay for grants and loans are positive and
significant, both statistically and economically. All else equal, increasing the discount
factor by one standard deviation leads to a $34 ($50) increase in the willingness-to-pay
for a $1,000 loan ($1,000 grant). This marginal effect is in particular much larger than
any of the effects associated with a $20,000 income differential.
    However, the marginal effect of risk aversion on the willingness-to-pay for grants or
loans is more intricate because risk aversion affects not only the value of accepting a
cash payment but also the value of financial aid, with the effect of risk aversion on the
value of financial aid being ambiguous.33 Indeed, while high-school students who are
more risk averse are also those who would benefit more from the future consumption
smoothing opportunity provided by financial aid, individuals who accept financial
aid can only exercise the option to take up a loan or a grant if they end up enrolling
in higher education. Those who are more risk averse and who are also not certain
of entering higher education, or are not sure when they are likely to do so, will be
particularly sensitive to the latter feature. As a consequence, it is in theory not possible
to sign unambiguously the effect of risk aversion on the willingness-to-pay for financial
aid. Because both individual-specific enrollment uncertainty and future parental
transfers are unobserved in our context, our model is not capable of separating those
two channels, and, while interesting, any discussion about their relative importance
  33
    Although with CRRA preferences the effect of risk aversion on the marginal utility of immediate
consumption is in theory ambiguous too, and depends on the level of background consumption, it is
always negative in our case since the background consumption happens to be larger than 1 for all
the individuals in the sample.


                                                36
would lie beyond the scope of the paper. At this stage, we only note that the marginal
effect of a one standard deviation increase in risk aversion on the willingness-to-pay
for a $1,000 grant and a $1,000 loan are both positive (equal to around $4 for loans
and $6 for grants), but are 8 to 10 times smaller than the marginal effects of discount
factors.


8     Conclusion
In this paper, we estimate the distribution of the willingness-to-pay for higher education
financial aid using data from a field experiment conducted in Canada where high
school students had to choose between immediate cash payments and various types of
higher education financing packages. Our model of financial aid acceptance decisions
is based on an explicit trade-off between the increase in current utility following an
immediate cash payment and the expected future gain associated with a specific
financial aid package. As the experiment also allows us to estimate the distributions
of individual risk aversion and discount factors, we are able to uncover how preference
parameters for time and risk affect the willingness-to-pay for the various types of
financial aids.
    We find that the majority of students attach a sizable value to accessing student
loans. Consistent with the existence of significant frictions in the market for college
loans, we find that the median high school student in our sample would be willing
to pay a large 6.6 percentage points interest rate premium on top of the prevailing
market rate to secure a $1,000 loan. The median interest rate premium is even higher
for a $2,000 loan, at about 10 percentage points. Taken together, these findings point
to the existence of credit constraints affecting a sizable share of the population of high
school students.
    Our results also disclose a large degree of heterogeneity in both risk aversion and
discount rates. The majority of the students exhibit a mild degree of risk aversion,
while the distribution of discount factors is bimodal with individuals with low discount
factors coexisting with forward-looking individuals. Interestingly, we find that the
willingness-to-pay for financial aid is dominated by individual preferences. The value
of financial aid is found to increase strongly with individual discount factors, while

                                           37
risk aversion also has a positive but much smaller effect on willingness-to-pay. After
conditioning on individual preferences, family background characteristics only play a
relatively modest role in the decision to accept a financial aid offer.
    Our findings suggest a number of interesting avenues for future research. First,
we believe that more effort should be devoted at investigating the role of time and
risk preferences in educational financing decisions and schooling choices more broadly.
Indeed, our results show that those preference parameters play a crucial role in financial
aid acceptance decisions. Second, data availability has confined us to the analysis
of financing decisions prior to actual college enrollment. It would be interesting to
combine this educational financing experiment with observational data on subsequent
outcomes to gain additional insights into the effects of improving higher education
financing opportunities on educational as well as future labor market outcomes.




                                           38
References
Andersen, S., G. W. Harrison, M. I. Lau, and E. E. Rutstrom (2008). Eliciting risk and time
  preferences. Econometrica 76 (3), 583–618.

Andreoni, J. and C. Sprenger (2012). Estimating time preferences from convex budgets.
  American Economic Review 102 (7), 3333–3356.

Arcidiacono, P., V. J. Hotz, and S. Kang (2012). Modeling college major choices using
  elicited measures of expectations and counterfactuals. Journal of Econometrics 166 (1),
  3–16.

Arcidiacono, P., H. Sieg, and F. Sloan (2007). Living rationally under the volcano? an
  empirical analysis of heavy drinking and smoking. International Economic Review 48,
  37–65.

Belley, P., M. Frenette, and L. Lochner (2014). Post-secondary attendance by parental
  income in the U.S. and Canada: do financial aid policies explain the differences? Canadian
  Journal of Economics 47 (2), 664–696.

Belley, P. and L. Lochner (2007). The changing role of family income and ability in
  determining educational achievement. Journal of Human Capital 1 (1), 37–89.

Belzil, C. and J. Hansen (2004). Earnings Dispersion, Risk Aversion and Education,
  Volume 33 of Research in Labor Economics, pp. 335–358. Greenwich, Conn.: JAI.

Brodaty, T., R. J. Gary-Bobo, and A. Prieto (2014). Do risk aversion and wages explain
  educational choices? Journal of Public Economics 117, 125–148.

Brown, M., J. K. Scholz, and A. Seshadri (2012). A new test of borrowing constraints for
  education. Review of Economic Studies 79 (2), 511–538.

Cameron, S. V. and J. J. Heckman (1998). Life cycle schooling and dynamic selection
  bias: Models and evidence for five cohorts of american males. Journal of Political
  Economy 106 (2), 262–333.

Cameron, S. V. and C. Taber (2004). Estimation of educational borrowing constraints using
  returns to schooling. Journal of Political Economy 112 (1), 132–182.



                                            39
Card, D. (1995). Earnings, schooling, and ability revisited, Volume 14 of Research in Labor
  Economics, pp. 23–28. Greenwich, Conn.: JAI.

Carneiro, P. and J. J. Heckman (2002). The evidence on credit constraints in post–secondary
  schooling. Economic Journal 112 (482), 705–734.

Coller, M. and M. Williams (1999). Eliciting individual discount rates. Experimental
  Economics 2 (2), 107–127.

Delavande, A. and B. Zafar (2014). University choice: The role of expected earnings,
  non-pecuniary outcomes and financial constraints. Working paper.

Frederick, S., G. Loewenstein, and T. O’Donoghue (2002). Time discounting and time
  preference: a critical review. Journal of Economic Literature 40 (2), 351–401.

Geweke, J. and M. Keane (2000). Bayesian inference for dynamic discrete choice models
  without the need for dynamic programming. In R. Mariano, T. Schuermann, and M. Weeks
  (Eds.), Simulation-based inference in econometrics: methods and applications, pp. 100–131.
  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Hansen, J. and X. Liu (2013). A structural model of educational attainment in canada. IZA
  Discussion Paper 7237.

Harrison, G. W. and J. A. List (2004). Field experiments. Journal of Economic Litera-
  ture 42 (4), 1009–1055.

Heckman, J. J. and S. Mosso (2014). The economics of human development and social
  mobility. Annual Review of Economics 6, 689–733.

Holt, C. A. and S. K. Laury (2002). Risk aversion and incentive effects. American Economic
  Review 92 (5), 1644–1655.

Johnson, M. T. (2013). Borrowing constraints, college enrollment, and delayed entry. Journal
  of Labor Economics 31 (4), 669–725.

Keane, M. P. and K. I. Wolpin (1997). The career decisions of young men. Journal of
  Political Economy 105 (3), 473–522.

Keane, M. P. and K. I. Wolpin (2001). The effect of parental transfers and borrowing
  constraints on educational attainment. International Economic Review 42 (4), 1051–1103.

                                            40
Lang, K. (1993). Ability bias, discount rate bias, and the return to education. Manuscript,
  Boston University, Department of Economics.

Lochner, L. J. and A. Monge-Naranjo (2011). The nature of credit constraints and human
  capital. American Economic Review 101 (6), 2487–2529.

Lochner, L. J. and A. Monge-Naranjo (2012). Credit constraints in education. Annual
  Review of Economics 4, 225–256.

Lochner, L. J. and A. Monge-Naranjo (2016). Student loans and repayment: theory, evidence,
  and policy. Volume 5 of Handbook of the Economics of Education, Chapter 8, pp. 397–478.
  Amsterdam: North Holland.

Magnac, T. and E. Maurin (2008). Partial identification in monotone binary models: Discrete
  regressors and interval data. Review of Economic Studies 75 (3), 835–864.

Magnac, T. and D. Thesmar (2002). Identifying dynamic discrete decision processes.
  Econometrica 70 (2), 801–816.

Montmarquette, C. and C. Johnson (2015). The lack of loan aversion among canadian high
  school students. Canadian Journal of Economics 48 (2), 585–611.

Murray, S., Y. Clermont, and M. Binkley (2005). The international adult literacy and skills
  survey. Technical report, Statistics Canada.

Neyman, J. and E. L. Scott (1948). Consistent estimates based on partially consistent
  observations. Econometrica 16 (1), 1–32.

Sauer, R. M. (2004). Educational financing and lifetime earnings. Review of Economic
  Studies 71 (4), 1189–1216.

Stinebrickner, R. and T. R. Stinebrickner (2008). The effect of credit constraints on the
  college drop-out decision: A direct approach using a new panel study. American Economic
  Review 98 (5), 2163–84.

Stinebrickner, R. and T. R. Stinebrickner (2014). A major in science? initial beliefs and final
  outcomes for college major and dropout. Review of Economic Studies 81 (1), 426–472.

Wiswall, M. and B. Zafar (2015a). Determinants of college major choice: identification using
  an information experiment. Review of Economic Studies 82 (2), 791–824.

                                              41
Wiswall, M. and B. Zafar (2015b). How do college students respond to public information
  about earnings? Journal of Human Capital 9 (2), 117–169.

Zafar, B. (2013). College major choice and the gender gap. Journal of Human Resources 48,
  545–595.




                                           42
Appendix (For Online Publication)

A      The Millenium Foundation Field Experiment on
       Education Financing
In this section, we provide additional details on the structure of the field exper-
iment. An extensive discussion of the experiment and the sample is available in
Montmarquette and Johnson (2015).
    All subjects were presented with the full set of decisions and are paid for one
randomly selected decision at the end of the session. The subjects were informed that
they would be paid for one decision, but they did not know which one at the beginning
of the session. The questions can be split into three groups. First, students must
answer a set of questions aimed at measuring their rate of time preference. Table A1
illustrates the experiment where individuals are offered a choice between two payments
of different values to be made at different points in time. This approach, originally
developed by Coller and Williams (1999), allows to evaluate each subject’s willingness
to forgo present consumption for future consumption, and provides a measure of the
discount rate.
    A second set of questions relate to the measurement of risk attitudes. Students
are presented with a sequence of binary choices between two lotteries in which risk is
objectively stated. Table A2 presents the two strategies used for eliciting risk aversion.
Both strategies consist of choosing between a lottery with average payoff and another
one with extreme payoff, and identify the cutoff point where an agent switches from
the average to the extreme lottery. The major difference between the two strategies
lies in the fact that while the first one pins down a cut-off probability, the second
identifies a cut-off payoff. These approaches pioneered by Holt and Laury (2002) are
standard in the experimental literature to measure the degree of risk aversion.
    The third group of questions, which constitutes the most original aspect of the
field experiment, is a sequence of choices between a cash payment to be paid within
one week from the day the experiment was carried, and the option to use a specific
financial aid package covering educational expenses. The financial aid package is
to be paid conditional on enrolling in a full-time program at any higher education

                                           43
                        Table A1: Discount rates questions


          Choices 1                         Choices 2
Payment     Payment                 Payment   Payment           Annual
1 day       1 month                 1 day     1 year            Interest(%)

$   75      $ 75.31                 $   75    $ 78.75           5
$   75      $ 75.63                 $   75    $ 82.5            10
$   75      $ 76.25                 $   75    $ 90.00           20
$   75      $ 78.13                 $   75    $ 112.5           50
$   75      $ 81.25                 $   75    $ 150.0           100
$   75      $ 87.5                  $   75    $ 225.0           200
          Choices 3                         Choices 4
Payment     Payment                 Payment   Payment           Annual
1 week      1 month + 1 week        1 week    1 year + 1 week   Interest(%)

$   75      $   75.31               $   75       $   78.75      5
$   75      $   75.63               $   75       $   82.5       10
$   75      $   76.25               $   75       $   90.00      20
$   75      $   78.13               $   75       $   112.5      50
$   75      $   81.25               $   75       $   150.0      100
$   75      $   87.5                $   75       $   225.0      200




                                         44
                           Table A2: Risk aversion lotteries

                Panel 1: Moving probability Lotteries (30 questions)
                         Choices 1            Choices 2            Choices 3
                       L= 32 L=2          L=24 L=1.5           L=40 L=2.5
                       H=40 H=77          H=30 H=57.75         H=50 H=96.25
    Prob L Prob H EV           EV         EV      EV           EV      EV
1 0.90       0.10      32.80 9.50         24.60 7.12           41.00 11.87
2 0.80       0.20      33.60 17.00        25.20 12.75          42.00 21.25
3 0.70       0.30      34.40 24.50        25.80 18.38          43.00 30.63
4 0.60       0.40      35.20 32.00        26.40 24.00          44.00 40.00
5 0.50       0.50      36.00 39.50        27.00 29.62          45.00 49.38
6 0.40       0.60      36.80 47.00        27.60 35.25          46.00 58.75
7 0.30       0.70      37.60 54.50        28.20 40.88          47.00 68.12
8 0.20       0.80      38.40 62.00        28.80 46.50          48.00 77.50
9 0.10       0.90      39.20 69.50        29.40 52.12          49.00 86.88
10 0.00      1.00      40.00 77.00        30.00 57.75          50.00 96.25
  Panel 2: Fixed probability Lotteries (Prob L= Prob H = 0.5, 25 questions)
  L H       EV      L H       EV       L H       EV      L H       EV
   Options A          Options B          Options A            Options B
  48 48 48          40 64 52           18 90 54          8 104 56
  40 64 52          32 80 56           8 104 56          0 112 56
  32 80 56          24 96 60           42 42 42          36 60 48
  24 96 60          16 112 64          36 60 48          30 78 54
  16 112 64         8 120 64           30 78 54          24 96 60
  48 48 48          42 66 54           24 96 60          18 114 66
  42 66 54          36 84 60           18 114 66         10 122 66
  36 84 60          30 102 66          54 54 54          44 68 56
  30 102 66         24 120 72          44 68 56          34 82 58
  24 120 72         16 128 72          34 82 58          24 96 60
  48 48 48          38 62 50           24 96 60          14 110 62
  38 62 50          28 76 52           14 110 62         6 118 62
  28 76 52          18 90 54
      Notes: (i) EV for expected value, L for Low payoff, H for High payoff. ii) Payoffs
      are in Canadian $. iii) Source: SRDC-CIRANO Field Experiment on Education
      Financing.




                                             45
institution in the country (within 2 years). Grants and loans were defined as follows:

       • Grants: Educational grants will be disbursed if a participant enrolls in a higher
         education institution for learning or training full time within two years from the
         date of experiment participation. The grant will cover direct and indirect costs
         related to the learning activity. For tuition fees, payments will be made directly
         to the education institution. Receipts will be required for the reimbursement of
         other costs.

       • Loans: Educational loans will be disbursed if a participant enrolls in a higher
         education institution for learning or training full time. These loans will be
         available up to two years from the date of the experiment. The loans are
         repayable upon the completion of, or if the participants drops out of the program
         of study. The interest rate, which is the same as the one offered by the Canadian
         Federal Student Assistance program, is floating and is set at the prime rate plus
         2.5%.34

    In total, we consider three different types of subsidies: grants, loans, and hybrid
loans which incorporate both a loan and a grant component. We use a total of 17
financial decisions, with 5 choices with a single loan offer, 7 choices with a single grant
offer, and 5 hybrid offers. These decisions are summarized in Table A3.
    In monetary terms, cash alternatives varied from $25 to $700, while grants and
loans varied from $400 to $4,000. The variations in cash, and in the nature and
the size of financial aid packages have a number of advantages. For instance, for
a given cash payment offered and manipulating the financial parameters, we can
uncover the relative values of a grant and a loan. Suppose instead that the financial
aid package is fixed, we can also reveal the willingness to pay for a specific package
by manipulating the cash payment. At the outset, it should be clear that these
amounts are quite sizeable. Over the period considered, a grant of $2,000 in 2008
would have covered 65% of yearly fee at University of Western Ontario and Queen’s
University, and almost 100% at McGill University and Université de Montréal. In
addition, although tuition fees at vocational college are more dispersed, they are also
  34
       The prime rate was equal to 3.2% on average over the period of interest.


                                                  46
                   Table A3: Financial aid questions

Type of package       Choices      Cash    Grant    Loan      Aid Take-up
                      1            25      0        2,000     0.458
                      2            300     0        2,000     0.171
Single Loans          3            700     0        2,000     0.051
                      4            300     0        1,000     0.109
                      5            300     0        4,000     0.283

                      6            25      1,000    1,000     0.834
                      7            300     1,000    1,000     0.637
Standard Hybrid       8            700     1,000    1,000     0.389
                      9            300     400      400       0.287
                      10           300     2,000    2,000     0.727

                      11           25      1,000    0         0.886
                      12           100     1,000    0         0.826
                      13           300     1,000    0         0.686
Single Grants         14           700     1,000    0         0.412
                      15           300     500      0         0.384
                      16           300     2,000    0         0.764
                      17           300     4,000    0         0.835

  Notes: i) Amounts are in Canadian dollars, ii) Source: SRDC-CIRANO Field
  Experiment on Education Financing.




                                    47
subject to the same regulation and are comparable to those of universities.35 Put in
2015 Canadian dollars, the total cost of the experiment is around $1,000,000.
    The sample was recruited to generate meaningful comparisons by population group,
gender, and low-, medium- or high-income status. The original project design called
for a minimum sample size of 1,000 urban respondents with the goal of 200 participants
per group of interest, with a total sample of 1,248 individuals. Table A4 summarizes
the share of participants in several groups of interest.36
    Over the day of the experiment, a numeracy test provided by the Center for
Education Statistics was administered to all students. The test was based on the
numerical component of the International Adult Literacy and Skills Survey project
undertaken by numerous OECD countries between 1995 and 2005. The questions are
meant to capture the capacity to perform numerical calculations.37 Students received
a score between 0 and 500, which is used as a cognitive ability measure.38




  35
     See Council of ministers of education of Canada (http://www.educationau-incanada.ca).
  36
     Parental education is defined as the highest level of education of the parent who responded to
the survey. Parental income is defined as the total income declared by the respondent, before tax
deductions and measured in 2007, of all family members living in the household.
  37
     More details can be found in Murray, Clermont, and Binkley (2005).
  38
     In our empirical application, individual numeracy test score has been scaled to have variance
one, and the mean is 5.1.


                                                48
Table A4: Descriptive statistics of the sample

    Parental    Drop-out              8%
    Education   High-school          25%
                Vocational College    7%
                College              61%
    Parental    0-20K                 5%
    Income      20-40K               13%
                40-60K               23%
                60-80K               19%
                80-100K              15%
                +100K                24%
    Location    Urban                80%
                Rural                20%
    Province    Quebec               30%
                Ontario              29%
                Manitoba             28%
                Saskatchewan         13%
    Citizen     Native               94%
                Immigrant             6%
    Gender      Male                 46%
                Female               54%

 Source: SRDC-CIRANO Field Experiment on Ed-
 ucation Financing.




                       49
B         Parametrization

          cai = c0 + c1 1pHigh-school + c2 1pVoc college + c3 1pCollege                                     (11)
                 +   c4 1p20-40K   +   c5 1p40-60K   +   c6 1p60-80K   +   c7 1p80-100K   +   c8 1p+100K
                 + c9 1Quebec + c10 1Ontario + c11 1Saskatchewan + c12 1pRural
                 + c13 1aFemale + c14 1aCitizenship + c15 1aSiblings -18 years + c16 1aSiblings +18 years



ψiq (gq , `q )   = ψ0 + ψ1 g + ψ2 g 2 + ψ3 ` + ψ4 `2 + ψ5 ` × g
                 + ψ6 β + ψ7 θ + ψ8 β × g + ψ9 θ × g + ψ10 β × ` + ψ11 θ × `
                 + ψ12 NU + ψ13 NU2 + ψ14 NU × β + ψ15 NU × θ + ψ16 NU × g + ψ17 NU × `
                 + ψ18 1p20-40K + ψ19 1p40-60K + ψ20 1p60-80K + ψ21 1p80-100K + ψ22 1p+100K
                 + ψ23 1pHigh-school + ψ24 1pVoc college + ψ25 1pCollege + ψ26 1Quebec + ψ27 1Ontario + ψ28 1Saskatchewan
                              g                 g               g               `                `                `
                 + ψ29 1QC        + ψ30 1ON        + ψ31 1SK        + ψ32 1QC        + ψ33 1ON        + ψ34 1SK
                             2180            5667            5064             2180             5667             5064
                 + ψ35 1p20-40K × g + ψ36 1p40-60K × g + ψ37 1p60-80K × g + ψ38 1p80-100K × g + ψ39 1p+100K × g
                 + ψ40 1p20-40K × ` + ψ41 1p40-60K × ` + ψ42 1p60-80K × ` + ψ43 1p80-100K × ` + ψ44 1p+100K × `
                 + ψ45 1p20-40K × θ + ψ46 1p40-60K × θ + ψ47 1p60-80K × θ + ψ48 1p80-100K × θ + ψ49 1p+100K × θ
                 + ψ50 1p20-40K × β + ψ51 1p40-60K × β + ψ52 1p60-80K × β + ψ53 1p80-100K × β + ψ54 1p+100K × β
                 + ψ55 1pHS × g + ψ56 1pVC × g + ψ57 1pCO × g + ψ58 1pHS × ` + ψ59 1pVC × ` + ψ60 1pCO × `
                 + ψ61 1pHS × β + ψ62 1pVC × β + ψ63 1pCO × β + ψ64 1pHS × θ + ψ65 1pVC × θ + ψ66 1pCO × θ          (12)




                                                              50
C   Background consumption

      Table A5: Background consumption (financial aid questions)
                                        Estimates St. errors
                              Const           1.84      0.01
                        High-school          -0.09      0.02
                Vocational College            0.63      0.01
                             College         -0.05      0.01
                             20-40K          -0.91      0.03
                             40-60K           0.39      0.04
                             60-80K           0.51      0.04
                            80-100K          -0.46      0.04
                             +100K           -0.27      0.05
                              Urban           0.03      0.01
                               Male           0.90      0.02
                              Native         -1.75      0.00
                             Quebec          -0.33      0.04
                             Ontario          0.45      0.03
                      Saskatchewan            0.39      0.01
              Siblings less than -18         -0.11      0.01
             Siblings more than 18            0.02      0.01




                                   51
D   Model fit

                             Table A6: Model Fit

           Choices                     Predicted            Empirical
                                      Probabilities        Frequencies
           c25 VS g1000                   0.90                0.89
           c100 VS g1000                  0.84                0.83
           c300 VS g1000                  0.64                0.69
           c700 VS g1000                  0.28                0.41
           c300 VS g500                   0.41                0.38
           c300 VS g2000                  0.82                0.76
           c300 VS g4000                  0.78                0.84
           c25 VS `2000                   0.63                0.46
           c300 VS `2000                  0.19                0.17
           c700 VS `2000                  0.04                0.05
           c300 VS `1000                  0.18                0.11
           c300 VS `4000                  0.28                0.28
           c25 VS `1000 + g1000           0.89                0.83
           c300 VS `1000 + g1000          0.60                0.64
           c700 VS `1000 + g1000          0.24                0.39
           c300 VS `400 + g400            0.35                0.29
           c300 VS `2000 + g2000          0.74                0.73
       Note: c, g and ` stand for cash, grant and loan, respectively. For
       example c25 VS g1000 refers to the choice between $25 cash and $1,000
       grant, while c25 VS `1000 + g1000 refers to the choice between $25 cash
       and the hybrid package ($1,000 loan and $1,000 grant).




                                         52
E         Spatial heterogeneity
In Table A7 below, we report the distribution of the willingness-to-pay for a $1,000
loan, a $1,000 grant and a hybrid financial aid package containing a $1,000 loan and a
$1,000 grant, separately for Ontario and Québec. These two provinces, which are the
most populated in Canada, are characterized by markedly different levels of tuition
fees. Specifically, Québec has low average annual tuition ($2,180 over the period of
interest), while Ontario has significantly higher tuition rates ($5,667 on average over
the period of interest). Québec and Ontario do not only differ in terms of higher
education tuition fees, but also in terms of financial aid generosity. The average
amount of financial aid offers per student, as well as the fraction of the total financial
aid that takes the form of grants is significantly higher in Québec than in Ontario.39
For a Québec resident, the median value of securing a $1,000 loan is estimated to
be $54. On the other hand, the median young Ontarians, who are faced with higher
tuition rates, would pay a higher amount ($71). More generally, the distribution of the
willingness-to-pay in Ontario dominates almost everywhere the distribution in Québec.
In particular, the first quartile, the median and the third quartile of the distribution
of the willingness-to-pay are all significantly higher in Ontario than in Québec at the
5% level. At the third quartile, the values indicating the willingness-to-pay are equal
to $137 for Ontario and $100 for Québec.
    Students from Ontario also attach higher values to grants as well as hybrid loans
than students from Québec. The median Ontarian high school student in our sample
is willing to forego $458 to secure a $1,000 grant (45.8 cents per dollar), while the
median student from Québec is willing to trade $360 against a $1,000 grant (36 cents
per dollar). Differences for hybrid loans are of similar magnitude, with the median
willingness-to-pay for a hybrid ($1,000 loan, $1,000 grant) package in Ontario being
equal to $432, against $334 in Québec. These findings are consistent with the existence
of significantly higher levels of (net) tuition fees in Ontario than in Québec.




  39
       For more details regarding financial aid parameters in Canada, see Belley et al. (2014).


                                                   53
Table A7: The distribution of the willingness-to-pay by province

                cmi (`1000 )   cm
                                i (g1000 )    cm
                                               i (`1000 + g1000 )
                ON QC          ON QC          ON        QC
   1st Dec.     8.2 3.4        174 104        180       110
   1st Quart.   28      22     310 226        300       214
   Median        71     54     458 360        432       334
   3rd Quart.   137 100        618 487        569       448
   9th Dec.     191 159        776 580        707       530
      Notes: (i) QC: Quebec, ON: Ontario. ii) Amounts are in
      Canadian dollars.




                               54
