                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             FOREIGN INVESTMENT AND DOMESTIC PRODUCTIVITY:
       IDENTIFYING KNOWLEDGE SPILLOVERS AND COMPETITION EFFECTS

                                      Christian Fons-Rosen
                                     Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
                                        Bent E. Sorensen
                                    Carolina Villegas-Sanchez
                                       Vadym Volosovych

                                       Working Paper 23643
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23643


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           August 2017, Revised October 2018




We thank Adam Szeidl for insightful comments on an earlier draft of this paper and discussants
and participants of numerous presentations. Carolina Villegas-Sanchez acknowledges financial
support from Banco Sabadell. Fons-Rosen acknowledges financial support from the Spanish
Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness through a grant (ECO-2014-55555-P) and through the
Severo Ochoa Programme for Centres of Excellence in R&D (SEV-2015-0563). Veronika
Penciakova provided superb research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23643.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Christian Fons-Rosen, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Bent E. Sorensen, Carolina Villegas-
Sanchez, and Vadym Volosovych. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Foreign Investment and Domestic Productivity: Identifying Knowledge Spillovers and Competition
Effects
Christian Fons-Rosen, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Bent E. Sorensen, Carolina Villegas-Sanchez,
and Vadym Volosovych
NBER Working Paper No. 23643
August 2017, Revised October 2018
JEL No. E32,F15,F36

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the impact of FDI on the productivity of host-country firms. FDI has positive spillovers
only when foreign and domestic firms use similar technologies. Channeling FDI to sectors where
firms share similar technology would significantly increase productivity spillovers from FDI. We
show that inventor mobility across sectors is a key channel of technology transfer. To deal with
endogeneity concerns we control for sectoral productivity growth, construct a Bartik-style
instrument based on the productivity growth of neighboring countries, and exploit differences in
knowledge flows across sectors captured by an asymmetric patent citation matrix.


Christian Fons-Rosen                            Carolina Villegas-Sanchez
Christian Fons-Rosen                            Department of Economics, Finance and Accounting
Universitat Pompeu Fabra and CEPR               ESADE Business School
Barcelona GSE                                   Avenida de Torreblanca, 59
Carrer Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27                08172 Sant Cugat - Barcelona
08005 Barcelona                                 SPAIN
SPAIN                                           SPAIN
christian.fons-rosen@upf.edu                    carolina.villegas@esade.edu

Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan                            Vadym Volosovych
Department of Economics                         Finance Group, Department of Business Economics
University of Maryland                          Erasmus University Rotterdam
Tydings Hall 4118D                              Room H14-30
College Park, MD 20742-7211                     P.O. Box 1738
and CEPR                                        3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands
and also NBER                                   and Tinbergen Institute and ERIM
kalemli@econ.umd.edu                            volosovych@ese.eur.nl

Bent E. Sorensen
Department of Economics
University of Houston
204 McElhinney Hall
Houston, TX 77204
and CEPR
besorensen@uh.edu
1         Introduction
According to the 2017 World Investment Report of UNCTAD, China is the third largest foreign
direct investment (FDI) recipient in the world after the United States and the United Kingdom.
China has followed a development strategy since 2008, allowing FDI only in particular sectors with
the justification that such policies promote growth.1 The Chinese Administration for Industry and
Commerce divides sectors as “encouraged” and “restrictive” for foreign direct investment, where
the encouraged sectors are all technology-intensive sectors. At the other extreme, the United States
is currently deliberating the “Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA),”
which aims to restrict FDI in strategic sectors, most importantly, the technology-intensive sectors.2
The United States is not the only country that restricts FDI in such sectors on the grounds of
the national security concerns. A recent OECD study (Kowalski, Rabaioli and Vallejo (2017))
investigates the industrial policy of 24 developed and developing countries and finds that almost
all developing countries use measures to encourage FDI in technology-intensive sectors, with China
being a very active user of such policies. At the same time, countries such as the United States, the
United Kingdom, and Germany do not typically encourage such FDI and the European Commission,
following a request by Germany, France and Italy, is currently considering a proposal for European
foreign investment screening regulation.
        Our paper provides a rationale for policies that encourage FDI into technology-intensive sectors.
FDI benefits the host country most when domestic firms use similar production technologies to
those of the foreign firms. We investigate the productivity effects of FDI on domestic firms in six
European countries, where domestic firms are defined as firms with no foreign ownership at any time
during our sample period of 1999–2008.3 Our sample of domestic firms is nationally representative
for the countries we study and our FDI data that is aggregated from firm-level foreign ownership
shares match OECD aggregate FDI data during our sample period.
        Previous work has investigated the same question by regressing the total factor productivity
(TFP) of domestic firms on output produced by foreign firms in the same two-digit sector, in the
majority cases, in a single country. The effects found within the same sector are referred to as the
“horizontal spillovers.” The literature has typically found negligible or even negative horizontal
spillovers.4 Aitken and Harrison (1999) interpret these results as emanating from two counteracting
    1
     See Made in China 2025.
    2
     See https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/senate-bill/2098.
   3
     Identifying domestic firms is challenging: in order to insure that the definition is consistent over time, one needs
data on the ownership structure of all firms for all countries at an annual basis during the entire decade, together
with changes in ownership stakes. We use the Orbis/Amadeus data which provides detailed information on parent-
subsidiary linkages over time, recording the percentage of equity capital owned by domestic and foreign owners across
the globe. To track the possible changes through M&A transactions, we use many vintages of Orbis/Amadeus over
time and double check our final time-series on firm-level FDI with Zephyr database that records the universe of M&A
transactions in our sample of countries.
   4
     See Barrios, Gorg and Strobl (2011), Haskel, Pereira and Slaughter (2007), Keller and Yeaple (2009), and Aitken


                                                           2
forces: positive learning effects and negative competition effects. The literature also finds negative
competition effects manifesting in lower market shares for domestic firms, although it is a priori
possible that competition between foreign and domestic firms increases average productivity of the
latter if less efficient firms are forced to exit. The lack of evidence for positive horizontal spillovers in
most countries has led researchers to explore the role of “vertical spillovers”; that is, spillovers from
foreign to domestic firms in different two-digit sectors. Positive vertical spillovers have been found
in upstream sectors that supply goods to the sectors with FDI presence. The interpretation is that
linkages between domestic upstream suppliers and downstream foreign-owned customers support
learning and technology transfers between the firms (see Javorcik (2004)). These vertical spillovers
are measured using coefficients from the input-output matrix to capture the trade-linkages between
upstream and downstream sectors.
   Our contribution differs from the previous literature in three major ways. First, we consider
FDI at the four-digit sector-level while previous studies focused on FDI at a broader two-digit
sector-level. Going to a more granular four-digit sector-level will allow us to better separate the
learning effects from the competition effects. We test if horizontal spillovers to domestic firms in
a four-digit sector are larger when they are technologically similar to the foreign firms investing in
that same four-digit sector. The intuition underlying our analysis is that when foreign and domestic
firms operate in the same four-digit sector, domestic firms may be affected negatively from foreign
competition in the product markets, but if foreign firms use similar technology to domestic firms,
these negative effects may be counteracted by positive learning effects.
   Our second contribution is to search for vertical spillovers across different four-digit and techno-
logically close sectors. We demonstrate empirically that technological similarity is not capturing the
same variation as input-output linkages between sectors along the product value chain. Finally, our
third contribution is to explicitly account for the endogeneity of FDI. The first order endogeneity is
the sector-level productivity growth since FDI is likely to come to growing sectors. We exploit our
multicountry setup so that we can simultaneously control for sector-level productivity growth and
identify the independent effect of sector-level FDI. For the possibility that FDI is endogenous not
only to sector-level productivity but endogenous to sector-level productivity only in certain coun-
tries, we undertake a Bartik-style instrumental variable analysis using neigbouring country-sector
productivity growth.
   Our methodology relies on the construction of measures of “technology closeness” across sec-
tors. Firms that file patents have to classify these into patent classes and the main idea is that if
firms patent in similar patent classes (or, for brevity, have similar patents), they are technologically
close. Hence, a sector has “technologically close firms” when many of its firms patent in the same
technology classes. Similarly, if firms in two different sectors tend to have similar patents, then
and Harrison (1999), and Harrison, Martin and Nataraj (2013).



                                                      3
these sectors are considered technologically close to each other. We develop sector-level measures
of technology closeness using firm-level patent data from the United States.5 The fact that tech-
nological distances in our European sample of countries comes from the U.S. patent data is crucial
to address another endogeneity concern that domestic firms adjust their patenting to the entry of
foreign firms.6 This strategy resembles the common practice of applying the Rajan-Zingales sector-
level indicators measuring the need for external finance, which uses U.S. firm-level data and then
uses those values in cross-country settings. Specifically, for each firm we construct a vector of patent
shares across patent classes. Our sectoral measure is then the average of the pairwise un-centered
correlations across these vectors weighted by firm R&D.
       With the help of these sectoral technology closeness measures, we can break up the existing
measures of horizontal spillovers from FDI, which are used to test for spillovers in a given two-digit
sector, into three different measures: (1) the effect of FDI on competition; (2) learning from foreign
firms using similar technologies and operating in the same four-digit sector (positive horizontal tech-
nology spillovers); and (3) learning from foreign firms operating in different four-digit sectors that
are technologically close to the sector of the domestic firm (positive vertical technology spillovers).
       In order to fix ideas, consider an example from the French data in our sample. The French
company Valinox, a manufacturer of highly specialized steel tubing for nuclear steam generation,
competes with the German multinational Salzgitter Mannesmann Precision (SMP), which operates
in France in the same four-digit sector. The presence of SMP may hurt the productivity of Valinox
by undercutting Valinox’s market shares but, at the same time, Valinox benefits if it can adopt
some of SMP’s cutting-edge technology. Valinox may buy a patent owned by SMP, learn about new
processes, mimic the organization of production and sales, or mimic management practices of SMP,
for example, by hiring workers who acquired skills while working for SMP. To be concrete, in the
NACE sector 2420, to which Valinox and SMP belong, on average, 23 percent of patents registered
belong to the same technological patent classes.7
       Valinox may also benefit from technological spillovers from foreign firms in other four-digit
sectors like the Dutch producer Constellium Montreuil Juigne, a leading supplier of aluminum
products and solutions for aerospace, transportation, and defense worldwide. It operates in France
in the same broad two-digit sector 24 as Valinox, but in a different four-digit NACE sector (sector
2442). Hence, Constellium does not directly compete with Valinox. However, steel and aluminum
are the two most common metals used and they share similarities in applications and design and
   5
     The U.S. patent data is from Bloom, Schankerman and Van Reenen (2013).
   6
     In the Appendix, we show that domestic firms increase their patenting after foreign entry when FDI takes place
in sectors that are technologically close.
   7
     In our paper we use the statistical classification of economic activities in the European Community, abbreviated
as NACE; the term NACE is derived from the French Nomenclature statistique des Activités économiques dans la
Communauté Européenne.




                                                         4
therefore Valinox may benefit from technological advances achieved by Constellium.8 Firms in sector
2420 (such as Valinox) and firms in sector 2442 (such as Constellium) use similar technologies,
reflected in the 31 percent patent overlap for firms across these two sectors. We measure the
technological distance between four-digit sectors in a similar fashion as within sectors; specifically,
it is the average of the pairwise un-centered correlations across firms taken from each of the sectors
of these vectors weighted by firm R&D.
    We regress TFP of domestic firms on the three measures that we have constructed.9 Our
first measure is a standard horizontal spillover measure, i.e. the fraction of output produced by
foreign firms, but in a given four-digit sector. The second measure is technology-closeness-weighted
horizontal spillovers in the four-digit sector; namely, the fraction of output produced by foreign
firms in a given four-digit sector weighted by our sector-level measure of technology closeness across
firms in that same sector. The third measure is technology-closeness-weighted vertical spillovers,
that is the share of output produced by foreign firms in each of the four-digit sectors (other than the
domestic firm’s), weighted by the technological distance from the four-digit sector of a given domestic
firm in the same broad two-digit sector. Our approach is related to Bloom, Schankerman and
Van Reenen (2013), who test for productivity spillovers from R&D, whereas we test for productivity
spillovers from FDI.
    Our results are as follows. Regressing firm TFP on our technology-closeness-weighted FDI
measure, we find that domestic firms obtain positive horizontal productivity spillovers: domestic
firms benefit from operating in the same sector as foreigners if firms in that sector are technologically
close. This contrasts to the results we obtain when we add the unweighted horizontal spillovers
measure into the same regression; horizontal spillovers are negative in sectors where firms are
technologically distant. Similar to Aitken and Harrison (1999), we interpret these negative effects
to be the result of the dominating competition effects. We also find positive vertical spillovers from
FDI undertaken in other four-digit sectors, only when these other sectors are technologically close
to the four-digit sector of the domestic firms. Importantly, we show that this measure does not
capture the standard vertical FDI spillovers based on customer-supplier relationships constructed
from the input-output matrices since we explicitly include this type of vertical spillovers in the
regressions. All in all, our results are similar in spirit to Keller and Yeaple (2009), who show that
    8
      Both steel and aluminum can be altered by alloying, cold-working, and heat-treating, and formed by rolling, ex-
truding, drawing, machining, and other mechanical processes. They can also be cast to a high tolerance; see the web-
site of the steel industry expert Satyendra Kumar Sarna http://ispatguru.com/comparison-of-steel-with-aluminum/.
    9
      While our baseline is a measure of revenue TFP, following the literature, results look very similar when we use
a measure of physical TFP, following a procedure suggested by Marin and Voigtlander (2014). As is well known in
the literature, changes in revenue TFP can be due to changes in physical productivity or to changes in prices and
the separate effects can not be measured in the absence of firm-level price data. This issue is particularly important
because markups of domestic firms may respond endogenously to competition, leaving the effect on physical TFP in
doubt. We also estimate markups following De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) and use them in a separate regression
analysis.



                                                          5
FDI spillovers are stronger in high-technology industries.
    A potential source of bias can be due to FDI being endogenous. Foreign companies may invest
in sectors that have high productivity growth or in sectors that are technologically close to high
productivity sectors. As long as domestic firms’ productivity is correlated with any factors that
affect the entry decision of the multinationals, the estimates of spillovers from foreign to domestic
firms may be biased. We address this issue in several ways. First, taking advantage of the fact that
our data spans six countries, we control for sectoral productivity growth that may attract FDI to
certain sectors, regardless of location, using sector×year-fixed effects. These fixed effects absorb
sector-specific patterns while still allowing us to identify the effect of sector-level changes in FDI
over time across countries. This identification methodology has not been used in the literature on
FDI spillovers before given that the majority of previous papers have been single-country studies.10
We also include country×year fixed effects to account for potential country-specific policy changes
implemented to attract FDI. As a result, our estimates are not driven by different dynamic patterns
in productivity between sectors and/or between countries or any other omitted variable at these
levels.
    Second, we also address potentially remaining endogeneity at the sector×country×year level.
Multinationals might decide to enter to specific country-sector combinations over time driven by
motives to acquire technological knowledge from domestic firms that are successful at innovating
in the years of foreign entry. This might be more likely to take place when domestic firms are
technologically close to the potential foreign entrants. It is also possible that foreign firms may wish
to enter the underperforming sectors with high growth potential (maybe taking advantage of “fire-
sales” of distressed firms), which could explain the negative competition effects that we have found.
To address potential reverse causality resulting from such selection, we perform an instrumental
variables analysis (IV), where we implement a Bartik-type IV procedure. We instrument growth of
FDI in a given country-sector-year with the neighboring countries’ growth in the same sector and
year. These IV results support causal horizontal spillover effects of FDI in technologically close
sectors.
    Our results on vertical spillovers are probably less likely to be affected by endogeneity concerns,
as it is less plausible for FDI to take place in a given four-digit sector with the expectation of getting
benefits from booming firms in other four-digit sectors. Nevertheless, we examine such possibility
and devise the following empirical test. Assume for simplicity of exposition that a two-digit sector
consists of three four-digit sectors, labelled as s41 , s42 , and s43 . Let us focus on domestic firms in
sector s41 and assume that foreign firms enter sectors s42 and s43 . Assume that foreign firms of s42
enter as a reaction to productivity advances by domestic firms in sector s41 , because globally sector
s42 happens to learn a lot from s41 and it is easier to benefit from these spillovers in geographical
  10
     An exception is Gorodnichenko, Svejnar and Terrell (2014), who study FDI in 17 transition economies and show
that the vertical spillovers vary by industry.


                                                       6
proximity. Further assume that sector s43 has never learned anything from s41 , so that the FDI
perform in that sector must be for reasons other than events or shocks occuring in sector s41 . If this
is the case, foreigners entering s42 should cite patents of the sector s41 more often than foreigners
entering to sector s43 . This would create a stronger relation between domestic productivity in
sector s41 and FDI in sector s42 due to reverse causality based on absorbing technology from sector
s41 more intensely. From the perspective of domestic sector s41 , FDI into sector s42 is endogenous
while FDI into sector s43 is exogenous. In the estimations we split FDI into its endogenous and
exogenous components and find estimated coefficients of similar magnitude, giving support for our
causal interpretation. To do this split, we make use of the asymmetric nature of patent citations as
shown by Acemoglu, Akcigit and Kerr (2016).
   What do our technology closeness measures capture? We argue that these measures capture
the benefits from “operating in the same technology space,” but in general we are not explicit
about how domestic firms may acquire knowledge from foreign firms. One channel could be the
mobility of inventors who transmit their knowledge from firm to firm. If inventors move frequently
between two four-digit sectors, then these sectors are likely to have more patent overlap as a
result of such knowledge transfers, thereby scoring high on our technology closeness metric. The
data on inventor mobility can provide an important check on our interpretation. We construct a
measure of mobility of inventors between sectors (imputed from underlying data for mobility between
technology classes). Using this new measure of FDI spillovers weighted by inventor mobility, we find
qualitatively similar results to those with spillover measures based on patent and citations data;
inventor mobility is a channel of knowledge transfers between technologically close sectors that
can benefit domestic firms, indicating true learning spillovers. Similarly to the asymmetric patent
citations exercise discussed previously, we again reject reverse causality after decomposing FDI into
its endogenous and exogenous components based on how often inventors move across a given pair of
sectors. Specifically, we test whether the measured FDI spillovers from different four-digit sectors
to domestic firms are stronger when inventors migrate more intensively from the domestic sector
to those FDI sectors (which would suggest reverse causality). We find no such differences as the
estimated coefficients are similar to each other for both FDI components.
   Finally, we perform a quantification exercise that reveals an important policy implication of
our results. We calculate the (counterfactual) effects of FDI flowing to technologically close sectors
rather than flowing equally to all sectors. Strikingly, this would more than double the productivity
spillovers from FDI on domestic firms. If all FDI were flowing to the least technologically close
sectors, spillovers would even be negative! These patterns likely explain the wide range of existing
estimates for horizontal spillovers in two-digit sectors where competition effects and knowledge
spillovers were confounded.
   The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents our data and measures.


                                                  7
Section 3 presents our econometric specification and results. Section 4 presents robustness analysis
and quantitative implications based on counterfactual exercises. Section 5 deals with endogeneity
and presents results from instrumental regressions framework. Section 6 presents results on the
inventor mobility channel. Section 7 concludes.


2        Data and Construction of Variables
We use the Orbis global database, from Bureau van Dijk (BvD)—a Moody’s Analytics company.
Orbis is the largest cross-country firm-level database, covering over 200 countries and 200 million
firms that can be used for research focusing on linking firms’ financial accounts, ownership structure
and production decisions. The database includes all industries and both private and public firms.
BvD collects data from various sources, in particular, publicly available national business registries
(BR), and harmonizes the data into an internationally comparable format.
       The coverage of firms varies both by country, industry, over time and across variables. The
reason for variation in firm coverage by country is that different countries have different laws in
terms of which firms require to file their financial accounts to the BR.11 For countries where the laws
require every firm to file to the national BR, the data obtained via Orbis will not differ from what
is obtained from country statistical offices in terms of financial accounts.12 We focus on six such
European countries, Belgium, Finland, France, Italy, Norway, and Spain, for the years 1999–2008
that has representative national coverage as shown in Table A1.13
       The coverage of firms in Orbis database can vary by time and industry and this may be a
source of discrepancies between various studies because it is a common practice in the literature
of using a single vintage of Orbis database. As, we explain in detail in Kalemli-Ozcan, Sørensen,
Villegas-Sanchez, Volosovych and Yesiltas (2015), the only way to get around this problem and
have consistent coverage of firms over time and by industry is to use the historical vintages and
match the firm data over time using unique firm identifiers. If a single vintage is used, firms will be
missing since Orbis drops firms over a certain period of time from the database and also variables,
such as value-added and intermediate inputs, will be missing since every vintage does not cover all
  11
     There is a common misconception that data from countries’ national statistical offices always have better coverage
than Orbis. Certain countries’ national statistical offices might have administrative surveys on certain samples of
small firms that can cover some of the differences in coverage of firms’ financial accounts, if these countries laws do
not require small firms to file their financial accounts. A case in point is the United States, where private firms are
not required to file financial accounts but there are select surveys covering certain set of firms in certain years such as
the Federal Reserve Board of Governors’ survey on “small business finance,” which is a repeated cross-section that
comes in four waves and covers only 3000-5000 firms.
  12
     Country censuses are administrative datasets and will cover the universe of firms in a country, however, census
datasets typically do not provide information on firms’ financial accounts as business registries do.
  13
     Finland is the exception since in Finland only firms with more than 25 employees are required to file financial
accounts. We keep Finland in the analysis because our final analysis focuses on firms with more than 10 employees
to be consistent with the FDI literature.



                                                            8
the variables. The industry classification will also be misleading since these classifications change
over time due to firms’ expanding their operations and/or firm and industry ID changes done by
the national statistical offices. With the missing information, most of the time Orbis single vintage
data will over-represent larger firms and under-represent smaller firms, leading to imputations and
re-weighing of the data to increase the representation of small firms. As we show in Kalemli-Ozcan,
Sørensen, Villegas-Sanchez, Volosovych and Yesiltas (2015), there will not be a need to re-weigh the
data and doing imputations if the historical vintages were used, which will deliver the nationally
representative data that mimics the firm size distributions given by the official statistics of each
country as shown in Table A2.14
       In the case of the ownership structure, which we need to track for constructing our FDI statistics
over time, using historical vintages is the absolute minimum practice since the current vintage
of Orbis database will only provide current ownership information. As a result, we use several
vintages of Orbis database together with Zephyr data that provides detailed financial and ownership
information on parent-subsidiary linkages with percentage of capital owned by domestic and foreign
owners across the globe. Firms are linked to their domestic and foreign parents through unique ID
numbers, and this allows us to construct precise firm-level measures of changes in FDI over time
based on changes in ownership stakes.15
       The financial information on the balance sheets requires checks and cleaning. We follow Kalemli-
Ozcan, Sørensen, Villegas-Sanchez, Volosovych and Yesiltas (2015) for cleaning the data and we
refer the reader there for details. However, we would like to point out a key issue that is critical for
the current paper. We need to make sure we assign correctly the foreign and domestic owners of the
companies that span the European countries as business groups such as the BMW and Vodafone
groups. Financial accounts of companies come both as consolidated accounts, which aggregates all
parent and subsidiary accounts, and also at unconsolidated level, that shows individual subsidiary
accounts separately. Using both will be double-counting as shown by Kalemli-Ozcan, Sørensen and
Volosovych (2014); hence, we use only unconsolidated accounts. Finally, to be consistent with the
FDI spillovers literature, we use only data from the manufacturing sector, with information on all
the four-digit sectors within the manufacturing sector. We exclude micro enterprises (those with
less than ten employees according to the European Commission definition), also to be consistent
with the FDI literature. Our final sample accounts for more than 90% of manufacturing output in
the countries under study, and it mimics the size distribution of firms provided by official national
sources, delivering national representation. Aggregate output of the foreign firms also tracks the
official statistics on FDI, verifying that we capture all the foreign firms in a given economy as shown
in Figure A.1.
  14
    Again with Finland being the exception for reasons explained above.
  15
    Official, balance-of-payments definition of FDI is equity ownership in access of 10% of a firm’s capital stock. 90
percent of FDI is conducted through acquisitions, according to Barba-Navaretti and Venables (2004).


                                                          9
       We next describe the main firm-level variables used in the analysis: revenue productivity, foreign
ownership, and the spillover variables. More details on the cleaning process and firm-level statistics
are provided in Appendix A.


2.1       Firm-Level Productivity
Our main dependent variable is total factor productivity of domestic firms.16 We assume that firm
i’s output is given by a Cobb-Douglas production function,

                                                Yit = Ait Lβit` Kitβk ,                                          (1)

where firm value added, Yit , is a function of physical productivity (Ait ) and firm inputs (Lit , Kit ).
Lit is labor input, Kit is capital input, βk is the output elasticity of capital, and β` is the output
elasticity of labor. We measure nominal value added, Pit Yit , as the difference between gross output
(operating revenue) and materials. We do not observe prices at the firm level, and we calculate
“real” output, Yit , by dividing nominal value added with the Eurostat two-digit industry price
deflators.17 Labor input, Lit , is measured as the firm’s wage bill (deflated by the same two-digit
industry price deflator).18 Finally, we measure the capital stock, Kit , as the book value of fixed
assets, deflated by the price of investment goods.19
       To obtain firm-level productivity estimates, we follow the approach suggested in Wooldridge
(2009)—see Appendix B for a detailed description of the estimation procedure. We estimate the
production function by country and two-digit sector (Table B.1 in Appendix B shows the estimated
elasticities) and winsorize the resulting distribution at the 1 and 99 percentiles by country.


2.2       Firm-Level Foreign Ownership
As explained below, to have the FDI measures based on a foreign ownership definition that is con-
sistent over time requires data on the ownership structure of all firms for all countries in our sample
at an annual basis during the entire decade together with the changes in ownership stakes. We use
the Orbis-Zephyr data that provides detailed ownership information on parent-subsidiary linkages
  16
      See next section for the definition of a domestic firm.
  17
      Norway and France do not have good coverage of industry price deflators at the two-digit level, and we use the
total manufacturing industry price deflator for these two countries.
   18
      We follow Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and use the wage bill, rather than the head count, to help adjust for
differences in the quality of workers across firms.
   19
      We use country-specific prices of investment from the World Development Indicators to deflate the book value
of fixed assets. The capital stock includes both tangible and intangible assets because in 2007 there was a change in
the accounting system in Spain and leasing items that until 2007 had been part of intangible fixed assets were from
2008 included under tangible fixed assets. To avoid breaks in the time series, we opt to use the sum of tangible and
intangible fixed assets as our measure of capital stock. Our results are robust to estimating TFPR using tangible
fixed assets as a measure of capital in the other countries of the sample.



                                                         10
with percentage of capital owned by domestic and foreign owners across the globe. The ownership
section of Orbis contains detailed information on owners of both listed and private firms, including
name, country of residence, and type (e.g., bank, industrial company, private equity, individual)
and tracks changes in ownership over time. Orbis collects ownership data from official registers
(including SEC filings and stock exchanges), annual reports, private correspondence, telephone re-
search, company web-sites, and news wires. We define a firm to be “domestic” if it never had any
foreign owner during the sample period.
       The database refers to each record of ownership as an “ownership link.” An ownership link
indicating that an entity A owns a certain percentage of firm B is referred to as a “direct” ownership
link. BvD records direct links between two entities even when the ownership percentages are very
small (sometimes less than one percent). For listed companies, very small stockholders are typically
unknown.20 We compute “foreign ownership” as the sum of all percentages of direct ownership
by foreigners. For example, if a company has three foreign owners with stakes of 10, 15, and
35 percent, the foreign ownership fraction for this company is 60 percent. If the information on
“direct” ownership is missing, we substitute this missing information with the global ultimate owner
information.


2.3       Sector-Level FDI Spillovers
In the literature, measures of FDI have typically been calculated using two-digit sector classifica-
tions. Because the number of firms in our dataset is very large and a four-digit industry classification
is available, we are able to refine the measures to the four-digit level as described below.
       Horizontal FDI/Spillovers. We follow Javorcik (2004) and compute exposure to foreign-owned
firms that produce in the same sector. We define the measure                       HORIZONTAL     as the share of “foreign
output” in sector output:                                      P
                                                                    i∈s4  foi,t × goi,t
                                       HORIZONTALs4,t      =         P                  ,                              (2)
                                                                         i∈s4 goi,t

where s4 refers to the four-digit sector of firm i, goi,t refers to gross output (operating revenue) of
firm i at time t, and foi,t refers to the percentage of capital of firm i that is foreign owned.
       Vertical FDI/Spillovers. Again, we follow Javorcik (2004) and define
                                                       X
                              VERTICAL IOs4,t    =                αs4,s̃4,t × HORIZONTALs̃4,t ,                        (3)
                                                     s̃4∈s2(s4)
                                                        s̃46=s4


where αs4,s̃4,t is the input-output coefficient that records the fraction of its own output that sector s4
  20
     Countries have different rules for when the identity of a minority owner needs to be disclosed. France requires
listed firms to disclose all owners with a stake larger than five percent while Italy requires listed firms to disclose all
owners with a stake larger than two percent.


                                                               11
supplies to each given sector s̃4. This measure is extensively used in the literature, often exploiting
data from The World Input-Output Database (WIOD). This data set provides time-series of world
input-output tables for forty countries at the two-digit industry level. To construct our measure
at the four-digit level, we use the U.S. input-output table from the Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA).21, 22


2.4       Sector-Level Technology Closeness
We utilize the technology closeness measures provided by Bloom, Schankerman and Van Reenen
(2013) for pairs of firms in the United States. They use firm-level accounting data (sales, employ-
ment, capital, R&D expenditure, etc.) and market value data from Compustat over the period
1980–2001 to match firms to U.S. Patent and Trademark Office data from the NBER data archive.
After matching, an unbalanced panel of 715 listed firms with at least four observations between
1980 and 2001 is available. Bloom, Schankerman and Van Reenen (2013) assign patents to differ-
ent technology clusters and compute a technology closeness measure, calculated as the uncentered
correlation between firm pairs, as follows: calculate the average share of patents each firm holds in
each of 426 different technology classes over the period 1970–1999 and define, for each firm i, the
vector of i’s technological activity      ti   = (ti1 , ti2 , ..., ti426 ), where         tix   is the share of patents of firm i
in technology class x. For each firm pair i, j in the sample, measures of technology closeness are
constructed, following Jaffe (1986), as the uncentered correlation of patent share vectors                             ti   and tj :

                                                                      (ti t0j )
                                               techij   =                             .                                          (4)
                                                            (ti t0i )1/2 (tj t0j )1/2

       Bloom, Schankerman and Van Reenen (2013) collect firm-level R&D expenditures, labeled                                        rdit

for firm i at time t, and test if a given firm i is affected by the R&D of other firms j 6= i that
are technologically close, as measured by               techij .    Specifically, they construct a measure             spilltechi    =
Σj techij rdj and test if this empirically predicts the R&D expenditures and other outcomes of firm i,
finding large effects of R&D on technologically close firms.
       We use these firm-level measures of technology closeness, but aggregate them to the four-digit
sector-level, matched to our NACE industrial classification. The number of four-digit industries
covered is lower than the number of four-digit industries available in our dataset,23 but Table D.1
  21
     Using the U.S.-based measures implicitly assumes that the patterns of input and knowledge flows in the six
countries of our sample are close to those of the United States. If the U.S. production and input structures are im-
perfect for European countries, we are introducing random error in the measurement of our regressors and, therefore,
reducing the probability of finding statistically significant results.
  22
     The variable VERTICAL IOs4,t represents what has been named in the literature as backward spillovers. A similar
variable can be constructed using the input-output coefficient that records the fraction of its own output that sector
s4 buys from each given sector s̃4, this is the case of forward spillovers. In Appendix C, we show further results on
vertical spillovers.
  23
     In our final dataset, we have 135 four-digit industries.

                                                                   12
in Appendix D shows that there are no major differences in company size due to the use of a lower
number of four-digit sectors, meaning the firms that are in the dropped sectors are of similar size
to the firms in our final sample. We use time-invariant measures of technology closeness at the
bilateral sector-level that pre-date the analysis. The combination time-invariant and the U.S.-firm
based measures helps alleviate concerns about endogeneity of the sector-level technology closeness
measures to sector-level FDI.
       The following steps describe our procedure. (We use the notation of Bloom, Schankerman and
Van Reenen (2013), except that we use a small-cap font for firm-level variables to contrast with
the country-sector-level variables in capitals.) First, for each four-digit sector pair, we compute the
sectoral technological closeness as the R&D-weighted sum of the technology closeness of firms i and
j operating in sector pairs s4 and s̃4 respectively, normalized by the sum of R&D of all k and l
firms in the two sectors, as:
                                                                                                        
                                              XX                                     + rdj
                                                                                     rdi
                         SPILL RDs4,s̃4   =                techij   ×        P     P                         ,   (5)
                                              i∈s4 j∈s̃4                      k∈s4  l∈s̃4 (rdk + rdl )


where s4 and s̃4 refer to four-digit sectors.24 The technology closeness measure and the firm-level
R&D expenditure, rd, are time invariant because we use the average R&D expenditure for each firm.
       Figure 1 displays heat maps for the values of SPILL RD in Panel A and input-output coefficients on
Panel B for the randomly selected sector 24. The figure illustrates that there is significant variation
across sectors in both measures and that patterns of technological closeness are not simply capturing
input-output relations.
  24
    A given rdk + rdl sum will enter twice in the sum in the denominator. This insures that the weights sum to unity
over the double summation.




                                                                    13
                                          Figure 1: Heatmaps for technological closeness and input-output links
                  2450
                                      A. Technological Closeness                                                                                                                                          B. Input-Output Coefficients




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             share of this input in total use in Manuf. (%)
                                                                                                                  Sectoral tech closeness, SPILL_RD x 100




                                                                                                                                                                                         2450
                                                                                                          23.63
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7.75
                  2440




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2442 (supplier) vs.




                                                                                                                                                                                         2440
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2420 (user)




                                                                                                                                                                 4-dgt supplier sector
   4-dgt sector
                  2430




                                                                                                          12.52




                                                                                                                                                                                         2430
                                                                                                          9.234
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.37
                  2420




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2420 (supplier) vs.




                                                                                                                                                                                         2420
                                      2420 vs. 2420                           2420 vs. 2442               5.86                                                                                                                                         2442 (user)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.36
                                                                                                          3.38
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .573
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .191
                  2410




                                                                                                                                                                                         2410
                         2410            2420             2430             2440               2450                                                                                              2410           2420                2430             2440                  2450
                                                  4-dgt counterparty sector                                                                                                                                                     4-dgt user sector

                          2420: Manuf. of tubes, pipes, hollow profiles and related fittings, of steel                                                                                           2420: Manuf. of tubes, pipes, hollow profiles and related fittings, of steel
                          2442: Aluminium production                                                                                                                                             2442: Aluminium production



Notes: For the randomly-chosen sector 24, Panel A displays the four-digit technology closeness-measure                                                                                                                                                                           SPILL RD,

and Panel B displays the four-digit input-output coefficients. The input-output coefficients are α-parameters in
equation (3) in the main text, and they record the fraction of its own output that a given sector supplies to each
other sector as intermediate input.                                                SPILL RD          is the R&D weighted similarity of patenting between four-digit sectors,
calculated using equation (5) in the main text. The data for these measures comes from U.S. sources, because of the
lack of four-digit data outside of the U.S., and the measures are time-invariant. The sectors discussed in the example
in Introduction are marked.


       Figure 2 shows the distribution of the sectoral technology closeness measure in equation (5),
where we split sectors by the OECD classification of the technology intensity of the sector.25 Sectors
that are classified by the OECD as technologically intensive (represented by the solid green line)
feature larger values of our technology closeness measure, equation (5). From the figure, the SPILL RD-
measure tends to be larger in technologically intensive sectors.
       Second, to account for the economic importance of each sector that is technologically linked to
a given four-digit sector s4, we use output weights as:

                                                                                                                             × GOs̃4,t
                                                                                                                 SPILL RDs4,s̃4
                                                                       WTECHs4,s̃4,t                 =P                                        ,                                                                                                                                      (6)
                                                                                                           ŝ4∈s2(s4) SPILL RDs4,ŝ4 × GOŝ4,t
                                                                                                            ŝ46=s4


where                    GOs4,t        is gross output of sector s4 at time t, and s2(s4) is the 2-digit sector that includes
the 4-digit sector s4. The numerator is the technological similarity between sectors s4 and s̃4
weighted by output and the denominator sums over all four-digit sectors in the two-digit sector.
Our empirical analysis use dummy variables to control for factors affecting two-digit sectors, and we
therefore design the weights to reflect the relative technological closeness within two-digit sectors.
  25
    The OECD classification is based on both direct R&D intensity and R&D embodied in intermediate and invest-
ment goods. Four categories were introduced: high-, medium-high, medium-low and low technology. Figure D.1 in
the appendix shows a more detailed breakdown by two-digit industry.


                                                                                                                                                            14
                           Figure 2: Distribution of R&D weights by technology intensity of sectors
            15               A. All values                                                          B. Truncated at 99 percentile




                                                                                           15
            10




                                                                                           10
  Density




                                                                                 Density
            5




                                                                                           5
            0




                                                                                           0
                 0    .1       .2        .3         .4           .5        .6                   0     .05       .1       .15         .2           .25         .3
                                     SPILL_RD)                                                                        SPILL_RD)

                               Low and Medium-Low Technology                                                    Low and Medium-Low Technology
                               High and Medium-High Technology                                                  High and Medium-High Technology




Notes: The figure displays the frequency distribution of the four-digit technology closeness-measure SPILL RD. The
SPILL RD is the R&D weighted similarity of patenting between four-digit sectors, calculated using equation (5) in the
main text. The data for this measure comes from the U.S. sources, because of the lack of four-digit data outside of
the U.S. The measure is time-invariant. In Panel B, the distribution is truncated at the 99th percentile in order to
more clearly bring out the differences between sectors with lower and higher technology.


2.5              Sector-Level Technology Closeness-Weighted FDI
Using the measures of technology closeness, we define the “technology closeness-weighted FDI/spillover”
variables that will be our regressors. For the “weighted horizontal FDI” variable, we multiply the
share of output produced by MNCs in each four-digit sector with our measure of technology closeness
of firms within the sector:

                                    HORIZONTAL TECs4,t                = WTECHs4,s4,t × HORIZONTALs4,t .                                                 (7)

The HORIZONTAL TEC measure interacts the presence of foreign firms in the four-digit sector (HORIZONTAL)
with the measure (WTECH) of the importance of technological linkages between firms within the sec-
tor.        HORIZONTAL TEC      is obviously correlated with the                      HORIZONTAL        measure, but when we include
both in a regression,         HORIZONTAL TEC             mainly captures the importance of closeness in the technology
space, while         HORIZONTAL     captures the competition effect from producing similar products.26
       For potential knowledge spillovers between different four-digit sectors, we construct a “weighted
vertical FDI” variable as follows: for each four-digit sector in the two-digit sector, we multiply our
measure of technology closeness with the output share of MNCs and average across all four-digit
  26
       In order to avoid outliers, we normalize the “diagonal” indices                     WTECHs4,s4,t     with the sums over all sectors.




                                                                           15
sectors within the two-digit sector, apart from the sector that the measure is constructed for:
                                                    X
                          VERTICAL TECs4,t    =                WTECHs4,s̃4,t   × HORIZONTALs̃4,t .                    (8)
                                                  s̃4∈s2(s4)
                                                     s̃46=s4


This measure is constructed similarly to the              VERTICAL IO      measure, but using technology closeness
weights instead of weights from the input-output tables.
    Figure 3 shows the relative importance of each measure in high- versus low-technology sectors
(as classified by the OECD). The importance of                      VERTICAL TEC       (the blue bars) is higher in high-
technology sectors.
                        Figure 3: Spillover measures by technology sector in 2007.


                                               High Technology
                              VERTICAL_TEC
                                               Low Technology


                                               High Technology
                                HORIZONTAL
                                               Low Technology


                                               High Technology
                           HORIZONTAL_TEC
                                               Low Technology


                                               High Technology
                                VERTICAL_IO
                                               Low Technology

                                                                    0     .5       1       1.5   2


                                                               .
Notes: The figure displays the average values of the main regressors, defined in Section 2.3, by technological intensity
of the four-digit sector. The data in these figures spans all countries in our sample but, unlike in the main paper, is
for a single year 2007. We take the value for each country-sector-year and normalize with the average value for the
corresponding country-year (because the scale differs across countries), and average over countries and years. The
technological intensity classification of sectors used here for presentation purposes follows the OECD methodology
and is based on two indicators of technology intensity reflecting, to different degrees, “technology-producer” and
“technology-user” aspects: i) R&D expenditures divided by value added; ii) R&D expenditures divided by production
(see OECD (2011)).


    Table D.2 in Appendix D reports summary statistics for the main variables and for the final
sample of firms used in the analysis. Table D.3 shows the matrix of correlations between our main
variables.




                                                               16
3        Empirical Analysis
We regress domestic firms’ TFP on our three measures and a measure of vertical FDI spillovers
based on input-output linkages:



                   log (TFPRi,s4,c,t ) = β1 HORIZONTALs4,c,t−1 + β2 HORIZONTAL TECs4,c,t−1                        (9)
                                            +β3 VERTICAL TECs4,c,t−1 + β4 VERTICAL IOs4,c,t−1
                                            +αi + φs4,t + δc,t + i,s4,c,t ,

where TFPRi,s4,c,t refers to total revenue factor productivity of firm i, in sector s4, country c, at
time t; and the terms δc,t and φs4,t represent country-year and sector-four-digit-year fixed effects,
respectively. We expect β1 to be negative, capturing the effect of competition, while we expect β2
to be positive, capturing the possible productivity improvement effects derived from the presence of
foreign-owned firms operating in the same sector as the domestic firms. It is important that both
measures of foreign presence in the four-digit sector are included because the measures are correlated
by construction; for example, both will be zero if no foreign firms are present in the sector. When
both measures are included, the regression estimates will for each variable, by the Frisch-Waugh
theorem, capture the contribution which is orthogonal to that of the other; therefore, the simple
measure of FDI is likely to capture pure competition effects, while the weighted measure of FDI
is likely to capture the effect of knowledge spillovers. β3 will be positive if domestic firms benefit
from the presence of foreign investors in closely related technologically close sectors, and we expect
β4 to be positive, capturing standard backward spillovers based on input-output relationships. We
include sector-year fixed effects to control for the sectoral productivity growth that can attract FDI
in the first place.
       Firms are heterogeneous and while most of the existing literature estimates spillover regressions
by Ordinary Least Squares (OLS), heteroskedasticity is of particular concern in the current study
that pools firms across different countries with potentially different firm-level volatility. Therefore,
all our results are estimated by two-step feasible Generalized Least Squares (GLS), which is the
efficient estimator in this case. We cluster standard errors at the country-four-digit sector-level
(allowing for autocorrelation).27
  27
     The first step estimates the equation by OLS, and for each firm the standard error of the innovation term is
estimated as the square root of the mean (over the observations for the firm) squared residuals. In the second step,
the least squares regression is repeated, weighting each firm by the inverse of its estimated residual standard error.
Because the time dimension is relatively short, some firms may get extremely high weights and to avoid this, we
winsorize the lower tail of the weights distribution at 5 percent. Graphical inspection of a partial correlation plot
of the regression reveals that there are no obvious outliers in our second step regression. Similar results were found
if the weights were obtained with a parametric model of the error variance (i.e., estimating standard errors as a
function of firm characteristics).



                                                         17
                Table 1: Horizontal Technology Spillovers Conditional on Competition

                           Dependent Variable: log Firm Revenue TFP
                                   Sample: Domestic Firms


                                                         (1)          (2)            (3)


                           HORIZONTALs4,t−1            -0.096*     -0.176***     -0.320***
                                                       (0.048)      (0.048)       (0.080)
                           HORIZONTAL TECs4,t−1                                   0.223**
                                                                                  (0.076)
                           Observations         322,698             322,698       322,698
                           Firm FE                 X                   X              X
                           Country-Year FE         X                   X              X
                           Sec4-Year FE                                X              X
                           Cluster                cs4                 cs4            cs4
                           s.d.(HORIZONTAL)       0.16                0.16          0.16
                           s.d.(HORIZONTAL TEC)                                     0.07

Notes: The table reports standardized coefficients and standard errors in parenthesis multiplied by 100. The depen-
dent variable is log revenue firm-level productivity at time t (log TFPRi,t ). See section 2.3 for a full description of
the regressors. The sample comprises domestic firms, i.e., firms that have no foreign participation over the years
of analysis. All right hand side variables are lagged one period. Standard errors are clustered at the country-four-
digit-sector-level. Results are obtained by GLS estimation using as weights the square root of each firm’s mean
squared predicted residuals from an initial OLS estimation. *** denotes 1% significance; ** denotes 5% significance;
* denotes 10% significance.


    In Table 1, we report the benchmark results for horizontal spillovers. Because our regressors
do not have magnitudes which are immediately intuitive, we report standardized coefficients ob-
tained from normalizing each regressor by its standard deviation (reported at the bottom of the
tables of results). The benefit of reporting standardized coefficients is that the magnitudes of the
reported parameter-estimates reflect the importance of the corresponding regressor in explaining
the dependent variable.
    The specification reported in column (1) uses the regressor             HORIZONTAL     and finds negative, (sta-
tistically) significant spillovers—broadly consistent with many previous papers. In column (2),
where we use fixed effects to control for factors that affect entire sectors in each given year, we find
that foreign presence in the four-digit sector significantly decreases the productivity of domestic
firms. The estimated coefficients are semi-elasticities with the left-hand side scaled by 100; i.e., the
estimated coefficients are interpreted as the predicted percentage change in the dependent variable
following a unit change in the regressor. Therefore, the coefficient of –0.176 implies that an increase
in foreign presence in the four-digit industry of one standard deviation decreases domestic firms’
productivity by about 0.18 percent.

                                                          18
       In column (3), we attempt to sort out competition effects and knowledge-spillover effects by in-
cluding both the competition variable HORIZONTAL and the technology-weighted variable, HORIZONTAL TEC.
We obtain highly significant coefficients for both competition and knowledge spillovers, with coef-
ficients of –0.320 and 0.223, respectively. Our interpretation is that there are large knowledge
spillovers to domestic firms from foreign-owned firms in the same four-digit sector, but those are
offset on average by negative competition effects. The knowledge spillover effect dominates in sec-
tors where the foreign-owned firms are technologically close, while the negative competition effect
dominates in sectors where the foreign-owned firms are not technologically close.
       Our main regression, presented in Table 2, utilizes our three measures of potential FDI spillovers
and condition on standard vertical spillovers measures based on input-output linkages.28 We include
the variables sequentially, in order to evaluate if the effects are robust to specification.
       In the first three columns, we display regressions using only the vertical measures. In column (1),
we include only     VERTICAL TEC    while in column (2), we include only           VERTICAL IO.    Column (3) dis-
plays results from regressions with both measures included. The                VERTICAL TEC    measure is robustly
estimated with a coefficient above 0.25 and highly significant. The backward-spillovers measure,
VERTICAL IO,    takes a positive coefficient, but it is not significant when the technology closeness-
weighted measure is included. Notice, the measure of backward spillovers is constructed at the
four-digit industry level while previous studies on the role of vertical linkages have used vertical
measures using I-O coefficients at the two-digit industry level. In Appendix Table E1, we show the
corresponding results that are significant when we calculate input-output based vertical spillovers
at the two-digit level in our sample of firms.
       Column (4) verifies that the horizontal and the vertical measures are not highly correlated, as
the estimated coefficients of the horizontal variables are similar to those found in Table 1 and not
sensitive to whether the vertical variables are included and vice versa. This is intuitive because
the measures are constructed from non-overlapping groups of firms. Column (5) is the preferred
specification with our three main measures, all being robustly significant.
       Overall, productivity increases with foreign presence in technologically close sectors. On average,
the overall results imply that the beneficial effect of foreign presence in the four-digit sector roughly
cancels out the negative competition effect; however, FDI is overall beneficial for the productivity of
domestic firms because of the further impact from FDI outside the four-digit sector. An important
implication of this result is that the amount of knowledge spillovers that a country enjoys from
FDI depends not just on how much foreign investment there is, but also critically on which sectors
foreign investment takes place in. In particular, as we quantify below, the impact will be larger
when FDI is concentrated in sectors where technological spillovers to other sectors are high, and
  28
   The variable VERTICAL IO refers to backward spillovers and we omit from the analysis the forward spillover
measure because it was never statistically significant. See Appendix A.4 for further results regarding the vertical I-O
measures.


                                                          19
    Table 2: Horizontal and Vertical Technology Spillovers Conditional on Vertical I-O Linkages

                          Dependent Variable: log Firm Revenue TFP
                                  Sample: Domestic Firms


                                           (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)           (5)


             VERTICAL TECs4,t−1         0.297***             0.267**         0.282**      0.312***
                                         (0.074)             (0.089)         (0.089)       (0.074)
             VERTICAL IOs4,t−1                       0.113** 0.042            0.049
                                                     (0.035) (0.042)         (0.042)
             HORIZONTALs4,t−1                                               -0.336***     -0.336***
                                                                             (0.080)       (0.080)
             HORIZONTAL TECs4,t−1                                           0.271***      0.271***
                                                                             (0.076)       (0.076)
             Observations                322,698     322,698     322,698     322,698       322,698
             Firm FE                        X           X           X            X             X
             Country-Year FE                X           X           X            X             X
             Sec4-Year FE                   X           X           X            X             X
             Cluster                       cs4         cs4         cs4          cs4           cs4
             s.d.(VERTICAL TEC)            0.15        0.15       0.15         0.15          0.15
             s.d.(VERTICAL IO)             0.07       0.07        0.07         0.07          0.07
             s.d.(HORIZONTAL)              0.16       0.16        0.16         0.16          0.16
             s.d.(HORIZONTAL TEC)          0.07        0.07       0.07         0.07          0.07

Notes: The table reports standardized coefficients and standard errors in parenthesis multiplied by 100. The depen-
dent variable is the logarithm of revenue firm-level productivity at time t, (log TFPRi,t ). See section 2.3 for the
details of the construction of the variables. The sample comprises domestic firms; i.e., firms that have no foreign
participation over the years of analysis. All right-hand-side variables are lagged one period. Standard errors are
clustered at the country-four-digit-sector-level. Results are obtained by GLS estimation using as weights the square
root of each firm’s mean squared predicted residuals from an initial OLS estimation. *** denotes 1% significance; **
denotes 5% significance; * denotes 10% significance.


lower if FDI is concentrated in “technologically isolated” sectors. This may well explain why the
estimated productivity spillovers from FDI differ across countries.


4     Robustness and Quantitative Implications

4.1     Technology or Pricing?
So far, we have studied the effect of spillovers on revenue total factor productivity which combines
the influence of technology and demand factors. Without further analysis, it is impossible to know
whether the effects found in Table 2 reflect changes in domestic firms’ technology or prices. To see



                                                        20
this, let us express revenue total factor productivity as:

                              TFPRit ≡ Pit TFPQit = µit × MCit × TFPQit ,                                      (10)

where Pit refers to the firm’s output price, and TFPQit is physical productivity. If firm-specific
prices were available to deflate nominal output, physical productivity (TFPQit ) could be isolated.
However, in the absence of firm prices, the use of sectoral price indexes to deflate introduces biases if
there are within-industry deviations between firm and sectoral prices. One can write the firm price as
the product of marginal cost and a markup µit , as is done in equation (10). Re-arranging and writing
the variables in growth rates (denoted by ∆), gives the following relationship between efficiency
gains and changes in TFPR, markups, and marginal costs: ∆TFPRit − ∆µit = ∆TFPQit + ∆MCit .
Reordering, we obtain a formula for the change in physical productivity:

                                 ∆TFPQit = ∆TFPRit − ∆µit − ∆MCit .                                            (11)

If one models firm-level marginal cost and markups, one can derive an estimate of changes in
productivity. In order to provide an estimate of markups, we follow the influential approach of De
Loecker and Warzynski (2012). Hall (1986) notes that under imperfect competition, input growth
is associated with disproportional output growth (as measured by the relevant markup). Based on
this insight, De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) re-arrange the first order condition of the firm cost
minimization problem with respect to the flexible input J to derive the firm markup (defined as
price over marginal cost) according to this expression:

                                        Pit    ∂Fit (·) Jit            PitJit Jit
                               µit ≡         =                /                        ,                       (12)
                                       M Cit     ∂Jit Fit (·)           P y
                                               |     {z     }          | it{z it }
                                                 OutputElasticity   ExpenditureShare


where Pit is the output price, M Cit is marginal cost, Fit (·) is the production function, Jit is inputs,
and Pit yit is nominal value added.
    Following De Loecker and Warzynski (2012), we consider labor as a flexible input J . Labor’s
expenditure share is straightforward to compute from the data as the ratio of the labor cost to
value added. The output elasticity with respect to labor is given by the elasticity obtained from
the estimation of the production function β` .29 We find empirical estimates of the median markup
close to 1.5 on average, which is similar to the estimates in the literature.30
  29
     We estimated the firm-level production function separately for two-digit industry and country so β` is constant
across firms within two-digit industries in each country.
  30
     Notice we follow De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) strategy to recover markups as the ratio of the technical
coefficient to the input share but for consistency the total factor productivity measure used throughout the text is
the one obtained from Wooldridge (2009) estimation procedure and therefore, the technical coefficients that go into
the estimation of the firm markups as well.


                                                         21
    Following Marin and Voigtlander (2014), who express marginal cost as a function of physical
productivity and input prices, we provide a more indirect estimate of the effect of FDI on TFPQ,
which we label the effect on “implied TFPQ” by applying equation (11). We have data for the
total material and wage cost, and normalizing this with revenue provides us with a measure of
average cost. We regress this measure on our regressors. While the change over time in average cost
over revenue is not literally the same as marginal cost, since firm-level constants are averaged out
via firm fixed effects, we take the estimated coefficients as estimates of the effect of the regressors
on marginal cost. Armed with estimates of the effect of spillovers on revenue TFP, markups, and
marginal cost, we can provide estimates of (implied) TFPQ.
                                     Table 3: Revenue TFP and Markups

                                         Sample: Domestic Firms


             Dependent Variable:         log TFPR         log µ       log M C      Implied log TFPQ
                                             (1)           (2)          (3)               (4)


             VERTICAL TECs4,t−1          0.312***      0.267***      -0.267***           0.312***
                                          (0.074)       (0.074)        (0.045)            (0.114)
             HORIZONTALs4,t−1            -0.336***     -0.192**       0.144***          -0.288***
                                          (0.080)       (0.064)        (0.032)            (0.107)
             HORIZONTAL TECs4,t−1        0.271***        0.076        -0.104**          0.299***
                                          (0.076)       (0.076)        (0.042)            (0.115)
             Observations                 322,698      322,698         322,698

             Firm FE                         X             X             X
             Country-Year FE                 X             X             X
             Sec4-Year FE                    X             X             X
             Cluster                        cs4           cs4           cs4
             s.d.(VERTICAL TEC)             0.15          0.15          0.15
             s.d.(HORIZONTAL)               0.16          0.16          0.16
             s.d.(HORIZONTAL TEC)           0.07          0.07          0.07

Notes: The table reports standardized coefficients and standard errors in parenthesis multiplied by 100. In column (1),
the dependent variable is the logarithm of revenue firm-level productivity at time t, (log TFPRi,t ). In column (2), the
dependent variable is the logarithm of firm markup (log µi,t ). In column (3), the dependent variable is the logarithm
of marginal cost M C, computed as the sum of the cost of employment and the expenditure on materials over total
output. See section 2.3 for the details of the construction of the variables. The sample comprises domestic firms;
i.e., firms that have no foreign participation over the years of analysis. All right-hand-side variables are lagged one
period. Standard errors are clustered at the country-four-digit-sector-level in column (1)-(3). Results are obtained
by GLS estimation using as weights the square root of each firm’s mean squared predicted residuals from an initial
OLS estimation. The numbers in column (4) are obtained by subtracting the numbers in the second and third
columns from the number in the same row in column (1). The standard errors in column (4) are calculated assuming
independence of the estimates in columns (1)-(3). *** denotes 1% significance; ** denotes 5% significance; * denotes
10% significance.



                                                          22
       We consider the effect of each measure. Column (1) in Table 3 repeats our main specification
(showing standardized coefficients) with the dependent variable log TFPR. A one standard devia-
tion increase in   VERTICAL TEC,   capturing vertical spillovers from outher four-digit sectors, increases
domestic firms’ revenue productivity by 0.312 percent. Column (2) uses the log of firm markup
as the dependent variable and shows that a unit increase in         VERTICAL TEC   leads to a 0.267 percent
increase in domestic firms’ markup. Column (3) uses the average cost of domestic firms as the depen-
dent variable and shows that a unit increase in VERTICAL TEC leads to a drop in the marginal average
cost of 0.267 percent.31 And, adding the numbers in columns (1)-(3), we obtain, in column (4),
the effect on physical TFP. The effect of a one standard deviation change in technology-weighted
knowledge spillovers is 0.312 percent, which for this variable happens to be exactly the value of the
impact on revenue TFP.
       Consider foreign presence in the same four-digit sector as captured by       HORIZONTAL.   The effect
on TFPR of a one standard deviation increase in         HORIZONTAL   is –0.336 percent. Columns (2), (3),
and (4) show that this effect can be decomposed into a –0.192 percent change in markups, a 0.144
percent increase in marginal cost, and a 0.288 percent decrease in TFPQ. Because the technology-
weighted four-digit measure is included, the interpretation is that of an increase in competition with
no knowledge spillovers, while the impact of      HORIZONTAL TEC   is the effect of knowledge spillovers in
the four-digit industry when product competition is controlled for.
       Consider knowledge spillovers from within the four-digit sector. The predicted effect of a one-
standard-deviation change in       HORIZONTAL TEC   is a 0.271 percent increase in revenue productivity,
and columns (2), (3), and (4) show that this effect can be decomposed into a 0.076 percent increase
in markups, a –0.104 percent change in marginal cost, and a 0.299 percent increase in TFPQ. It
is reasonable that increased competition decreases markups and increases marginal costs due to a
lower scale of production. Knowledge spillovers can be expected to lower costs, and we see negative
relations between (approximate) marginal cost and the technological-spillover measures. The lower
cost then allows firms to increase margins.
       To sum up, increases in revenue productivity, induced by higher foreign ownership in technolog-
ically related sectors outside the same four-digit sector, are mainly driven by changes in physical
productivity. The presence of technologically related foreign firms in the same four-digit sector has
a similar effect on revenue productivity, but a larger fraction of this is driven by changes in markups
and marginal costs. Competition lowers revenue productivity, with about two-thirds of the effect
coming from physical productivity.
  31
    That VERTICAL TEC has exactly the opposite effect on markup and average cost to the third decimal point is
purely coincidental.




                                                     23
4.2     Extra Robustness
Table 4 examines if our results are robust to the use of OLS instead of GLS, to reasonable changes
in the way the sample is selected, to the use of dummies at the two-digit sector×year level, and to
the inclusion of a direct measure of competition.
                                       Table 4: Robustness

                                  Dependent Variable: log Firm Revenue TFP
                                          Sample: Domestic Firms


                                       (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)
                                    Benchmark      OLS       Balanced      Empl10      Sec2-year     HHN


             VERTICAL TECs4,t−1       0.312***    0.342**     0.407**      0.442***    0.461***    0.282***
                                       (0.074)    (0.163)     (0.136)       (0.091)     (0.089)      (0.074)
             HORIZONTALs4,t−1        -0.336***    -0.336*    -0.494***     -0.527***   -0.528***   -0.288***
                                       (0.080)    (0.176)     (0.132)       (0.099)     (0.080)      (0.080)
             HORIZONTAL TECs4,t−1     0.271***      0.09     0.548***      0.362***    0.688***     0.341***
                                       (0.076)    (0.195)     (0.153)       (0.094)     (0.083)      (0.076)
             HERFINs4,t−1                                                                          -0.582***
                                                                                                     (0.116)
             Observations             322,698     322,698        101,424   221,907     322,705       322,698
             Firm FE                    X           X              X         X           X              X
             Country-Year FE            X           X              X         X           X              X
             Sec4-Year FE               X           X              X         X                          X
             Sec2-Year FE                                                                 X
             Cluster                    cs4         cs4           cs4        cs4         cs4         cs4
             s.d.(HORIZONTAL)           0.16        0.16          0.16       0.16        0.16        0.16
             s.d.(HORIZONTAL TEC)       0.07        0.06          0.07       0.07        0.07        0.07
             s.d.(VERTICAL TEC)         0.15        0.15          0.15       0.15        0.15        0.15
             s.d.(HERFIN)                                                                            1.16


Notes: The table reports standardized coefficients and standard errors in parenthesis multiplied by 100. The de-
pendent variable is the logarithm of revenue firm-level productivity at time t, (log TFPRi,t ). See section 2.3 for
details of the construction of the variables. The sample comprises domestic firms; i.e., firms that have no foreign
participation over the years of analysis. All right-hand-side variables are lagged one period. Column (1) reports
benchmark results; column (2) reports results in a stable sample of firms that we observe during the full time period
of analysis; column (3) reports the OLS results; column (4) reports results for the subsample of firms that always
report employment greater than ten employees; column (5) reports results including two-digit-sector (rather than
four-digit-sector) and year fixed effects; column (6) reports results controlling for country-four-digit-sector concen-
tration. Standard errors are clustered at the country-four-digit-sector-level. Results are obtained by GLS estimation
using as weights the square root of each firm’s mean squared predicted residuals from an initial OLS estimation. ***
denotes 1% significance; ** denotes 5% significance; * denotes 10% significance.


    The first column displays our preferred regression that uses GLS. The literature has typically
presented OLS estimates, which do not downweigh firms with volatile productivity. We demonstrate
in Column (2) our results are broadly similar whether we use OLS or GLS. The horizontal technology
closeness-weighted spillover measure is insignificant using GLS, while the effects of competition and
vertical technology closeness-weighted spillovers are estimated with coefficients that are very similar


                                                            24
to those of the GLS estimation.
   The results of column (3), estimated using a balanced sample of firms, are similar to those
obtained using the full sample, although the estimated coefficients are larger for the balanced
sample of firms (the standardized coefficients can be compared to those of Table 2 because the
standard errors of the variables in the balanced sample are similar to those of the larger sample
used in that table). This indicates that the results we have found so far are not driven by entry
and exit of firms.
   One may worry about the somewhat artificial sample selection of keeping firms in the sample
only in the years where they have more than 10 employees. If we keep only firms whose employment
never dips below 10 employees, we get the results presented in column (4). The estimated coefficients
for this sample are larger than the benchmark coefficients, but the qualitative conclusions remain
unchanged.
   Using four-digit-year fixed effects absorbs a lot of degrees of freedom, and we examine if the
results are sensitive to that. If we use two-digit-year fixed effects, rather than the four-digit-year
fixed effects used so far—see column (5)—the impacts of all measures are larger, which is not
surprising given that less variation is absorbed by dummies; however, the overall patterns are
similar to those found earlier. We prefer the estimates with four-digit-year fixed effects because
they are less likely to be impacted by reverse causality, even if the four-digit-year fixed effects may
absorb some of the impact of FDI on productivity.
   We interpret the effect of   HORIZONTAL   as a result of increased competition, and we examine if
the coefficients are sensitive to including a direct measure of competition. Including a measure of
concentration, see column (6), affects the estimated effects little, with no coefficients moving out of
the standard 95 percent confidence intervals from the preferred regression, although the impact of
the horizontal variables become smaller consistent with the interpretation. Because concentration
is likely endogenous to FDI, we prefer the specification without the concentration measure.
   Finally, the results may conceivably depend on the exact way that we calculate TFP, but if we
run our regressions with labor productivity as the dependent variable and we obtain similar signs
and t-values, which indicate that the details of how TFP is calculated is not of importance for our
results. Because the coefficients in those regressions are not comparable to those obtained using
TFP, we do not tabulate them.
   Our results are robust to reasonable modifications of samples and specifications, and the results
of the robustness regressions indicate that, if anything, our reported magnitudes are conservative.


4.3    Short Run and Long Run Effects
It is possible that spillover effects take time to materialize, in which case the results will be more
economically significant at longer horizons—our previous level-regressions with firm-fixed effects are

                                                  25
equivalent to estimating growth effects over the full sample. Table 5 repeats our main specification
estimated in one-, two-, and four-year (non-overlapping) differences.32
                                             Table 5: Lagged Spillovers

                                         Sample: Domestic Firms


                                       (1)              (2)                  (3)                  (4)


          Dependent Variable: log TFPR            ∆j=1 log TFPR       ∆j=2 log TFPR        ∆j=4 log TFPR


          ∆j VERTICAL TECs4        0.021***            0.001              0.032***            0.053***
                                    (0.005)           (0.005)              (0.004)             (0.004)
          ∆j HORIZONTALs4          -0.021***         -0.023***            -0.014**            -0.017***
                                    (0.005)           (0.006)              (0.006)             (0.005)
          ∆j HORIZONTAL TECs4      0.039***            0.010               0.039**            0.054***
                                    (0.011)           (0.015)              (0.015)             (0.012)
          Observations              322,698           374,592             172,806               72,752
          Firm FE                      yes               no                   no                  no
          Country-Year FE               X                 X                   X                    X
          Sec4-Year FE                  X                 X                   X                    X
          Cluster                      cs4               cs4                 cs4                  cs4


Notes: The sample comprises domestic firms; i.e., firms that have no foreign participation over the years of analysis.
The dependent variable is the non-overlapping year difference in the logarithm of revenue firm-level productivity at
time t (∆j log, TFPRi,t ) where j indicates, first, second, and fourth differences. See section 2.3 for the details of
the construction of the variables. Standard errors are clustered at the country four-digit-sector-level. Results are
obtained by GLS estimation using as weights the square root of the firm mean squared predicted residuals from
an initial OLS regression. Column (1) displays (non-standardized) results from our main regression, column (2)
is estimated in first differences, column (3) is estimated in second non-overlapping differences, and column (4) is
estimated in fourth non-overlapping differences. *** denotes 1% significance; ** denotes 5% significance; * denotes
10% significance.


       In Table 5, the coefficients are not standardized (nor multiplied by 100), because we want to
compare across the different frequencies (columns), rather than across different variables (rows),
and this would be hard to do with standardized coefficients. Further, the coefficients are easier to
compare with existing results in the literature.33
  32
     The difference-specifications do not include firm fixed effects which “washes out” with differencing. We use
non-overlapping data to avoid the mechanically induced autocorrelation that would result from using overlapping
data—an autocorrelation that typically cannot be well corrected for. Because we use non-overlapping differences,
the number of observations decline with the length of differencing.
  33
     We regress over long differences rather than running regressions with many lags. While the later might allow
more precise estimates about the timing of effects, for higher lags this benefit is to be weighed against the many
lag coefficients themselves being imprecisely estimated. On net, we prefer the long-difference specification, which
delivers a compact set of results that are simple to communicate.

                                                         26
       In the first column, we repeat the preferred specification from Table 2, but displaying the non-
standardized coefficients. The results imply that competition spillovers affect productivity instantly
while knowledge spillovers occur only gradually. Competition effects, as captured by the variable
HORIZONTAL,     are significant already at the first year of a change and the effect remains negative and
with no-significant changes over two- and four-year differences. The one-year-difference coefficient
of –0.023 is very close to the coefficient –0.021 from the level-regression. The point estimates
of the competition effects are numerically slightly smaller at higher differencing intervals but the
coefficients are not statistically different from the ones obtained using one-year-differenced data.
       The estimated impact of knowledge spillovers within the four-digit sector increases with the
length of the differencing period and it is significant only after two years, where the coefficient is
0.039 (identical to the coefficient from the regression in levels with fixed effects). After 4 years the
coefficient is 0.054, even larger than the level effect.34 Finally, knowledge spillovers from outside the
four-digit sector also become significant after two years and almost double again from two- to four
years, with a four-year coefficient of 0.053, which is larger than the estimated level effect of 0.021.
These results provide strong intuitive support for our interpretation because knowledge spillovers
are likely to be caused by low-frequency phenomena, such as workers bringing skills from foreign
to domestic firms or domestic firms studying the business practices of foreign firms before trying to
adapt them.
       The estimated coefficients from the level regressions are preferred because the long differences use
a much smaller sample, but the conclusions are otherwise very robust and it is clear that knowledge
spillovers take time to materialize. The larger coefficients at longer differencing intervals are likely
an artifact of changes in the sample, with firms in existence for only a few years not entering the
four-year-differenced sample—from Table 4, the estimated coefficients are larger for a sample of
firms in existence throughout the sample period.
       Haskel, Pereira and Slaughter (2007) estimate spillovers from FDI in the UK—a developed
country comparable to the countries in our sample—and they use differences at various frequencies,
as we do. They find that spillovers take time to materialize and although their results are not
directly comparable with ours, we can compare magnitudes.35 Our                VERTICAL TEC     measure increases
more or less proportionally with foreign ownership on average, so the non-standardized coefficient
to   VERTICAL TEC    of 0.053 in column (4) implies that a change in            VERTICAL TEC    of 0.1 predicts a
change in TFP of 0.53 percent, which can be compared to the effect of 10 percentage point change
in foreign ownership found by Haskel, Pereira and Slaughter (2007) for five-year differences of 0.63
percent. Because the specifications differ in several respects, we will not compare more extensively
  34
     Estimating long differences is not the same as estimating lags, so referring to the effect, when TFP and the
regressor are both differenced over two years, as the effect “after” two years involves an obvious abuse of notation.
More precisely, the two-year differenced results capture average impacts over two years.
  35
     They consider FDI in either the same sector or the same geographical area as domestic firms, and do not separate
between competition and knowledge effects, or between closeness in product or technology space.


                                                         27
to their results, but we find it reassuring that our estimates and those of the literature are similar
in magnitude.


4.4     Economic Significance and Quantitative Implications
We illustrate how important FDI is in explaining the observed TFP improvements of domestic firms
by performing two different exercises. First, we undertake a simple prediction exercise and calculate
the variation explained in the actual revenue TFP data by our estimated coefficients. And second,
in order to highlight the importance of heterogeneity of sectors in terms of technological closeness,
we run a counterfactual experiment where we hypothetically change FDI only in technologically
connected sectors.
    Figure 4 shows the result of the first exercise. On the y-axis, we plot the average annual TFP
growth rate at the country-four-digit-sector-level. We average the firm-level TFP data to the four-
digit-sector-level by country and calculate the annual growth rate for the country-four-digit-sector
TFP for each year. We average these growth rates over time and plot them on the y-axis. On the
x-axis, we plot the predicted TFP growth rates—we use the estimates in column (4) of Table 2
(including all fixed effects) to predict average firm-level TFP over time. We average the firm-level
predicted TFP effects to the country-four-digit-sector-level for each year, calculate TFP growth
rates, and plot the average of these growth rates on the x-axis. Our predicted TFP growth rates
explain 43.5 percent of the variation in the actual TFP growth rates.
        Figure 4: Actual versus predicted TFP growth by four-digit sector 2000 and 2008.

                                                                                R-square: 0.437
                                                                              Trend: 0.627 (0.032)
                                                                                                        45 degree line
                         Actual TFP growth (2000-2008)

                                                         .04




                                                                                                               Fitted
                                                         .015
                                                         -.01
                                                         -.035




                                                             -.035     -.01                .015          .04

                                                                     Predicted TFP growth (2000-2008)



Notes: The figure plots estimated actual TFP growth, averaged by four-digit sector, against firm-level predicted TFP
growth, averaged by four-digit sector. In order to focus on the central mass of the distribution, the four-digit-level
TFP variables are truncated at the 5 and 95 percentiles in this figure.


    Next, we quantify the effects on TFP of hypothetical changes in foreign ownership of a certain

                                                                                 28
magnitude using only the estimated coefficients on the FDI/spillover variables in column (4) of
Table 2. We consider the effect of a similar amount of FDI in all sectors and the effect of certain
patterns in the amount of FDI across sectors.
   Consider the effect of an across-the-board change in foreign ownership in sector s4 of magnitude
∆fos4 , which should be considered evenly distributed across firms in each sector. The predicted
change in TFPR as a result of change in each spillover variable from column (4) of Table 2 can be
written as:

                     ∆ log\
                          (TFPRs4 ) = β̂1 ∆VERTICAL TECs4 + β̂2 ∆HORIZONTALs4                      (13)
                                             +β̂3 ∆HORIZONTAL TECs4 .

   Because the right-hand-side spillover variables in equation (13) are sector-level variables, we
obtain the predicted average sectoral TFPR increase. We can transfer a change in firm-level foreign
ownership, which is what we measure in our data, to a change in the country-four-digit-sector
spillover variables as follows:
                                                  X
                  ∆VERTICAL TECs4 =                               WTECHs4,s̃4   × ∆HORIZONTALs̃4   (14)
                                         s̃4,s̃4∈s2(s4),s̃46=s4
                                         X
                                     =         WTECHs4,s̃4        × ∆fos̃4
                                     = ∆fos̃4 .

Because the weights are constructed to sum to unity, the impact of a change in foreign ownership
if ∆fos4 for every firm in an s4 sector is
                                                  P
                                                    i∈s4∆fos4 × goi
                            ∆HORIZONTALs4 =            P            = ∆fos4 .                      (15)
                                                        i∈s4 goi


   We have


                              ∆HORIZONTAL TECs4 = WTECHs4,s4 × ∆fos4 .                             (16)

   For an across-the-board change of ∆foi = ∆fos4 = ∆fo, the total effect is
                                                                           
                          ∆ log\
                               (TFPRs4 ) =        β̂1 + β̂2 + β̂3 WTECHs4,s4 ∆fo .                 (17)


   FDI may not take place as an equal across-the-board change in all sectors. As is clear from
equations (7) and (8), the impact of FDI will be higher if it is concentrated in sectors where the
WTECH   coefficients are higher; i.e., in sectors that (on average) are technologically close to other
sectors (including the average technological closeness of firms within each sector). We construct a

                                                       29
dummy for such sectors in order to evaluate the effect of FDI being concentrated in these sectors.
   For each sector s4, we can calculate the “average technology connectedness” (ATC) to other
sectors as
                                                 1 X
                                     ATCs4 =              WTECHs̃4,s4 ,                                          (18)
                                                 N s̃4∈s2

where the average is taken over the first subscript of           WTECH.     We construct a dummy, Dconnected       s4

which is unity for “high connectedness sectors,” with a value of ATC above the median (across
four-digit sectors) and 0 otherwise. We calculate the effect of focusing FDI in highly connected
sectors. Specifically, we calculate the effect of an increase of 2 ∆fo in the sectors which have ATC
above the median and 0 in the other sectors (∆foi = ∆fos4 = Dconnected                 s4 ×2 ∆fo).   By construction,
attributing twice the amount of FDI to the “high connectedness” sectors, which make up 50 percent
of the sectors, the total amount in FDI is the same as an increase of ∆fo in all sectors . We then
calculate the predicted effect as


                                                  X
                 ∆ log\
                      (TFPRs4 ) = β̂1                                WTECHs4,s̃4   × (2 ∆fo)                     (19)
                                           s̃4,Dconnected   s̃4 =1

                                    + Dconnected     s4   × (β̂2 + β̂3 WTECHs4,s4 ) × (2 ∆fo).

Notice that the last two terms only are non-zero for sectors that themselves have above-median
ATC, while the first term is non-zero for all sectors. In Table 6, we tabulate all the predicted
effects. We first consider the effect of an increase in foreign ownership of 10 percentage points
across the board. The first row in Table 6 shows that the average predicted increase in productivity
across all four-digit sectors is 0.14 percent. This effect is the sum of three partial effects as given in
equation (17).
   In the second row, we show the predicted effect on average TFP of a similar aggregate increase
in FDI, but concentrated in the 50 percent of sectors that are closest to other sectors in technology
space on average. The predicted effect is twice as large in this case. There is a larger negative
competition effect of –0.34 (which is an artifact of the more connected sectors being larger), a
knowledge-spillover effect from firms in the same sector of 0.27, and a spillover effect from firms
outside the four-digit sector of 0.32. The total effect then is a predicted increase of average TFP
of 0.26 percent, almost twice the predicted impact of an across-the-board increase in TFP. More
strikingly, the impact of concentrating TFP in the least connected sectors is virtually nil with a
spillover effect of 0.04 percent. This results from a negative competition effect of –0.09 percent, small
knowledge spillovers of 0.02 percent from within the four-digit sector, and knowledge spillovers of
0.10 percent from outside the four-digit sector. These results shed light on why researchers have had
a difficult time identifying horizontal spillovers. Knowledge spillovers will be negative if domestic


                                                      30
                                Table 6: Predicted Effects of Increases in FDI

                                            Sample: Domestic Firms


                                          (1)=(2)+(3)+(4)         (2)              (3)               (4)
       ∆ fo       Targeted Sectors          ∆ log TFPR        ∆HORIZONTAL ∆HORIZONTAL TEC ∆VERTICAL TEC


       10%    Across the Board Increase        0.14              -0.21            0.14               0.21
       20%    Highly Connected Sectors         0.26              -0.34            0.27               0.32
       20%     Less Connected Sectors          0.04              -0.09            0.02               0.10


Notes: Row (1) displays the predicted average increase in TFPR in manufacturing as a result of a 10 percentage
point increase in FDI, equally distributed across sectors. Row (2) displays the predicted average increase in TFPR
in manufacturing as a result of a 10 percentage point increase in FDI, distributed as a 20 percentage point increase
in FDI in half of sectors, chosen as those that are closer to other sectors on average and 0 percentage points in
the more isolated sectors. “Closeness to other sectors on average” is defined according to equation (18). Row (3)
shows the predicted impact of the same amount of FDI, but focused in the sectors that are below the median in
terms of being close to others in technology space on average. Column (1) shows the predicted average effect in
TFPR in manufacturing. Columns (2), (3), and (4) show the contribution of the associated corresponding change in
HORIZONTAL, HORIZONTAL TEC, and VERTICAL TEC to the predicted average effect in TFPR in manufacturing.



firms operate in sectors that are not technologically close to the sectors that MNCs enter.


5        Endogeneity of FDI
So far we have controlled for global sector-level productivity shocks with sector-year fixed effects.
This rules out the concern that these global shocks drive both the entry decision of foreigners and
domestic firms’ productivity. Nonetheless, it is still possible that certain sectors are booming more
in certain countries than in others and we therefore need to address endogeneity concerns at the
country-sector-year level.
       First, we instrument our horizontal spillover variables following the approach of Bartik (1991).
For each firm i in sector s4 with foreign ownership in any year, we use the value of foreign output
(which may be zero) and total output in the first year the firm is observed and let these variables
grow over time in line with output in the same sector in all other countries in the sample:
                                                    P
                                       IV             i∈s4foi,o × (goi,o × cumm
                                                                            \gri,t )
                             HORIZONTAL s4,t    =        P                           ,                         (20)
                                                           i∈s4 goi,o × cumm
                                                                         \gri,t

where goi,o is total output the first year we observe the firm, foi,o × goi,o is the initial foreign part
                \gri,t is the predicted growth of output for firm i from period 0 to period t.36
of output, and cumm
  36
   The subscript 0 does not refer to any given year, but is short-hand for the first period each firm i is observed.
The formula for predicted growth similar involve a slight abuse of notation, by not marking all time indices as firm


                                                         31
Firm-level predicted output growth is calculated as:

                                              \gri,t
                                             cumm           = Πts=1 (1 + gbrs2(i),t ) − 1                                          (21)

where gbrs2(i),t is the growth-rate of the two-digit sector of firm i in all other countries in the sample
except for the country of firm i. In order to retain information about the industry structure in
country c, we weigh the growth of the four-digit sectors with the initial industry shares found in
country of firm i, as:                                                                  
                                                         X                  GOs4,c,0
                                     gbrs2(i)t   =                                           × grs4,c0 ,t .                        (22)
                                                                           GOs2(i),c,0
                                                     s4∈s2(i),c0 6=c

                                                                           IV                          IV
As instrument for       HORIZONTAL TEC,          we use      HORIZONTAL TEC                   =   WTECHs4,s4,t   × HORIZONTALIV , where
     IV
WTECHs4,s4,t    is instrumented in the same fashion using output growth in other countries.37
                                   Table 7: Instrumental Variables—First Stage

                       Dependent Variables: Horizontal Spillover Measures
                                    Sample: Domestic Firms
                                               (1)              (2)

                       Dependent Variable                   HORIZONTALs4,t−1                 HORIZONTAL TECs4,t−1

                                 IV
                       HORIZONTALs4,t−1                          4.026***                             0.177*
                                                                 ( 0.279)                            ( 0.101)
                                     IV
                       HORIZONTAL TECs4,t−1                      4.003***                            3.558***
                                                                  ( 0.35 )                           ( 0.202)
                       VERTICAL TECs4,t−1                          0.148                              -0.044
                                                                 ( 0.341)                            ( 0.193)
                       Firm FE                                       X                                   X
                       Country-Year FE                               X                                   X
                       Sec4-Year FE                                  X                                   X
                       Cluster                                      cs4                                 cs4
                       F-stat                                    186 ***                             126 ***
                       s.d.(HORIZONTALIV )                          0.24                               0.24
                       s.d.(HORIZONTAL TECIV )                      0.13                               0.13

Notes: The table reports standardized coefficients and standard errors in parenthesis multiplied by 100. Results are
obtained by GLS estimation using as weights the square root of each firm’s mean squared predicted residuals from
an initial OLS estimation. *** denotes 1% significance; ** denotes 5% significance; * denotes 10% significance.


       First stage regressions in Table 7 show that the instruments are highly significant. The second
stage regressions are reported in Table 8; where Column (1) presents our main OLS results for com-
parison. Column (2) shows the second stage results after instrumenting the variables                                        HORIZONTAL

specific, in order to simplify the equations.                         P
  37                               IV                 SPILL RDs4,s4 ×( i∈s4 goi,o ×cumm\gri,t )
       The exact formula is   WTECHs4,s4,t   =       P                       P
                                                            SPILL RDs4,ŝ4 ×( i∈s̃4 goi,o ×cumm
                                                                                             \gri,t )
                                                                                                      .
                                                 s̃4∈s2(s4)



                                                                       32
and    HORIZONTAL TEC.      The estimated coefficients tell the same story as the un-instrumented hori-
zontal spillover variables, although the coefficients are much larger for the instrumented variables.
This pattern is consistent with the instrument correlating better with the potentially endogenous
horizontal variables in some regions or sectors than others (a “local treatment effect”). We conclude
that the qualitative impact of the horizontal spillover-variables is robust, while the magnitudes of
the effects may be more tentative. The estimated coefficient on the variable                 VERTICAL TEC    is almost
unchanged when comparing the OLS and IV specifications. Because the vertical measures are nearly
orthogonal to the horizontal measures, the coefficient stays very close across specifications.


      Column (3) undertakes an exercise that deals with the possibility that                VERTICAL TECs4,t   may be
endogenous, even if FDI firms and domestic firms are in different sectors. Assume for simplicity of
exposition that a two-digit sector consists of three four-digit sectors, labelled as s41 , s42 , and s43 .
Let us focus on domestic firms in sector s41 and assume that foreign firms enter sectors s42 and s43 .
Assume that foreign firms of s42 enter as a reaction to productivity advances by domestic firms in
sector s41 , because globally sector s42 happens to learn a lot from s41 and it is easier to benefit from
these spillovers in geographical proximity. Further assume that sector s43 has never learned anything
from s41 , so that the FDI in that sector must be for reasons other than events in sector s41 . If this
is the case, foreigners entering s42 should cite patents of the sector s41 more often than foreigners
entering to sector s43 . This would create a stronger relation between domestic productivity in
sector s41 and FDI in sector s42 due to reverse causality based on absorbing technology from sector
s41 more intensely. From the perspective of domestic sector s41 , FDI into sector s42 is endogenous
while FDI into sector s43 is exogenous. We, therefore, estimate two separate coefficients and test
whether the relation between domestic productivity and FDI is stronger for foreign entry sectors
that cite the sector of the domestic firms more heavily or not.38
      For each sector s4, we split the other sectors into two groups, based on how often they cite
patents belonging to sector s4. Consider the vector             cites4,s̃4   giving us the number of citations made
by firms in sector s̃4 ∈ s2(s4) to patents originating in sector s4, for s̃4 ∈ s2(s4), s̃4 6= s4. In
other words, this vector should tell us how much each s̃4 cites our baseline sector s4. We define
the dummy variable        D HCs4,s̃4   taking value 1 for sectors with above median citations made to sector
s4 and    D LC   = 1 − D HC taking value 1 for sectors with below median citations made to sector s4,
i.e. sectors that are less likely to receive knowledge-spillovers from sector s4. This latter dummy
variable is the one that we will interpret causally as the reverse causality concern is considerably
mitigated.
 38
      See Appendix A.3 for a full description of the citation data as well as the construction of the variables.




                                                           33
            Table 8: Instrumental Variables—Second Stage (Asymmetric Patent Citation)

                     Dependent Variable: log Firm Revenue TFP
                             Sample: Domestic Firms

                                                                         (1)          (2)          (3)

                  Specification for Horiz. Spillovers                 GLS             IV           IV
                  HORIZONTALs4,t−1                                  -0.336***     -1.617***    -1.617***
                                                                      (0.080)      (0.240)      (0.240)
                  HORIZONTAL TECs4,t−1                               0.271***     1.224***     1.217***
                                                                      (0.076)      (0.202)      (0.202)
                  VERTICAL TECs4,t−1                                 0.312***     0.342***
                                                                      (0.074)      (0.074)
                              HC
                  VERTICAL TECs4,t−1                                                            0.327***
                                                                                                 (0.098)
                              LC
                  VERTICAL TECs4,t−1                                                             0.318**
                                                                                                 (0.098)
                  Obs.                                              322698         322698        321474
                  R2                                                0.99631        0.99631       0.99629
                  Firm FE                                              X              X             X
                  Country-Year FE                                      X              X             X
                  Sec4-Year FE                                         X              X             X
                  Cluster                                             cs4            cs4           cs4
                  s.d.(HORIZONTAL)                                    0.16           0.16          0.16
                  s.d.(HORIZONTAL TEC)                                0.07           0.07          0.07
                  s.d.(VERTICAL TEC)                                  0.15           0.15          0.15
                  P-value F-test                                                                   0.58

Notes: The table reports standardized coefficients and standard errors in parenthesis multiplied by 100. The de-
pendent variable is the logarithm of revenue firm-level productivity at time t, (log TFPRi,t ). The regressions are
estimated by 2SLS where the variables HORIZONTALs4,t−1 and HORIZONTAL TECs4,t−1 are instrumented by, corre-
spondingly, HORIZONTALBartik
                          s4,t−1
                                 IV
                                    and HORIZONTAL TECBartik
                                                        s4,t−1
                                                               IV
                                                                  . The construction of the latter variables is explained
in Section 5. The first stage for column (2) is reported in Table 7; the first stage for column (3) is similar. All
right-hand-side variables are lagged one period. Standard errors are clustered at the country-four-digit-sector level.
Results are obtained by GLS estimation using as weights the square root of each firm’s mean squared predicted
residuals from an initial OLS estimation. *** denotes 1% significance; ** denotes 5% significance; * denotes 10%
significance. ”P-value F-test” reports the p-value of the test of the equality of the coefficients of VERTICAL TECHCs4,t−1
and VERTICAL TECLC s4,t−1 under   the null.


    We then define
                                              X
                               HC
                   VERTICAL TECs4,t     =                WTECHs4,s̃4,t   × HORIZONTALs̃4,t × D HCs4,s̃4 ,           (23)
                                            s̃4∈s2(s4)
                                               s̃46=s4


and
                                              X
                                LC
                    VERTICAL TECs4,t    =                WTECHs4,s̃4,t   × HORIZONTALs̃4,t × D LCs4,s̃4 ,           (24)
                                            s̃4∈s2(s4)
                                               s̃46=s4




                                                               34
which satisfies    VERTICAL TECs4,t   = VERTICAL TECHC                 LC
                                                    s4,t + VERTICAL TECs4,t


                                                         HC                                                                 LC
       If the estimated coefficient to       VERTICAL TECs4,t          was larger than the one to               VERTICAL TECs4,t ,       this
could reflect reverse causality. No significant difference in the coefficients would make it unlikely
that causality goes from productivity by domestic firms in sector s4 leading to FDI in other sectors
that are technologically close. Column (3) of Table 8 shows that there is no significant difference
                                                          LC                                  HC
in these estimated coefficients to            VERTICAL TECs4,t             and    VERTICAL TECs4,t ,    which makes us be less
concerned about reverse causality.


6        A Primer on the Channel: Inventor Mobility
In this section, we explore one potential channel for spillovers highlighted in the theoretical liter-
ature; namely, that of labor mobility (see Fosfuri, Motta and Ronde (2001)). In particular, if one
believes that knowledge is embedded in people, then a channel by which firms learn from each other
is through employee mobility.39
       In Table 9, we use a different measure of vertical spillovers, where the technological distance
(again using U.S. data) is based on inventor mobility across sectors. Instead of the patent-based
                                                                                                                        IN V
measure used in previous tables, now we rather use the fraction of inventors                                        techs4,s̃4   in sector s4
                                                                                     IN V
that previously worked for firms in sector s̃4. As the                           techs4,s̃4   measure is not symmetric, we will
use this feature for identification as we did with the patent citation matrix. The imputation of
inventor-flows between sectors from inventor-flows between technology classes is described in detail
Appendix A.4.
                              IN V
       We proceed using   tech       as the new weight and calculate
                                                                                                           
                                IN V
                                             XX
                                                              IN V                      + rdj
                                                                                        rdi
                        SPILL RDs4,s̃4   =                techs4,s̃4   ×       P     P                          ,                       (25)
                                             i∈s4 j∈s̃4                         k∈s4   l∈s̃4 (rdk + rdl )


which is equivalent to equation (5), except for using an inventor-mobility weight instead of a patent
similarity weight. We further calculate

                                                          X
                                    IN V                                  IN V
                        VERTICAL TECs4,t         =                SPILL RDs4,s̃4,t      × HORIZONTALs̃4,t ,                             (26)
                                                     s̃4∈s2(s4)
                                                        s̃46=s4

       The GLS-results obtained using this measure are presented in column (1) of Table 9. Results
are very similar to those obtained in column (5) of Table 2 indicating that our findings are not an
artifact of the exact way the technology weights are constructed. Domestic firms in sector s4 are
  39
    Other studies like, for example Poole (2013), who use data from Brazil, show that higher-skilled former multi-
national workers are better able to transfer information.


                                                                   35
more likely to benefit from FDI that is concentrated in sectors s̃4 when the inventor matrix shows
that there is higher inventor mobility from sector s̃4 to s4. In addition, the inventor mobility-based
measure does not rely on output weights therefore implying that our main results are not caused by
some particular patterns in those weights. Further, results indicate an important role for inventor
mobility for knowledge flows across sectors.
    These results might be driven by endogeneity if foreign firms enter particular sectors to hire
inventors from other sectors. To deal with this concern and following a similar intuition to the one
used in the previous section, we divide sectors into high inventor mobility (HM) and low inventor
mobility (LM) sectors. If inventors in a given domestic sector do not tend to move to the foreign
entry sector (i.e. the LM case), then it is less likely that foreigners do FDI with the hope of stealing
inventors from the domestic sector. Consequently, from the perspective of the domestic sector, the
presence of FDI in an LM sector is less likely to be driven by reverse causality. We use the transition
matrix of inventor mobility across technology classes previously described. From column (2) of
Table 9, we see that there is no significant difference between the estimated coefficients of HM and
LM sectors, supporting our causal interpretation. Furthermore, it also highlights inventor mobility
as one channel of technology transfer captured with our patent based measure.


7     Conclusion
We study the impact of FDI on host-country firms’ productivity. We show that the positive FDI
spillovers only occur when foreign and domestic firms use similar technologies. When they use
dis-similar technologies, the effect of FDI on host country firms may be negative. Our estimates
show that productivity gains from FDI doubles, when FDI is concentrated in sectors where firms
use similar technologies compared to the case where the same amount of FDI is spread evenly across
all sectors.
    We account for potential endogeneity of FDI to the productivity of domestic firms in the same
sector using two strategies. First, we control for sector×year effects and second, we use Bartik-style
instrumentation, where we instrument sector-country growth with productivity growth in the same
sector of neighboring countries. Regarding potential endogeneity of FDI to the productivity of
domestic firms in other sectors, we use data on asymmetric citations and inventor mobility, both of
which supports our causal interpretation. We also show that inventor mobility between sectors is a
channel of technology transfer between foreign and domestic firms.
    Our work is related to work on competition, innovation, and R&D (Aghion, Bloom, Blundell,
Griffith and Howitt (2005), Bloom, Schankerman and Van Reenen (2013), Jaffe (1988), Aghion and
Howitt (1992)). Acemoglu, Akcigit and Kerr (2016) argue that technological progress is not only
a cumulative process of “standing on the shoulders of giants,” but also a process where innovation


                                                  36
                         Table 9: GLS and IV (Asymmetric Inventor Mobility)

                          Dependent Variable: log Firm Revenue TFP
                                  Sample: Domestic Firms

                                                         (1)                (2)

                          HORIZONTALs4,t−1            -0.320***         -0.320***
                                                       (0.080)           (0.080)
                          HORIZONTAL TECs4,t−1         0.229**           0.236**
                                                       (0.076)           (0.076)
                                      IN V
                          VERTICAL TECs4,t−1          0.199***
                                                       (0.046)
                                      IN V −HM
                          VERTICAL TECs4,t−1                             0.268**
                                                                         (0.084)
                                      IN V −LM
                          VERTICAL TECs4,t−1                             0.147**
                                                                         (0.059)
                          Obs.                         322698             322698
                          Firm FE                         X                  X
                          Country-Year FE                 X                  X
                          Sec4-Year FE                    X                  X
                          Cluster                        cs4                cs4
                          s.d.(HORIZONTAL)              0.16               0.16
                          s.d.(HORIZONTAL TEC)          0.07               0.07
                          P-value F-test                                   0.40

Notes: The table reports standardized coefficients and standard errors in parenthesis multiplied by 100. The de-
pendent variable is the logarithm of revenue firm-level productivity at time t, (log TFPRi,t ). All right-hand-side
variables are lagged one period. Standard errors are clustered at the country-four-digit-sector level. Results are
obtained by GLS estimation using as weights the square root of each firm’s mean squared predicted residuals from
an initial OLS estimation. *** denotes 1% significance; ** denotes 5% significance; * denotes 10% significance;
+
  denotes 15% significance. ”P-value F-test” reports the p-value of the test of the equality of the coefficients of
              IN V −HM                      V −LM
VERTICAL TECs4,t−1      and VERTICAL TECIN
                                         s4,t−1    under the null.


in one firm affects firms in technologically close fields. Our findings are in line with the existence
of such innovation networks. The unique contribution of our paper is to show that these network
effects extends across country-borders with the help of FDI, which constitutes a strong argument
in favor of globalization.




                                                        37
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, and William Kerr, “Innovation Network,” Proceedings of the Na-
  tional Academy of Sciences, 2016, 113 (4).

Ackerberg, Daniel A., Kevin Caves, and Garth Frazer, “Identification Properties of Recent Produc-
  tion Function Estimators,” Econometrica, 2015, 83 (6), 2411–2451.

Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction,” Econo-
  metrica, March 1992, 60 (2), 323–51.

  , Nicholas Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, and Peter Howitt, “Competition and Inno-
  vation: An Inverted-U Relationship,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2005, 120 (2), 701–728.

Aitken, Brian J. and Ann E. Harrison, “Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Direct Foreign Invest-
  ment?” American Economic Review, 1999, 89 (3), 605–618.

Barba-Navaretti, G. and A. Venables, Multinational Firms in the World Economy, Princeton Uni-
  versity Press, 2004.

Barrios, Salvador, Holger Gorg, and Eric Strobl, “Spillovers through backward linkages from multi-
  nationals: Measurement matters!” European Economic Review, August 2011, 55 (6), 862–875.

Bartik, Timothy J., Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies? num-
  ber wbsle. In ‘Books from Upjohn Press.’, W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research,
  December 1991.

Bloom, Nicholas, Mark Schankerman, and John Van Reenen, “Identifying Technology Spillovers
  and Product Market Rivalry,” Econometrica, 07 2013, 81 (4), 1347–1393.

De Loecker, Jan and Frederic Warzynski, “Markups and Firm-Level Export Status,” American
  Economic Review, 2012, 102 (6), 2437–2471.

Fosfuri, Andrea, Massimo Motta, and Thomas Ronde, “Foreign direct investment and spillovers
  through workers’ mobility,” Journal of International Economics, February 2001, 53 (1), 205–222.

Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, Jan Svejnar, and Katherine Terrell, “When does FDI have positive spillovers?
  Evidence from 17 transition market economies,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 2014, 42 (4),
  954–969.

Hall, Robert E., “Market Structure and Macroeconomic Fluctuations,” Brookings Papers on Eco-
  nomic Activity, 1986, 17 (2), 285–338.


                                               38
Harrison, Ann E., Leslie A. Martin, and Shanthi Nataraj, “Learning versus Stealing: How Important
  Are Market-Share Reallocations to India’s Productivity Growth?” World Bank Economic Review,
  2013, 27 (2), 202–228.

Haskel, Jonathan E., Sonia C. Pereira, and Matthew J. Slaughter, “Does Inward Foreign Direct
  Investment Boost the Productivity of Domestic Firms?” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  2007, 89 (3), 482–496.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow, “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (4), 1403–1448.

Jaffe, Adam B., “Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms’ Patents,
  Profits, and Market Value,” American Economic Review, December 1986, 76 (5), 984–1001.

Jaffe, Adam B, “Demand and Supply Influences in R&D Intensity and Productivity Growth,” The
  Review of Economics and Statistics, August 1988, 70 (3), 431–37.

Javorcik, Beata Smarzynska, “Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of Domes-
  tic Firms? In Search of Spillovers through Backward Linkages,” American Economic Review,
  2004, 94 (3), 605–627.

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Bent E. Sørensen, and Vadym Volosovych, “Deep Financial Integration
  And Volatility,” Journal of the European Economic Association, December 2014, 12 (6), 1558–
  1585.

  ,   , Carolina Villegas-Sanchez, Vadym Volosovych, and Sevcan Yesiltas, “How to Construct
  Nationally Representative Firm Level data from the ORBIS Global Database and an Application
  to Industry Concentration,” September 2015, (21558).

Keller, Wolfgang and Stephen R. Yeaple, “Multinational Enterprises, International Trade, and
  Productivity Growth: Firm-Level Evidence from the United States,” The Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 2009, 91 (4), 821–831.

Kowalski, Przemyslaw, Daniel Rabaioli, and Sebastian Vallejo, “International Technology Transfer
  measures in an interconnected world: Lessons and policy implications,” OECD Trade Policy
  Papers 206, OECD Publishing November 2017.

Levinsohn, James and Amil Petrin, “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to Control for
  Unobservables,” Review of Economic Studies, 2003, 70 (2), 317–342.

Marin, Alvaro F. Garcia and Nico Voigtlander, “Exporting and Plant-Level Efficiency Gains: It’s
  in the Measure,” Journal of Politcal Economy, 2014, Forthcoming.

                                               39
OECD, “Technology Intensity Definition, ISIC REV. 3,” 2011.

Olley, G. Steven and Ariel Pakes, “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equip-
  ment Industry,” Econometrica, 1996, 64 (6), 1263–97.

Petrin, Amil, Jerome Reiter, and Kirk White, “The Impact of Plant-level Resource Reallocations
  and Technical Progress on U.S. Macroeconomic Growth,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2011,
  14 (1), 3–26.

Poole, Jennifer P., “Knowledge Transfers from Multinational to Domestic Firms: Evidence from
  Worker Mobility,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, May 2013, 95 (2), 393–406.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., “On Estimating Firm-Level Production Functions Using Proxy Variables
  to Control for Unobservables,” Economics Letters, 2009, 104 (3), 112–114.




                                              40
                                    Appendix for Online Publication


A      Data
Kalemli-Ozcan, Sørensen, Villegas-Sanchez, Volosovych and Yesiltas (2015) provide a comprehensive
comparison of our data, relying on the Orbis database, with the best available national sources.
Here we briefly touch upon some statistics relevant for the countries in our study and refer the reader
to Kalemli-Ozcan, Sørensen, Villegas-Sanchez, Volosovych and Yesiltas (2015) for more details.


A.1      Fraction of Total Output Covered
Table A.1 shows how much of the official gross output data, from Eurostat’s Structural Business
Statistics (SBS) database, is covered by the firms in our dataset in the manufacturing sector.40
Each cell is the ratio of gross output produced by the firms in our dataset, relative to the value
of gross output in the Eurostat data. Missing ratios appear in some country-year cells due to
missing Eurostat data. For year 2008, our dataset accounts for close to 50 percent of output in
Finland and for 69–90 percent in the other countries. Kalemli-Ozcan, Sørensen, Villegas-Sanchez,
Volosovych and Yesiltas (2015) demonstrate that the BvD has good coverage for the data used in the
estimation of TFP, such as employment, wage bill, tangible fixed assets, and cost of materials. In
addition, our dataset is representative when we count the number of firms and compare to numbers
from Eurostat or to numbers from the sector-level CompNet database, which is constructed by the
European Central Bank using sources similar to those of the BvD.41
    Important for our study is the representativeness in terms of firm sizes within the manufac-
turing sector. Table A.2 reports the size distribution in the manufacturing sector by gross output
accounted for by firms belonging to three size categories in year 2006 (other years are similar). Row
entries denote the fraction of total economic activity accounted for by firms belonging to each size
class. We match the official statistics well in terms of size distribution of economic activity in the
manufacturing sector.




  40
     “Gross output” in the BvD data is firms’ operating revenue and “gross output” in the Eurostat database is called
“turnover.” The definitions are very similar and quite standard, and if there are any “fine print” deviations, they
are unlikely to be important for our comparison.
  41
     The comparison in terms of the number of businesses is somewhat noisy because many firms in Eurostat have
zero employment (self-employed entrepreneurs), while neither our database nor CompNet includes the self-employed.
Nonetheless, our data covers most of the total economy in terms of number of firms.


                                                         41
Table A.1: Coverage Based on Gross Output (Turnover) in the Manufacturing Sector, BvD vs. Eu-
rostat Data


                               Belgium      Finland     France    Italy    Spain    Norway


                       1999       0.75        0.30       0.64      0.61     0.75      0.60
                       2000       0.80        0.34       0.76      0.66     0.77      0.60
                       2001       0.78        0.36       0.79      0.65     0.78       na
                       2002        na         0.37       0.82      0.71     0.80      0.75
                       2003       0.81        0.39       0.79      0.70     0.79      0.68
                       2004       0.80        0.41       0.83      0.73     0.79      0.72
                       2005       0.80        0.41       0.82      0.77     0.78      0.69
                       2006       0.78         0.4       0.84      0.79     0.83      0.75
                       2007       0.79        0.45       0.87      0.79     0.81      0.76
                       2008       0.78        0.49       0.90      0.90     0.85      0.69

Notes: The table presents the ratio of output covered by the firms in the BvD sample to output from Eurostat’s
Structural Business Statistics (SBS) database. For a given country-year, the reported fraction is the ratio of ag-
gregated gross output value reported by BvD firms in the manufacturing sector over total manufacturing output
reported in the SBS database. “na” indicates that the latter number is 0.




Table A.2: Size Distribution by Gross Output (Turnover) in the Manufacturing Sector, 2006, BvD
vs. Eurostat Data


                                         Belgium      Finland    France    Italy    Spain    Norway


              A: Orbis-Amadeus
              1 to 19 employees            0.05        0.08       0.05      0.12     0.13      0.11
              20 to 249 employees          0.30        0.38       0.23      0.49     0.40      0.40
              250 + employees              0.66        0.54       0.72      0.40     0.47      0.49
              B: EUROSTAT (SBS)
              0 to 19 employees            0.08        0.06       0.09      0.20     0.14      0.13
              20 to 249 employees          0.27        0.21       0.27      0.41     0.38      0.36
              250 + employees              0.65        0.74       0.64      0.39     0.49      0.51

Notes: The table presents the share of gross output accounted for by firms belonging to each of three size categories
in the year 2006. The sample consists of firms that report data with positive values of gross output (turnover).
Panel A reports the measures from our data based on Orbis-Amadeus and Panel B reports the same numbers from
Eurostat’s SBS database. Row entries denote the fraction of total economic activity accounted for by firms belonging
to each size class. Each column is a different country.




                                                         42
A.2     Foreign Ownership
We validate our foreign ownership data by comparing it to the country-level Activities of For-
eign Affiliates (AFA) database from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD), covering “affiliates under foreign control” (available at http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?
DataSetCode=AFA IN3). The data is provided, largely, at the one-digit level of the ISIC rev. 3
or 4 classification, but it allows us to estimate the share of foreign output in manufacturing. The
data is not directly comparable to our firm-level data. In our data, foreign investors are the direct
foreign owners and we observe all stakes, including very small stakes held by multiple foreign enti-
ties. In the OECD data, foreign investors are, in principle, the ultimate foreign owners, although
it is the immediate controlling entity for some countries. In addition, the notion of foreign affiliate
in the OECD AFA database is based on the concept of controlling interest, which varies across
countries. In most countries, the controlling interest is based on majority ownership (50%), while
other countries also consider minority control (between 10% and 50%). Moreover, some countries
include indirectly owned foreign affiliates in addition to directly controlled affiliates.
   We compute foreign turnover from our data as the ratio of the foreign part
                                                                          P
                                                                              ofPturnover, aggre-
                                                                                   s4,c (   i∈s4,c    foi,c,t ×goi,c,t )
gated over firm-sector-countries, to the total turnover. That is, we compute         P            P                      ,
                                                                                         s4,c (   i∈s4    goi,c,t )
in the full sample of firms and, separately, for the firms which remain in the sample in all years (the
balanced sample of firms).
   For the OECD data, we aggregate the multinational turnover from the AFA database, expressed
in a single currency, add them up across countries, and then divide by the total monetary value
of overall manufacturing turnover taken from the OECD’s STAN Database for Structural Analysis
(available at http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=STAN08BIS).
   Figure A.1 presents a comparison of foreign shares of turnover based on data from the OECD
and from the BvD. The dashed line, based on the all-firms BvD sample, and the solid line with
circles, based on OECD data, almost coincide. The shares in the smaller BvD balanced sample of
firms follow the same trend, but are a bit larger (by about a percentage point), because this sample
consists, on average, of larger firms which are more likely to have foreign ownership. Overall, our
data matches the foreign presence reported by government agencies to the OECD very well.




                                                   43
                                Figure A.1: Foreign Shares in Turnover: BvD vs. OECD Data
                                34
                                32
                                30




                                     28.8       29.2
                                                                 28.6
                                                                                   28.1
                     FO share (%)




                                              28.0                                                   27.6
                                28




                                                                                                                   27.1
                              27.3                   27.2    26.9
                                       26.6
                                                                               25.9 26.3         26.0 26.4
                                26




                                                                     25.8                                               25.4
                                                                                                                 24.8
                                24
                                22
                                20




                                     2002       2003             2004              2005              2006          2007
                                                                          Year

                                                     Aggregated FO share in Oper.Rev. (%), full smpl BvD
                                                     Aggregated FO share in Oper.Rev. (%), BvD
                                                     Aggregated Share of MNC turnover in total Manuf.(%), OECD




Notes: All ratios are in percent.
                               P The shares from the BvD data are computed as the ratios of the aggregated foreign
                                       foi,c,t ×goi,c,t
turnover to total turnover as i∈s4,c
                                   P                    over firms i, sectors s4, and countries c in the balanced firm sample
                                     i∈s4 goi,c,t
(solid line with diamonds) and in the full sample (dashed line with squares). Foreign presence from the OECD data
(solid line with circles) is the sum of the multinational turnover in manufacturing over countries divided by the
total manufacturing turnover in these countries. Countries included are Finland, France, Italy, Norway, and Spain.
Belgium is omitted because of missing OECD data due to confidentiality issues.




                                                                        44
A.3        Citation Based Technology Closeness
We construct a measure of technology closeness between sectors based on patent citations by merging
the information in two databases from the United States. The first is the USPTO database, which
lists the number of patents by cited-citing technology class. Technology classes are defined according
to 37 different subcategories42 . This classification was created by Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg and is
based on the Patent Classification System as of 12/31/1999. The unit of observation is the citation
between a pair of firms, and we use data on granted patents between 1976 and 2006. The second
dataset is Compustat, which we merge with the information from the USPTO database in order to
construct a sectoral measure of the overlap in technology class citation based on cited and citing
sector. In particular, using a firm identifier that is present in both datasets, we can incorporate
Compustat’s sectoral information to the citation data, which allows us to generate an asymmetric
citation matrix at the sector-pair level.

      Specifically, we begin by merging the two files from the USPTO database: i) pat76 06 assg.dta,
which contains information on patent id, granted year, and technology class; and ii) cite76 06, which
has two columns: one for citing patent and another for cited patent. We merge the two files, so that
we know for each citing-cited pair from the latter file in which year the cited patent was granted
for the first time and in which year the patent is cited. We explored other cuts of the data in order
to examine if the results are sensitive to using, for instance, more recent data or predetermined
observations. We obtained similar results for the alternative cuts, specifically:

       1976-1998: from the starting year of patent dataset to the year before our dataset starts so
        that everything is pre-sample. Further, in the citations dataset we see truncation from roughly
        1999 onwards, which is another reason for ending in 1998 (truncation of citations is due to
        patent applications still not granted or incorporated in the official dataset).

       1989-1998: past 10 years prior to the starting data of our paper’s dataset in 1999.

       1987-2006: past 20 years with available information.



      The resulting file includes all the citations in the USPTO, which are uniquely identified at the
citing patent and cited patent pair level. We aggregate this data from the patent- to the technology
class-pair level and make it a fully balanced panel. Since we have 37 technological classes in our
dataset, we end up with a dataset with 1,369 observations and a measure of the number of citations
made between each pair of technological classes. We refer to this dataset as the “Technological
Input-Output Matrix.”
 42
      For information on what they are, see page 41 of http : //www.nber.org/papers/w8498.pdf



                                                        45
       The final step is to match the USPTO database with Compustat and construct a sectoral
measure which indicates the overlap in technology class citation based on cited and citing sector.
The resulting database relies on the information on 6,325 unique currently listed or listed in the
past Compustat firms that are associated with a total of 1,124,198 patents with the time period
spanning 1976–2006. Once we match Compustat and USPTO, we know for each U.S. firm operating
in sector s4 the number of patents created in each technology class.



A.4        Inventor Based Technology Closeness
We obtain the patents information from the NBER patent data project. It covers US patents
data for the period 1976-2006 and several files, including assignee matches to Compustat are avail-
able on the downloads page.43 The Community Members (Bronwyn Hall, Jim Bessen, and Grid
Thoma) are responsible for providing this data for the scientific community. For each patent, the file
pat76_06_ipc.dta provides us with the technology class, named subcat. This variable will allow
us to assign a main technology class to each patent assignee. Crucially for us, they also provide a
file that has standardized the patent applicant, named pdpass to be found in the file assignee.dta.
The official documentation of the website provides an excellent explanation of their procedure:

         Finally, it is also worth noting what we mean by a patent “assignee”. Assignee names are
         listed in the patent data from the USPTO, but they are not standardized. For example,
         there are over 100 different spellings, misspellings, abbreviations, etc. for the assignees of
         patents assigned to IBM. Using extensive name standardization and matching routines,
         we grouped these into a single “assignee” that is assigned a unique number stored in the
         variable PDPASS. This number is based on the first patent the firm was granted after
         January 1, 1976. Note that some firms do not have utility patents, but do have other
         patents, e.g., design patents. These firms have negative PDPASS numbers.

       The next step is to combine the previous two files, i.e. assignee.dta and pat76_06_ipc.dta,
in order to obtain the main technology class by patent assignee.
       With this dataset at hand, what is left is to match this to the inventor side. To this end,
we benefit from the inventor name disambiguation undertaken by Harvard Business School and
its Patent Network Dataverse.44 Large-scale studies of inventors are challenging, as the United
States Patent and Trademark Office does not provide unique inventor identifiers. Many scholars of
invention have implemented ad-hoc disambiguation methods based on string similarity thresholds
and string comparison matching, but such methods have been shown to be vulnerable to a number
  43
    See https://sites.google.com/site/patentdataproject/Home/downloads.
  44
    See https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=hdl:1902.1/15705 and also https://funginstitute.
berkeley.edu/research/innovation-in-tech/tools-and-data/.


                                                       46
of problems that can adversely affect research results. The disambiguation method used in this
paper is represented below and based on this paper: “Disambiguation and Co-authorship Networks
of the U.S. Patent Inventor Database (1975 - 2010)” by Ronald Lai, Alexander D’Amour, Amy Yu,
Ye Sun, and Lee Fleming.45 The following quotation summarizes what the paper does:

        Using a Bayesian supervised learning approach, we identify individual inventors from
        the U.S. utility patent database, from 1975 to the present. An interface to calculate and
        illustrate patent co-authorship networks and social network measures is also provided.
        The network representation does not require bounding the social network beforehand.
        We provide descriptive statistics of individual and collaborative variables and illustrate
        examples of networks for an individual, an organization, a technology, and a region.
        The paper provides an overview of the technical algorithms and pointers to the data,
        code, and documentation, with the hope of further open development by the research
        community.

      Once we generate a panel of inventors and track them over time, the last step is to match those
patents to their patent assignees we identified later. This final match allows us to track the changes
in patent assignees during the lifetime for a given inventor. For each change in employer that an
inventor undertakes, we can identify the main technology class of both the previous and the new
patent assignee. This information allows us to generate an asymmetric transition matrix of inventor
mobility across technology classes which we then use in the regressions.
      In our study, there is a potential endogeneity concern if foreign firm A enters sector S1 expecting
to hire a lot of inventors from sector S2. To deal with this concern we divide sectors from the
perspective of S1 into those that historically have transferred a lot of inventors to S1 (High Inflow
(HI)) and those that have hardly transferred any inventors to S1 (Low Inflow (LI)). Suppose S2 falls
under the LI category, in this case, the motive for firm A to enter S1 cannot be because it expects a
lot of inventor mobility from S2 to S1, therefore, mitigating the selection concern. However, at the
same time, given the asymmetric nature of the inventor mobility matrix even if S1 does not supply
inventors to S2 it can still be that S2 supplies inventors to S1 leading to knowledge spillovers. To
identify the HI and LI sectors, we use the transition matrix of inventor mobility across technology
classes previously described.




 45
      See https://hdl.handle.net/1902.1/15705.


                                                    47
B         Production Function Estimation

B.1        Methodology
To obtain firm-level productivity estimates, we estimate the log-value added production function

                                      yit = β0 + β` `it + βk kit + ωit + it ,                                 B.1

where yit is the logarithm of real output, `it is the logarithm of labor input, kit is the logarithm
of capital input, ωit is the logarithm of physical productivity, and it is a production shock that is
not observable by the firm before making their input decisions at time t. The main concern, when
estimating output elasticities with respect to the inputs in equation B.1, is whether the firm observes
its own productivity ωit at the time of making input choices. This would render input quantities
endogenous to productivity and ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates of β` and βk would be
inconsistent. We follow the approach suggested in Wooldridge (2009), which builds on previous
work by Olley and Pakes (1996) (OP) and Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) (LP), which addresses the
concerns raised by Ackerberg, Caves and Frazer (2015), who argue that if the flexible labor input
is chosen as a function of unobserved productivity, the coefficient on labor input is not identified in
the previous approaches.
       The estimation is based on a two-step procedure to achieve consistency of the coefficient esti-
mates for the inputs of the production function. Wooldridge (2009) suggests a generalized method
of moments estimation of TFPR to overcome some limitations of OP and LP, including correction
for simultaneous determination of inputs and productivity, no need to maintain constant returns to
scale, and robustness to the Ackerberg, Caves and Frazer (2015) critique.46 The following discus-
sion is based on Wooldridge (2009), accommodated to the case of a production functions with two
production inputs (see Wooldridge (2009) for a general discussion).
       For firm i in time period t define:

                                      yit = α + βl lit + βk kit + ωit + eit ,                                  B.2

where yit , lit , and kit denote the natural logarithm of firm value added, labor (a variable input), and
capital, respectively. The firm-specific error can be decomposed into a term capturing firm-specific
productivity ωit and an additional term that reflects measurement error or unexpected productivity
shocks eit . We are interested in estimating ωit .
  46
    Ackerberg, Caves and Frazer (2015) highlight that if the variable input (labor) is chosen prior to the time when
production takes place, the coefficient on variable input is not identified.




                                                        48
    A key assumption of the OP and LP estimation methods is that for some function g(., .):

                                                       ωit = g(kit , mit ) ,                                            B.3

where mit is a proxy variable (for investment in OP, for intermediate inputs in LP). Under the
assumption,
                                     E(eit |lit , kit , mit ) = 0            t = 1, 2, ..., T ,                         B.4

substituting equation B.3 into equation B.2, we obtain the regression

                              E(yit |lit , kit , mit ) = α + βl lit + βk kit + g(kit , mit )                            B.5
                                                         ≡ βl lit + h(kit , mit ) ,

where h(kit , mit ) ≡ α + βk kit + g(kit , mit ).
    In order to identify βl and βk , we need some additional assumptions. First, rewrite equation B.4
in a form allowing for more lags:

               E(eit |lit , kit , mit , li,t−1 , ki,t−1 , mi,t−1 , ..., li1 , ki1 , mi1 ) = 0     t = 1, 2, ..., T .    B.6

Second, assume productivity follows a first-order Markov process:

                           E(ωit |ωi,t−1 , ..., ωi1 ) = E(ωit |ωi,t−1 )                t = 2, 3, ..., T,                B.7

and assume that the productivity innovation ait ≡ ωit − E(ωit |ωi,t−1 ) is uncorrelated with current
values of the state variable kit as well as past values of the variable input l, the state k, and the
proxy variables m:

                                 E(ωit |kit , li,t−1 , ki,t−1 , mi,t−1 , ..., li1 , ki1 , mi1 )                         B.8
                                          = E(ωit |ωi,t−1 ) ≡ f [g(ki,t−1 , mi,t−1 )] .

Recall from equation(B.3) that ωi,t−1 = g(ki,t−1 , mi,t−1 ).
    Plugging ωi,t = f [g(ki,t−1 , mi,t−1 )] + ait into equation B.2 gives:

                            yit = α + βl lit + βk kit + f [g(ki,t−1 , mi,t−1 )] + ait + eit .                           B.9

Now it is possible to specify two equations which identify (βl , βk ):

                                      yit = α + βl lit + βk kit + g(ki,t , mi,t ) + eit                                B.10



                                                                 49
and
                                 yit = α + βl lit + βk kit + f [g(ki,t−1 , mi,t−1 )] + uit ,                  B.11

where uit ≡ ait + eit .
       Important for the GMM estimation strategy, the available orthogonality conditions differ across
these two equations. The orthogonality conditions for equation B.10 are those outlined in equa-
tion B.6, while the orthogonality conditions for equation B.11 are

                       E(uit |kit , li,t−1 , ki,t−1 , mi,t−1 , ..., li1 , ki1 , mi1 ) = 0   t = 2, ..., T .   B.12

       To proceed with the estimation, we estimate these equations parametrically. We follow Petrin,
Reiter and White (2011) and use a third-degree polynomial approximation using first order lags of
variable input as instruments.47


B.2        Estimation Results
Table B.1 reports summary statistics for the output elasticities estimated using the Wooldridge
(2009) approach. The results are consistent across countries with no major differences except for
Belgium, where the number of observations is slightly lower and the coefficient on labor is on average
marginally lower (0.601) and the average coefficient on capital marginally higher (0.113). Summary
statistics are computed excluding sectors in which the WLP procedure delivers either missing, neg-
ative, or zero coefficients. These cases are few and mainly correspond to sectors 12 “Manufacture
of Tobacco products” and 19 “Manufacture of coke and refined petroleum products,” which have
very few observations and contribute little to overall manufacturing output.

              Table B.1: Summary Statistics of the Production Function Output Elasticities


                                                  Labor Elasticity (β` )           Capital Elasticity (βk )

                    Mean                                     0.719                          0.083
                    Median                                   0.725                          0.079
                    Standard Deviation                       0.099                          0.057
                    Max                                      0.943                          0.573
                    Min                                      0.133                          0.004




  47
       We use the Stata routine suggested in Petrin, Reiter and White (2011).


                                                                 50
C      Vertical Spillovers
Our analysis focuses on distinguishing between competition and knowledge spillover effects within
two-digit sectors. There is an extensive literature, following the pioneer work of Javorcik (2004),
which explores the role of inter-industry linkages and we verify that our data delivers similar results.
The variable HORIZONTALs2,t−1 proxies for horizontal spillovers and is the two-digit sector counterpart
of equation (2). The variable      BACKWARDs2,t−1       captures backward linkages between two-digit sectors
and is computed at the two-digit industry level according to equation (3). To be consistent with the
previous literature, we add the variable FORWARDs2,t−1 that represents forward linkages between two-
digit industries. The rationale for this variable is that domestic firms might experience productivity
improvements as a result of buying cheaper or higher quality inputs from foreign firms. The variable
is constructed following equation similarly to (3), but summing over the first index in the input-
output coefficients; i.e., the amount that sector s4 buys on average from sector s̃4:
                                                     X
                               VERTICAL IOs2,t   =             αs2,s2,t
                                                                 ˜      × HORIZONTALs̃2,t .                      C.1
                                                     s̃26=s2


    Column (1) in Table C.1 shows the results without sector-year fixed effects, which corresponds
to pooled country studies, and column (2) shows the results with sector-year fixed effects. The
results in column (1) are consistent with productivity spillovers through backward linkages between
two-digit sectors but no evidence of forward spillovers is found. Javorcik (2004) finds a similar result
and argues that a potential explanation for the lack of evidence supporting forward linkages is that
domestic firms lack the technological capability to benefit from the higher quality product produced
by foreign firms. Column (2) confirms that the importance of backward linkages between two-digit
sectors is not driven by omitted sector characteristics that vary over time and corroborates the lack
of evidence supporting forward spillovers in this study.48




  48
     Similarly, we do not find evidence of forward linkages within the same two-digit sector and therefore, we exclude
this variable from our analysis.


                                                               51
                              Table C.1: Two-Digit Sector Vertical Linkages

                          Dependent Variable: log Firm Revenue TFP
                                  Sample: Domestic Firms


                                                      (1)                 (2)


                          HORIZONTALs2,t−1         -0.183*            0.444***
                                                   (0.105)             (0.105)
                          BACKWARDs2,t−1          0.281***             0.140**
                                                   (0.054)             (0.054)
                          FORWARDs2,t−1             0.177               0.089
                                                   (0.101)             (0.101)
                          Observations             322,705            322,705
                          Firm FE                     X                   X
                          Country-Year FE             X                   X
                          Sec2-Year FE                                    X
                          Cluster                    cs2                 cs2
                          s.d.(HORIZONTALs2 )        0.13                0.13
                          s.d.(BACKWARDs2 )          0.11                0.11
                          s.d.(FORWARDs2 )           0.13                0.13

Notes: The table reports standardized coefficients and standard errors in parenthesis multiplied by 100. The de-
pendent variable is the logarithm of revenue firm-level productivity at time t, (log TFPRi,t ). See section 2.3 for
the detailed construction of the variables. The sample comprises domestic firms; i.e., firms that have no foreign
participation over the years of analysis. All right-hand-side variables are lagged one period. Standard errors are
clustered at the country-two-digit-sector-level. Results are obtained by GLS estimation using as weights the square
root of each firm’s mean squared predicted residuals from an initial OLS estimation. *** denotes 1% significance; **
denotes 5% significance; * denotes 10% significance.




                                                        52
D       Appendix Tables and Figures
                Table D.1: Employment Characteristics Across Samples and Countries


                                Country      Sample      Mean     Median       SD

                                Total        original     61.4       26       157.1
                                             merged       65.2       27       173.4
                                Belgium      original    151.6       55       410.3
                                             merged      171.4       58       506.8
                                Spain        original     57.4       25       124.9
                                             merged       58.7       25       136.7
                                Finland      original     56.4       24       113.7
                                             merged       57.5       24       115.5
                                France       original     75.5       27       202.9
                                             merged       85.3       30       227.1
                                Italy        original     49.2       25       100.2
                                             merged       50.5       25       101.1
                                Norway       original     54.8       24       121.9
                                             merged       58.3       24       135.9

Notes: The table displays descriptive statistics for firms by country. “Original” sample refers to the sample of firms
from the BvD with more than 10 employees, while the “merged” sample refers to the sample we end up with after
the BvD dataset is merged with the dataset for which the technology closeness-measures can be calculated. See the
text for further details.




                                                         53
                                       Table D.2: Summary Statistics


                                                   Observations      Mean       SD

                             log TFPR                 322,698        3.55      0.93
                             µ                        322,698         1.94     0.90
                             MC                       322,698         0.68     0.13
                             #patents                 322,698         0.00     0.20
                             L                        322,698        54.48    135.21
                             HORIZONTAL               322,698        17.45     16.01
                             HORIZONTAL TEC           322,698         5.00     6.95
                             VERTICAL IO              322,698         1.99     7.06
                             VERTICAL TEC             322,698        21.23     14.86
                                         CIT
                             VERTICAL TEC             322,698        23.22     15.84


Notes: The table displays sample size, means, and standard deviations for our main variables for the sample of
domestic firms used in the regressions. log TFPR is the logarithm of revenue total factor productivity; µ is the
estimated markup; M C is the estimated marginal cost; #PATENTS is the number of granted patents; L is the number of
employees; VERTICAL TEC is the constructed measure of “technology-weighted knowledge spillovers” from outside the
four-digit sector; HORIZONTAL TEC is the constructed measure of “technology-weighted competition spillovers” from
within the four-digit sector; HORIZONTAL is the constructed measure of “competition spillovers;” VERTICAL TECCIT
is the constructed measure of “technology-weighted knowledge spillovers” from outside the four-digit sector based on
citations. Monetary values are deflated and expressed in constant 2010 dollars.




                                                        54
                                                                    Table D.3: Correlation


                               log TFPR      log µ    log M C    HORIZONTAL      HORIZONTAL TEC      VERTICAL IO     VERTICAL TEC     VERTICAL TECCIT

         log TFPR                   1
         log µ                   0.9312         1
         log M C                 -0.702     -0.7351       1
         HORIZONTAL             -0.0046     -0.0047    0.0021           1
         HORIZONTAL TEC          0.0045      0.0012    -0.0011       0.7139              1




55
         VERTICAL IO              0.003      0.0021    -0.0015      -0.0637           -0.1552              1
         VERTICAL TEC            0.0049      0.0049    -0.0042      -0.1105           -0.2111           0.5231             1
         VERTICAL TECCIT         0.0071     0.0083     -0.0024      -0.0901           -0.1519            0.428           0.7216                1

     Notes: The table displays the correlation matrix of the “demeaned” variables (i.e., firm, country-year, and four-digit-sector-year fixed effects have been
     removed). The construction of these variables is explained in the main text. log TFPR is the logarithm of revenue total factor productivity; log µ is the
     logarithm of the estimated markup; log M C is the logarithm of (approximate) marginal cost; VERTICAL TEC is “technology-weighted knowledge spillovers;”
                                                                                                                           CIT
     HORIZONTAL TEC is “technology-weighted competition spillovers;” HORIZONTAL is “competition spillovers;” VERTICAL TEC       is “technology-weighted knowl-
     edge spillovers” based on citations.
                                                         Figure D.1: Spillover Measures by Two-Digit sector in 2007
  .5
  .4
  .3
  .2
  .1
  0

           Chemicals

                       Motor Vehicles

                                        Basic Metals

                                                       Electronics

                                                                     Electrical

                                                                                  Rubber

                                                                                           Non-metallic mineral

                                                                                                                  Other Transport

                                                                                                                                    Petroleum

                                                                                                                                                Paper

                                                                                                                                                        Beverages

                                                                                                                                                                    Machinery and Equipment

                                                                                                                                                                                              Other Manuf.

                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fabricated Metal

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Food

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Furniture

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Printing

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Textiles

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Wood products

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Wearing Apparel
                                        VERTICAL_TEC                                                                HORIZONTAL                                                                HORIZONTAL_TEC                                                             VERTICAL_IO




Notes: The figure displays the average values, by two-digit sector, of the main regressors, defined in Section 2.3.
The data in these figures spans all countries in our sample but, unlike in the main paper, is for year 2007 only. We
average over countries for that year.




                                                                                                                                                56
