                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            TARIFFS, THE REAL EXCHANGE
                           RATE AND THE TERMS OF TRADE:
                           ON TWO POPULAR PROPOSITIONS
                            IN INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICS




                                 Sebastian Edwards

                               Sweder van Wijnbergen




                              Working Paper No. 2365




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 1987




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #2365
                                               August 1987




        Tariffs, the Real Exchange Rate and the Terms of Trade:
        On Two Popular Propositions in International Economics



                               ABSTRACT



     In this paper we investigate the relation between tariff changes, terms

of trade changes and the equilibrium real exchange rate. For this purpose

we use two models of a small open economy: (1) a three goods version of the

Ricardo-Viner model; and (2) a three goods model with full intersectoral

factor mobility. We show that, in general, it is not possible to know how

the equilibrium real exchange rate will respond to these two disturbances.

Moreover, we show that the traditional wisdom that establishes that a

tariff hike will always result in a real appreciation, while a terms of

trade worsening will generate an equilibrium real depreciation, is

incorrect.




     Sebastian Edwards                       Sweder van Wijnbergen
     Department of Economics                 The World Bank
     UCLA                                    1818 H Street, N.W.
     405 Hilgard Avenue                      Washington, D.C. 20433
     Los Angeles, CA 90024

     (213) 825-5304
I. Introduction

         The following two propositions are found repeatedly in poLicy

discussions regarding the developing countries:




Proposition 1:    In a small country the increase of import tariffs wiLL result

in an appreciation of the real exchange rate.



Proposition 2: In a small country the worsening of the terms of trade will

result in a depreciation of the real exchange rate.



         In most cases these propositions have been made in a rather loose

way, usually without making clear what specific model the author has in

mind. However, it is fair to state that both of them are widely accepted by

economists and policy makers. Proposition 1 has usually been made within the

context of trade liberalization in developing countries, whereas proposition 2

is made in discussions on real exchange rates and external shocks. See for

example, Diaz—Alejandro (1983, p. 33), Balassa (1982, p. 16), Johnson (1969,

p. 159), Harberger (1984, p. 34) and Dornbusch (1980, p. 111).!" It turns

Out, however, that these two propositions are generally inconsistent. Under

generaL conditions they don't hold simultaneously. Moreover, in a popular

class of models ——   the three—goods—two—factors model —— the two propositions
can never hold at the same time. However, in another class of model —— the

three—goods and specific factors model —— both propositions hold

simultaneously only under very special conditions.

        The purpose of this paper is to provide a clarifying discussion

regarding these two propositions. We first show that in a traditional
             aLMW +   ar                                                  (1)




             aw +     ar    =                                             (2)


             aLNw + a1<.r=                                                (3)


                            =                                             (14)
                                EPx



                                P(l+t)E

                            =                                             (6)


                          e =



                                                                            (8)
                          E=Px=1

where the a's are input—output coefficients; w and r are the wage rate and

the rental rate of capital, M' P and          refer to the domestic price of

importables, exportables and nontradables;         and P are the world prices of

X and M; t    is   the tariff rate, T is the domestic price of tradables;

   and (1—s) are weights used in the construction of            and e is the real

exchange rate.

         Equations (1) and (2) can be used to determine the effects of a

tariff change on factor rewards. In Jones's (1965) famiLiar notation:


                      0                        0
          w= (              ) (1+t)   ; r— (          ) (1+t)
                    KK KM                     KX KM
Heckscher—Ohlin setting with importables, exportables and nontradables and no

specialization, the two propositions are always inconsistent (Section II). In

Section III we use a factor—specific model to derive the conditions under

which both propositions hold simultaneously. It is found that this can only

happen if income effects generated by the terms of trade change care very

large. Section IV contains brief concluding remarks.



II. The Three—Goods—Two—Factors Case

         Consider the case of a small economy that produces exportables (x),

importables (M) and nontradables (N), using two non—tradable factors of

production, capital (K) and labor (L). Assume also that technology has

constant returns to scale, that there is perfect competition, that there is a

fixed unitary nominal exchange rate and that there is an initial tariff on the

importation of M. Finally, assume that both factors of production can move

freely across sectors.V Under these circumstances, and ruling Out

specialization,V the world prices of exportables (P) and importables

        plus the tariff (t) determine unequivocally the rewards of both
 (P)
factors (w and r). These factors rewards, under the assumption of perfect

competition, determine the nominal price of nontradables        Demand

conditions for nontradabLes, in turn, determine totaL output of nontradables

and total factors used in their production. This leaves a certain amount of

factors (K and L) that is used in the production of exportables and

importables in a traditional Heckscher—Ohlin fashion. It is assumed

throughout that all three goods are produced.

        The modeL is given by equations (1) through (8).J'
where             =    ar        ®LX =
                                                  =    ar        0LM     10KM



and hats stand for percentage changes.
           If    it is assumed, as is the most plausible case for developing

countries, that importables have the highest capital—labor ratio, then


 (o — o) < 0           and [w/(l+t)] < 0 and [r/(l+t)] >    0.        This of course is the

Stolper—Samuelson theorem. The effect of the tariff change on                the price of
nontradables is:


                 =
                      [00)](i+t)
                       KXKM

           It    is possible to see from this expression that the effect of a

change   in t on the     price of nontradables will depend on          the difference in
capital intensity between exportables and nontradables. From this                and (7)    the

change   in the real exchange rate is


            e/(1t)      =
                            [c*—(GKX—OKN)
                                            / °KX°KM                                (9)


From equation (9) it can be seen that proposition 1 is not aLways true. In
order for it to hoLd, it is required that e/(1+t) <              0.     This will be the

case    if a <   (eKx_eKN)/(0KxOKM).
           Let's look now at the effect of an exogenous increase in the worLd
price of imports (i.e., a terms of trade worsening) on the real exchange
rate. The resulting expression, of course, is exactly the same as (9):
            e/P                                                             (10)



           Then proposition 2 will be true if        >                           Of

course this latter condition contradicts the requirement for proposition 1 to

be true. In this setting, the popular propositions 1 and 2 cannot hoLd

simultaneously.

           Another way of looking at it goes as follows: As long as the economy

produces both exportables and importables, the zero profit conditions in the

T—sector         =                            where C is the unit cost function in
                     C(r,w), M =   CM(r,w),
sector i] determine factor prices for given values of P< and             Constant

returns to scale in NT production then determine the price of nontraded goods

   from the cost side only via the zero profit condition          =
                                                                      CN(r,w).
Income effects have no influence whatsoever on the reaL exchange rate under

this production structure, so whether P increases because of a higher tariff

t or a higher world price P is irrelevant for the impact on the real

exchange rate.

           The model analyzed in this section assumes full factor mobility

between the three sectors in the economy. In practice, of course, such

reallocation may take years to bring abou.t, especially for physical capital.

From a short run perspective the assumption of imperfect mobility of at least

capital would seem of greater interest. In the next section we therefore

construct a very general specific factor model of an economy where factor

prices are not uniquely tied down by the price vector of traded goods. We

demonstrate that propositions P1 and P2 cannot in general be both correct. We

do show one special case where strong income effects produce a sign difference
          dP        dP
between          and —.      Without such strong income effects, P1 and P2 are
                    dP
                         M
incompatible.



III. A Specific Factor Model

          In the specific factor Ricardo—Viner model (Jones (1971)) each sector

employs labour and a factor (capital) specific to that sector. There are

therefore four factors; hence demand conditions have to be brought into the

picture explicitly. We do that by using an expenditure function.

          We summarize production technology and resource allocation by using a

revenue function R. R gives the maximum revenue obtainable given factor

supplies v and relative prices:



           R =                                                            (11)
                 R(PX,PM,PN;v)


We assume a Ricardo—Virier structure (see Jones (1971)) so that factor price

equalization does not hold. This model is therefore perhaps best seen as a

short—run model.

          Similarly consumer preferences and budget allocation are summarized

by an expenditure function (E), giving the minimum expenditure necessary to

reach welfare level U given the relative price structure:



          E =                                                             (12)
                 E(PX,PM,PN;U)


          A convenient property of revenue functions is that their derivatives

with respect to prices give the corresponding commodity supply functions.

Similarly, the derivatives of E with respect to prices equal to (Hicksian)
demand for the corresponding goods. Accordingly nontraded goods market

cLearg requires:



                                                                        (13)




The model is closed by the budget constraint:



                                                                        (14)
              R(PX,PM,PN;V) +          tP(EM RH) = )PX,PM,PN;U)


             Define, for notationaL convenience, the "net" expenditure function

 Z = E-'R.      Differentiation of (14) immediately yields the welfare effects of

changes in relative prices:



              (1 —                                                       (15)
                     tPMCM) Eud(J =



                         —         —
                             (ZM       tPMZ)   dPM + tPM   ZdPN

                         +   7 (Ps' ,l, +
                                               M'



CM = EMU E1, the pure income effect on demand for importables; ZM = 3ZI3PM,

etc. Note that changes in the price of NT goods N have first order welfare

effects in the presence of tariffs. Although a country has by definition a

zero net export position in NT goods, an increase in N wilL, through

substitution effects, induce more consumption and less production of

importables. Since these are underconsurned and overproduced due to the

tariff, welfare increases when N goes up.
              Differentiation of the NT goods market clearing equation and

substitution into (15) aLlows derivation of the total weLfare effects of

tariff changes and terms of trade shocks. A terms of trade shock implies

 dPM =   (1+t) dP, dt = 0;                        a tariff increase on the other hand implies

 dPM =         dt    >   0.        Inserting that into (13) and (15) yields the simple

expression:



               E
                         1          dU        —         1 dU       —       ZM   <
                                                                                         1   dU <
                                                                                                  o   (16)
                u (1+t) d*
                         M
                                                  Eu
                                                       *M    dt        y(l+t)       Eu
                                                                                         M


               y =
                         1tPMCM
                                        +
                                             CNPM
                                                       tZIZ >          0    in stable models.



A terms of trade shock infLicts a larger welfare loss than an equivalent

tariff increase. The reason is that, in the case of the tariff, a country at

least retains the additional tariff revenues ZMdt.

              We are now ready to compare the real exchange rate effects of an

increase in tariffs t and a deterioration in the external terms of trade

 dP of equal magnitude. Consider first the increase in tariffs.

Differentiating the NT goods market equilibrium equation and using (15) and

 dPM =   0,   dPM =          dt   > 0        yields:



               1 dPN —            (1tPcM)              Z    + CNt P ZMM
                                        (—y Z)                 (—y ZNN)

                                            (A; +)                (B; —)



(A) is a substitution effect: higher tariffs draw resources out of the NT
sector and divert consumption towards it (if we ruLe out complementarity in

consumption). Both effects increase net demand for NT goods and so put upward
pressure on the relative price of non—traded goods. (B) is an income effect

that comes into play only if the tariff increase starts from a positive

initial tariff. The        increase       in distortionary cost of the existing tariff

reduces welfare and therefore expenditure and so reduces demand for NT goods,

exerting downward pressure on the relative price of non—traded goods. So

proposition P1 is correct unless the economy is very distorted to begin with.

         Consider now an adverse terms of trade shock, dP = dPM >              0, dt = 0.

Following similar procedures, it can easily be seen that



               i   dPN       1
                                 +        CNZM
          (l+t)
                   dP
                    M
                      PM              y(l+t)Z
                           <1N
         Furthermore, (17) and (18) refer to                   not to the real exchange rate

 e =                  Straightforward            arithmetic shows that


                                  dP
          de_ ae            e         N
          dt       (l+t)     E'N dt




and


                                 dP
           de
            *
                    ae_e
                     * P
                                     N
                                     *
          dPM        M N dPM
                     (1+t) de         e CNZM
                       *   dt            N 1NN

(18) and (19) show two things. First proposition P2 is not in general. true.

As in the case of higher tariffs, the substitution effect itseLf wilL lead to
an increase in the relative price of non—traded goods (item A in (17)). On

the other hand, high initial distortions (item (B) in (17)) or a large income

effect due to the terms of trade deterioration (the term proportional to ZM in

(18)) reduce aggregate demand and so depress the real exchange rate.

Therefore, unless the net import position in good M is sufficiently Large or

the economy is very distorted to begin with, a terms of trade deterioration

will cause an increase in the relative price of non—traded goods, in

contradiction to proposition P2. In fact, and this is our second point, P2 is

the only true if income effects are large enough to swamp the substitution

effect. This is not impossible, and in fact becomes less unlikely the more

distorted the economy is (the larger t   is).   Nevertheless dominance of income

effects over substitution effects is generally considered an anomaly; if so,

so is proposition P2.
                                  FOOTNOTE S




1/ It is easy to find quotes in the Literature that refer either to

    propositions 1 or to proposition 2, or to both at the same time. For

    example, CarLos Diaz—Aiejandro (1983) states: [S]tandard models would

    predict that the following variables would infLuence its real exchange

    rate...an improvement [in terms of trade] will lead to appreciation...;

    higher import and export taxes will lead to appreciation." The authors

    cited above also make explicit references to at least one of the popular

    propositions.




2/ Also, as in most discussions on the subject, it is assumed that the

   capital account is exogenously given.




3/ This is not an unusually restrictive assumption, because the third

   commodity is non—traded. Introducing trade in the third good would create

   a knift edge equilibrium, with a strong presumption towards

   specialization. This feature disappears when there are barriers to trade

   in at least as many goods as there are more goods (or traded factors) than

   non—traded factors (Neary (1985)). Incomplete specialization requires

   that the aggregate capital—labor ratio net of capital and Labor employed

   in the NT sector, falls between the capitaL—labor ratios in each traded

   sector that guarantee zero profits at positive activity levels for given
    worLd trade goods prices. Since these latter two ratios will in generaL

    be different, the set of equilibria characterized by incomplete special-

    ization has positive measure.




4/ !4ote that since we are dealing with effects on prices and factor rewards

   only, there is no need to specify the demand side of the model [Corden and

   Neary (1982)]. This property of the model is actually crucial for our

   resuLt regarding the inconsistency of the two propositions.
                                  REFERENCES

Balassa, Bela (1982), DeveLopment Strategies in Semi—Industrial Economies.
    Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Diaz—Alejandro, Carlos (1983), "Exchange Rate and Terms of Trade in the
    Argentine Republic: 1913—76" in M. Syrquin and S. Teitel (eds.) Trade,
    Stability, Technology and Equity in Latin America. New York: Academic
    Press.

Dornbusch, Rudiger (1980), Open Economy Macroeconomics. New York: Basic
    Books.

Harberger, Arnold (1984), "Balance of Payments Crises: Lessons of
    Experience." Paper presented at National Bureau of Economic
    Research/World Bank Conference.

Johnson, Harry C. (1969), "A Model of Protection and the Exchange Rate."
    Economica, pp. 119—38.

Jones, R. (1965), "The Structure of Simple General Equilibrium Models,"
    Journal of Political Economy, pp. 557—572.

Jones, R. (1971), "A Three—Factor Model in Theory, Trade and History," in
    Trade, Balance of Payments and Growth, J. Bhagwati (ed.), North Holland.

Neary, J. P. (1985), "International Factor Mobility, Minimum Wage Rates and
    Factor Price Equalization: A Synthesis," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    pp. 551—570.
