                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE STRUCTURE OF STATE CORPORATE TAXATION AND ITS IMPACT ON
               STATE TAX REVENUES AND ECONOMIC ACTIVITY

                                    Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
                                         Owen M. Zidar

                                       Working Paper 23653
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23653


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                             August 2017, Revised July 2018




We are especially thankful to Tim Bartik for providing detailed comments on an early draft as
well as to Jim Poterba, Josh Rauh, and Tom Neubig. We also thank Tim Bartik, Dan Wilson and
Robert Chirinko, Nathan Seegert, and Jamie Bernthal, Dana Gavrila, Katie Schumacher, Shane
Spencer, and Katherine Sydor for generously providing us with data on components of the state
corporate tax structure. Tim Anderson, Stephanie Kestelman, Matt Panhans, Francesco Ruggieri,
Linh Nguyen, and John Wieselthier provided excellent research assistance. This work is
supported by the Kauffman Foundation and the Kathryn and Grant Swick Faculty Research Fund
at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. We declare that we have no relevant or
material financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato and Owen M. Zidar. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Structure of State Corporate Taxation and its Impact on State Tax Revenues and Economic
Activity
Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato and Owen M. Zidar
NBER Working Paper No. 23653
August 2017, Revised July 2018
JEL No. H2,H25,H71,R5

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper documents facts about the state corporate tax structure | tax rates, base rules, and
credits | and investigates its consequences for state tax revenue and economic activity. We present
three main findings. First, tax base rules and credits explain more of the variation in state
corporate tax revenues than tax rates do. Second, although states typically do not offset tax rate
changes with base and credit changes, the effects of tax rate changes on tax revenue and
economic activity depend on the breadth of the base. Third, as states have narrowed their tax
bases, the relationship between tax rates and tax revenues has diminished. Overall, changes in
state tax bases have made the state corporate tax system more favorable for corporations and are
reducing the extent to which tax rate increases raise corporate tax revenue.


Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences Building
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
jc@jcsuarez.com

Owen M. Zidar
Department of Economics & Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
237 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
ozidar@princeton.edu
How states tax businesses has received renewed interest in both academic and policy circles. Recent work on
state corporate tax rates has investigated their impacts on income growth, employment, and business location.1
However, state policymakers compete to attract businesses not only by changing tax rates, but also by changing
the tax base to enhance several investment incentives, loss provisions, and enforcement mechanisms.2 There
is a lack of basic facts about the state corporate tax structure, its evolution over recent years, and how it
impacts tax revenue and economic activity. This paper describes the state corporate tax structure, documents
how it has changed over time, and investigates the consequences of these changes for state tax collections and
economic activity.
    Our analysis proceeds in four steps. We first describe recent trends in state corporate tax structure.3 While
average state corporate tax rates have remained relatively stable, state corporate tax revenues as a share of
economic activity have declined substantially. Some of this decline is due to other factors (e.g., the rise of
pass-throughs (Cooper et al., 2016) and corporate losses (Auerbach and Poterba, 1987)), but we show that
tax base and credit changes have substantial impacts on state corporate tax collections. Tax base and credit
changes are much more frequent than tax rate changes. Contrary to the view that state tax rate changes are
often accompanied by offsetting changes in the tax base, we find that the vast majority of tax base changes
are not associated with tax rate changes. Some provisions, such as R&D credits, investment tax credits, and
loss carryforward rules, have become more favorable for corporations while others (e.g., throwback rules and
combined reporting) have lead to broader bases.
    Second, we estimate the importance of each of these tax base rules for state corporate tax collections from
1980 and 2010. We perform analysis of variance decompositions every five years and document the importance
of tax base rules, relative to tax rates, in explaining the variation in corporate tax revenue across states and
over time. Overall, tax base components account for the majority of the explained variation in tax revenues.
This result remains relatively stable throughout most of our sample, with only a slight increase in the fraction
explained by tax rates in 2010. The importance of different tax base components in explaining tax revenues has
evolved over our sample. In particular, sales apportionment weights and loss carryback provisions have waned
in importance, while franchise taxes, different depreciation rules, and interactions with federal tax policies,
such as adopting the federal tax base or allowing for the deductibility of federal taxes, have increased their
share of explained variance.
    Third, we analyze how tax base provisions affect the relationship between state tax rates and two outcomes:
state corporate tax revenue and state GDP. This analysis has two parts. We first explore the degree to which
controlling for these tax base provisions affects the relationship between tax rates and revenue and GDP. We
find that, while tax base controls explain a large portion of the variation in revenues, the relationships between
    1 Recent papers include Heider and Ljungqvist (2015), Giroud and Rauh (2015), Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016), Fajgel-

baum et al. (2015), Ohrn (2016), and Ljungqvist and Smolyansky (2014).
    2 These tax base rules are important determinants of measures of state business climate indexes (e.g., Tax Foundation

(2016)). ALEC (2014) reports that 14 states changed taxes in 2014 with many of the changes affecting both tax rates as well
as tax base determinants.
    3 The fifteen determinants of the corporate income tax structure that we analyze include tax credits, such as the investment

tax credit and the R&D tax credit. For simplicity, we refer to these credits as determinants of the tax base, along with our other
tax base measures.




                                                                2
tax rates and our outcomes of interest are not fundamentally affected by controlling for these tax base measures.
This result may be due to the lack of a temporal coincidence between changes to tax rates and determinants
of the tax base. However, even if tax base and rate changes do not occur at the same time, the tax base can
influence the effects of tax rate changes.
    We then explore the extent to which interactions between the tax base and tax rates induce heterogeneous
effects of state corporate tax rate changes. Intuitively, when the tax base is narrow, a tax rate increase
mechanically raises less revenue since taxable income is a smaller portion of overall income. In addition, tax
changes have smaller incentive effects, so the behavioral responses to tax rate increases are likely attenuated.
Empirically, we first confirm that states with narrower tax bases collect less revenue from marginal increases
in tax rates. The main finding is about tax-base-driven heterogeneity in the time series. While some states
have broadened the base (e.g., Michigan, Ohio, Illinois), we observe narrower tax bases on average over the last
thirty years. These trends in state tax bases over time have made the state corporate tax system more generous
towards corporations, and are reducing the extent to which increases in tax rates raise corporate tax revenue.
In addition, we find that including interactions between the state tax base and state tax rates also increases
the estimate of the average treatment effect (ATE) of state corporate tax rate changes on state corporate tax
revenue.4
    We conclude by investigating the implications of these results for revenue-maximizing-state-tax rates and
for the claim that state corporate tax rate cuts pay for themselves.5 We estimate a regression in which tax rates
have linear (β0 ) and quadratic (δ0 ) effects on tax revenue. The revenue-maximizing-state-corporate-tax rate
                                         β0
equals the ratio of these effects:      −2δ0 .   The estimate of the quadratic effect (δ̂0 ), which measures decreasing
returns from tax rate increases, is not substantially larger than the linear effect (β̂0 ). Our point estimates
imply that the tax rate that maximizes state corporate tax revenue is close to 30 percent. In Suárez Serrato
and Zidar (2016), we note that state corporate taxes may have fiscal externalities and may affect tax revenue
from sales and personal income taxes. Even when we allow for this externality by considering total state tax
revenue instead of only corporate tax revenue, our estimates imply a total-state-tax-revenue-maximizing rate
of close to 10%. Since the estimated revenue-maximizing rate is greater than the majority of state corporate
tax rates, we reject the hypothesis that tax cuts tend to pay for themselves.
    This paper contributes to three literatures. First, relative to recent work on the effects of changes in state
business tax rates on economic activity (Heider and Ljungqvist (2015), Giroud and Rauh (2015), Suárez Serrato
and Zidar (2016), Fajgelbaum et al. (2015), Ohrn (2016), and Ljungqvist and Smolyansky (2014)), we explore
how the relationships between tax rates and revenues and economic activity depend on the structure of the
corporate tax system. A contribution of this paper is the collection and description of a comprehensive set of
variables that describe the structure of the corporate tax system across all U.S. states since 1980, which we
    4 As is well known (Wooldridge, 2005; Gibbons, Suárez Serrato and Urbancic, 2014), in the presence of heterogeneous treat-

ment effects, regressions that control for the drivers of heterogeneity estimate a weighted-average of the heterogeneous treatment
effects that may not be a consistent estimate of the average treatment effect. In this context, the source of heterogeneous effects
is the tax base. We discuss treatment effect heterogeneity in Section 5.
    5 See, for instance, claims by Sam Brownback (Mclean, 2017), Thom Tillis (The News & Observer Editorial Board, 2017),

and Mitt Romney (Romney, 2010) for the cases of Kansas, North Carolina, and Massachusetts, respectively, and Rand Paul
(Kessler, 2015) for a similar claim at the federal level.



                                                                3
hope will aid future researchers in this literature. In a contemporaneous contribution, Bartik (2017) simulates
the tax consequences of locating a new plant in 32 states and 45 industries that cover roughly 90 percent of
U.S. economic activity since 1990. These simulations are highly detailed and capture complex interactions
between several rules. We view this paper as highly complementary to ours, which takes a reduced-form
empirical approach. Specifically, we do not conduct similar simulations at the plant level, but do variance
decompositions of observed state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP to understand the quantitative
importance of different base provisions for state tax revenue. Bartik (2017) also documents several facts about
changes in incentives and finds that business incentives are large, vary substantially across states, and have
become increasingly generous. Consistent with these results, we document substantial variation across states
and a general narrowing of the base on average in the full panel of 50 states since 1980.
    Second, this paper is also related to a set of papers that explore whether the tax base affects the relationship
between corporate tax rates and corporate income tax revenues. In particular, Clausing (2007), Devereux
(2007), and Kawano and Slemrod (2015) study this relationship across 29 OECD member countries, and
Dahlby and Ferede (2012) perform a similar analysis across Canadian provinces. We follow Kawano and
Slemrod (2015) by collecting a comprehensive set of variables that describe the breadth of the tax base and by
controlling for this tax base vector in our estimations. In contrast to Kawano and Slemrod (2015), who focus
on the international corporate tax structure, we find that state tax rate changes are not often offset by base
and credit changes.
    Finally, we find that the relationship between state tax rates and economic activity depends on the structure
of the tax base. This point is related to work by Kopczuk (2005), who finds that the elasticity of reported
taxable income for individuals depends on the availability of deductions. In our setting, this dependence on the
tax base is important for revenue forecasts and assessments of the incidence and efficiency of state corporate
taxation.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 describes the dataset of tax base determinants, and Section 2
describes trends in the structure of the state corporate tax system. Section 3 performs the variance decompo-
sition analysis, and Section 4 explores the effects of controlling for tax base determinants on various outcomes
of economic interest. Section 5 explores tax-base-driven treatment effect heterogeneity across states and over
time, Section 6 analyzes the revenue-maximizing-tax rate, and Section 7 concludes with a discussion of policy
implications.



1     Measuring the State Corporate Tax Structure
We use fifteen measures of the corporate tax base for the main analysis in the paper. Details on each of
the variables, sources, and coverage are available in Appendix A.6 The following variables comprise our state-
year panel dataset of tax base and credit components: an indicator of having throwback rules, an indicator of
    6 Most of the data used in this paper were digitized from a variety of sources including CCH State Tax Handbook (1980-

2010) and CSG Book of the State (1976-2011), but we also rely on data collected and generously provided by Chirinko and Wil-
son (2008), Wilson (2009), and Bernthal et al. (2012). Unless otherwise indicated, we exclude the District of Columbia from the
analysis.



                                                               4
having combined reporting rules, investment tax credit rates, research and development (R&D) tax credit rates,
an indicator for whether the R&D tax credit applies to an incremental base that is a moving average of past
expenditures, an indicator for whether the R&D tax credit applies to an incremental base that is fixed on a level
of past expenditures, the number of years for loss carryback, number of years for loss carryforward, an indicator
for franchise taxes, an indicator for federal income tax deductibility, an indicator for federal income tax base as
the state tax base, an indicator for follows federal accelerated depreciation, an indicator for follows accelerated
cost recovery system (MACRS) depreciation, an indicator for federal bonus depreciation, and corporate tax
apportionment weights.
    Most of the variables are indicators of whether a state allows a particular policy. Throwback and combined
reporting rules come from Bernthal et al. (2012) and describe whether a state requires a unitary business to
submit combined reporting and, in the case of throwback rules, whether a state eliminates “nowhere income”
that would be untaxed by either the state with the corporation’s nexus or the state in which the relevant sales
were being made.
    Data on state investment tax credits and R&D tax credits come from Chirinko and Wilson (2008), and
Wilson (2009) provides the rate of each of these credits. For the R&D credit, we use the statutory credit
rate adjusted for recapture and type of credit. States vary in how they implement R&D tax credits. States
determine whether the R&D tax credit applies to all qualified expenditures, or whether the base is incremental
based on previous expenditures. In addition, the basis of previous expenditures may be fixed in time or may
be a moving average of recent activity. We control for two indicators for whether the base is incremental and
fixed, or whether it is incremental and based on a moving average.
    Loss rules specify the number of years that a corporation may carry back net operating loss prior to the
loss as well as the number of years a corporation may carry forward any excess loss following the loss year. The
depreciation indicators describe whether a state conforms to federal depreciation rules and adopts federal bonus
depreciation policies that accelerate investment incentives (see Zwick and Mahon (2017) for policy details).
Finally, we use apportionment weights for payroll, property, and sales that were digitized from CSG Book of
the State (1976-2011). These weights determine the share of national profits of multi-state firms that is taxable
in a given state (see section IV.B of Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) for policy details on apportionment).
    In addition to our data on tax base measures, we use a few other data sources in the analysis. We use
statutory state corporate income tax rates from CSG Book of the State (1976-2011), top statutory personal
income tax rate from NBER TAXSIM, GDP from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (1967-2016), and tax
revenue data from the U.S. Department of Commerce (1942-2012).7
    Table 1 provides summary statistics of our main base measures. In the pooled sample from 1980 to 2010,
roughly half of the states had throwback rules and franchise taxes. Most used federal income as the state
tax base and followed accelerated depreciation schedules (although some states stopped allowing for bonus
depreciation for budgetary reasons). Roughly a quarter of states in the pooled sample used combined reporting
    7 See Feenberg and Coutts (1993) for more details on NBER TAXSIM. In robustness analysis, we also use use annual payroll

from County Business Patterns (2010), and, for a subset of states and year, additional base controls from Bartik (2017), such as
property taxes and job creation tax credits.



                                                               5
rules, although this share has been increasing over time.8



2     Trends and Changes in the State Corporate Tax Structure
The structure of state corporate taxation varies widely across states and over time. Figure 1 shows that the
statutory corporate income tax rate varies between 0 and 12%. Five states (Nevada, South Dakota, Texas,
Washington, and Wyoming) currently have no taxes on corporate income. As of 2012, another five states
(Alaska, Illinois, Iowa, Minnesota, and Pennsylvania) had tax rates above 9%. Figure 1 shows that over the
past few decades, very modest increases in the state corporate tax rate distribution across states have been
accompanied by substantial declines in state corporate tax revenue as a share of economic activity. Panel A of
Figure 2 shows this pattern directly – average state corporate tax rates are quite stable, but the average state
corporate tax revenue as a share of GDP has declined nearly 40%. While part of this decline arises from the
shift away from the traditional corporate form (Cooper et al. (2016)), losses and other factors (Auerbach and
Poterba (1987)), part of this decline is due to changes in the state corporate tax base.9
    Table 2 describes the number of changes to each of our tax base measures. This table shows that there
are more changes categorized as tax base narrowing than broadening, which suggests that an aggregate trend
towards narrower bases is partly responsible for the patterns in Figures 1–2. Of these changes, the increase
in the number of years allowed for carrying losses forward and the increased reliance on sales as a factor for
apportionment are the most frequently reformed measures in our data.
    Table 3 compares changes in the tax base with changes in the tax rate. As the resurgent literature studying
the effects of state corporate taxes on economic activity has noted, there have been a considerable number of
changes to states’ tax rates. This table shows that states have decreased rates in 70 occasions, while increasing
rates 103 times, for a total of 173 changes. However, this considerable policy activity pales in comparison to
changes to the states’ tax bases. Table 3 shows that states have adopted changes that narrow the tax base in
283 occasions, while increasing the base 163 times, for a total of 446 tax base changes.
    A widespread belief among economists and policy analysts is that increases in tax rates have relatively small
effects on firms’ tax obligations, since legislatures often change tax rates and tax bases simultaneously.10 In
particular, if tax increases are accompanied by the narrowing of tax bases, firms’ effective tax rates will be less
susceptible to changes in the statutory rate. Panel B of Figure 2 shows for each year the number of states that
change their corporate tax rates and base provisions. Most points fall below the red 45 degree line, illustrating
that in almost all years in which states change their tax base, most of them do not change their tax rates.11
    8 Panel B in Table 1 provides summary statistics for the cross section of states in 2010 and shows that roughly half the states

had combined reporting in 2010. Appendix Table A1 provides summary stats of the additional Bartik (2017) controls for the
subset of states and years for which these data are available.
    9 Ideally, one could decompose the importance of these different channels as in Auerbach and Poterba (1987). However, the

necessary state level inputs for this exercise are not publicly available. See Bartik (2017) for a detailed industry-state level anal-
ysis of business tax incentives since 1990.
   10 This belief is supported by cross-country studies, as in Devereux and Sørensen (2006) and Kawano and Slemrod (2015). At

the subnational level, however, other authors have noted cases where the tax base is set at the federal level, while the tax rates
are set at the sub-national level (Fuest, Peichl and Siegloch, 2018).
   11 Appendix Figure A1 shows that this finding is also consistent in recent years and states that coincide with the analysis

sample in Bartik (2017).



                                                                  6
   Table 3 provides additional evidence that state tax rates and tax bases are not typically temporally related,
by showing the number of times that states changed rates and tax bases. This table shows that in most
occasions (43 out of 70) when states lowered tax rates, these changes were not accompanied by a tax base
change. Similarly, when states increased tax rates, there were relatively few occasions when states also changed
the tax base (only 9 out of 103). Conversely, Table 3 also finds that when states changed tax bases, these
changes were very seldom accompanied by changes in the tax rates (23 out of 283 for base-narrowing changes,
and 22 out of 163 for base-broadening changes).12
   Table 4 formalizes this point by presenting probit estimates of the likelihood of a coincidence in base and
rate changes. The first panel estimates the probability of a change in tax base as a function of a rate change.
This panel shows that changes in tax rates are not predictive of changes in tax bases, and that this pattern is
robust to splitting the dependent variable into base-narrowing and broadening events. Panel B estimates the
converse relation using changes in tax bases to predict changes in tax rates. In particular, when we estimate
the likelihood of a tax increase, we observe that there is no statistical relation with a state also narrowing
the tax base. We only find a modest correlation between the likelihood of a tax change and a broadening of
the base. The third column shows this result is driven by tax decreases and base broadenings. However, it is
sensitive to a few number of observations.13 These results contrast with those of Kawano and Slemrod (2015),
who estimate similar models for OECD countries and find statistically significant relations in all categories.
   We now describe trends in specific tax base and credit provisions. Figure 3 shows how tax credits, loss
rules, other base provisions and apportionment weights have evolved over time. Panel A of Figure 3 shows that
tax credits, especially R&D credits, have become much more generous. Panel B shows that loss carryforward
provisions have become more favorable, and loss carryback provisions have remained relatively stable. Figure
4 shows how the distributions of many of these provisions have tended to become more generous over the past
few decades. In 1980, research and development credits were rare. Beginning in 1990, some states introduced
credits, but the vast majority of these were small – below 5%. R&D tax credits have become more common in
the twenty-first century. Many states have increased the size of the credit; as of 2010, a large share of states
offer credits even more generous than the most generous provisions in 1990. However, the generosity of these
credits has been reduced by adoption of rules that limit R&D tax credits to incremental expenditures. The data
reveal similar patterns for the investment tax credit and loss carryforward provisions, which have on aggregate
changed with the result of narrowing the tax base.14
   Panel C of Figure 3 shows that states have continued to narrow their base by increasing the apportionment
weight on sales, and decreasing the weights on property and payroll. In 1980, the majority of states placed
less than half of the apportionment weight on sales. This share declined steadily until 2010, leaving only 12
states with sales apportionment shares below 50%. Figure 4 depicts this shift and the implications for the sales
apportioned corporate tax rate, which is the product of the statutory corporate tax rate and the sales weight.
Given the secular decline in payroll and property weights, it is not surprising that the range of this distribution
  12 Appendix  Table A3 provides more detail by describing the co-movement of tax rates and each individual tax base measure.
  13 Inparticular, the adoption of throwback rules in 2007 by a small number of states is responsible for this result. In Ap-
pendix Table A4 we show that this result is not robust to ignoring these changes.
  14 Appendix Figures A5–A19 provide additional detail behind changes in individual tax base measures by state.




                                                              7
is more compressed than the distribution of sales-apportioned corporate rate. However, it is striking that the
distribution of the sales-apportioned corporate rate is skewed to the right and has, if anything, become more
dispersed in recent years by increasing the density of states with higher sales-apportioned corporate rates.
    In contrast, other dimensions of the tax base have expanded over the past few decades. Panel D of Figure
3 shows an increasing number of states have adopted the federal definition of the state tax base for state tax
purposes. This policy choice limits the extent to which state lawmakers can tinker with the tax base, but also
puts states at risk of changes in federal policy that may have adverse effects on state tax revenues. The panel
also shows a slight increase in the number of states adopting throwback rules that limit the ability of companies
to have “nowhere income” under state apportionment rules, especially in later years. Similarly, many states
adopted combined reporting rules that strengthen the reporting requirements for unitary businesses. This panel
also shows that states have moved away from allowing federal income taxes to be deducted from state taxation.
The most notable change is the reduction in the number of states adopting bonus depreciation in the early
2000s, which is likely due in part to the substantial fiscal cost of these provisions in a period of reduced tax
revenues (Ohrn, 2016).
    The structure of the corporate tax system has been an active area for state policymakers. Contrary to
conventional wisdom, we do not find evidence of a temporal concomitance in tax rate and tax base changes.15
While some aspects of the tax base have become more generous for corporations (e.g., loss carryforward
provisions and R&D and investment tax credits), changes in other rules have broadened the tax base (e.g.
throwback and combined reporting rules). The following section explores the degree to which these changes to
states’ corporate tax systems explain changes in tax revenue.



3     Decomposing Variation in State Corporate Tax Revenue
The mapping from the state corporate tax structure to state corporate tax revenue is complex. We begin our
analysis by taking a first-order approximation of state corporate tax revenue R(τ, X) = τ × B(τ, X), which
is a function of the state corporate tax rate τ and the tax base B(τ, X), which depends on a vector of state
corporate tax base rules X. An approximation of the state corporate tax revenue function around (τ ∗ , X∗ ) is:
                                                                                
                                                                                       ∗
                                                     εR,τ      X εR,X
                                                                                  +τ dR +
                                                                                             X        dR∗
                             R(τ, X) ≈ R∗ 1 −             −                                     Xj        ,                        (1)
                                                      τ∗         j
                                                                         X j,∗         dτ    j
                                                                                                      dX j
                                          |              {z                      }
                                                      constant
   15 Appendix Table A5 presents estimates of how the probability of changes in the state corporate tax structure relates to

changes in the tax structure of neighboring states in Panel A and of similar states in Panel B. For example, from a baseline
probability of 3.1%, states are -0.1, -0.1 and 0.0 percentage points more likely to increase their state corporate tax if, in the
prior year, their neighbor increased their corporate tax rate, cut their corporate tax rate or broadened their tax base, respec-
tively. None of these effects were statistically significant. Appendix Table A6 provides analogous results using changes in the
past five years. Appendix B describes how we execute the analysis and define similar states.




                                                                     8
where X j is an element of the state corporate tax base that is indexed by j.16
    We use equation 1 as a point of departure for decomposing state corporate tax revenue into three compo-
nents: a component related to state corporate tax rates, a component related to the state corporate tax base,
and a residual component, i.e.,
                                                 Rst = α + γτst + X0st ΨBASE  +ust ,                                                   (2)
                                                                  |    {zst }
                                                                     Base Indexst

where Rst is state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP and Xst is a vector of tax base controls
described in Section 1. The residual component is α + ust .
    We can then study the variation in state corporate tax revenue shares by decomposing the variation in these
components.
                                        Var(Rst ) = Var(α + γτst + X0st ΨBASE
                                                                         st   + ust ).                                                 (3)

We estimate the share of the variance in Rst which can be explained by these independent variables overall
and then individually.
    Figure 5 presents the results.17 Panel A shows that roughly half the variation in corporate tax revenue as
a share of GDP across states and over time can be explained by the state corporate tax structure. Of this
explained variation, state corporate tax base and credits explain more of the variation than state corporate tax
rates. Panel B and C examine this result further by showing the importance of variation from specific tax base
and credit rules. The contribution to the variance from a given base provision j is Var(xjst Ψjst ), which depends
on the variance of the rule xjst and the magnitude of its relationship with corporate tax revenue as a share of
                                                                                         Var(xjst Ψjst )
GDP Ψjst . Panel B shows the overall contribution from each rule, i.e.,                 P         j    j .   The five most important
                                                                                         j Var(xst Ψst )

rule provisions are having a franchise tax (21%), sales apportionment weights (20%), using the federal income
tax as state base (17%), the deductibility of the federal income tax (16%), and throwback rules (8%).18 To
                                                                                                                         xjst −x̄jst
isolate the importance of variation in the effects of base rules Ψjst , we standardize the rules x̃jst =                    σxj        and
then regress each standardized rule on revenue as a share of GDP. Panel C shows the results. Each row shows
the point estimate of Ψ̃jst , which is the effect of a one standard deviation increase in standardized tax base
measure x̃jst . Two aspects of this figure are interesting: the direction and magnitude of each effect. First,
Panel C shows, for example, that a one standard deviation increase in standardized sales apportionment is
associated with a 30 basis point decrease in state corporate tax revenue as a share of GDP. This impact is
  16   This expression follows from the following first-order approximation:
                                       dR∗   X                dR∗             dR∗   X       dR∗    dR∗   X    dR∗
           R(τ, X) ≈ R∗ + (τ − τ ∗ )       +   (X j − X j,∗ )    j
                                                                   = R∗ − τ ∗     −   X j,∗     +τ     +   Xj    j
                                                                                                                   ,
                                        dτ   j
                                                              dX               dτ   j
                                                                                            dX      dτ   j
                                                                                                              dX

                           dR∗         dB(τ ∗ ,X∗ )      ∗                          dB(τ ∗ ,X∗ )
where R(τ ∗ , X∗ ) = R∗ , dX  j = τ
                                     ∗
                                         dX j,∗
                                                 , and dR
                                                        dτ
                                                           = B(τ ∗ , X∗ ) + τ ∗ ×   dτ
                                                                                          , and from expressing the first group
of terms as elasticities. Clausing (2007), Devereux (2007), and Kawano and Slemrod (2015) motivate their analysis with similar
derivations.
    17 Each decomposition is weighted by mean state GDP across the full period (1980-2010). Appendix Figures A2 and A3 show

a version of equation 2 and equation 3 that uses ln Rst as the outcome. Appendix Table A7 shows the results for different spec-
ifications. Appendix Table A8 shows how the base rules and their changes are correlated. See Appendix Table A2 for variance
decomposition results that take Bartik (2017) controls into account for the subset of states and years for which these controls
are available.
    18 We present further results of this variance decomposition in Table A7. For example, when we control for an interaction of

throwback rules and apportionment weights, the explanatory power of the throwback rule increases.




                                                                 9
positive and relatively large compared the overall contribution to the variance shown in Panel B. The largest
negative correlate is an indicator for having a franchise tax, which is more common among southern states and
sometimes substitutes for having any corporate tax system at all (e.g., Texas).19 Most of the base and credit
provisions listed are positively related to revenue as a share of GDP, except for federal income tax deductiblitly,
loss provisions, and depreciation provisions, which are associated with less corporate tax revenue as a share of
GDP. Overall, tax base and credit rules account for the majority of the explained variation in corporate tax
revenues as a share of GDP.
     Figure 6 shows that the explanatory power of base and credit rules has evolved over time. Specifically,
it shows the share of variation for each five-year interval from 1980-2010 that can be explained by the state
corporate tax structure in Panel A, rates versus base and credit rules in Panel B, and for each base rule in Panel
C. The upper left panel shows that the state tax policy parameters explain roughly half of the variation in state
corporate tax revenues as a share of state GDP. The upper right panel shows that a larger share of the explained
variance is accounted for by state corporate tax base rules. Sales apportionment weights and loss provisions
were quite important in the first half of the sample period. More recently, however, federal provisions (such as
adopting the federal tax base and federal bonus depreciation or allowing for the deductibility of federal taxes)
have grown in importance. Additionally, franchise taxes and loss carryforward provisions have also increased
their share of explained variance.



4       Impacts on State Tax Revenue and Economic Activity
We now analyze how taxes impact state tax revenue and economic activity. Equation 1 shows that tax base
controls should be included when estimating the effects of state taxes on state outcomes. In this section we
focus on the extent to which omitting state corporate tax base affects these estimates. We first explore an event
study approach that flexibly captures the dynamic effects of tax changes. We then summarize these results
with a more parsimonious regression specification.


4.1          Event Study Estimates

We begin with an analysis of the typical path of state outcomes preceding and following a change in the state
corporate tax structure. We use an event study specification of the form:

                                                     X                            X               X
                                                                          k               k              k
                        Yst = αs + γt +                               βk Dst +β          Dst +β         Dst + εst   (4)
                                           k∈{−4,−3,−2,0,1,2,3,4,5}               k<−4            k>5


       k
where Dst is an indicator for state s having changed the state tax rate k periods in the past, αs is a state
fixed effect, and γt is a time fixed effect. The coefficients βk provide the impact on the time path of mean
outcomes relative to the period before the tax rate change (which has been normalized to zero). Additionally,
we address imbalance issues by “binning” periods greater than 5 or less than -4, which is reflected in the β̄
    19 See   Appendix Figure A6 for a map of which states have franchise taxes.



                                                                 10
and β coefficients that are assumed to be stable within end point bins. To address serial correlation in εit , all
standard errors are clustered by state. We consider three main outcomes: state corporate tax revenue as a
share of state GDP, log state corporate tax revenue, and log state GDP.
    We fit specifications of this type on our state panel data using data from 1980 to 2010. We also consider
specifications that control for the leads and lags of key components of the tax base. Specifically, we control
for leads and lags of the six most important tax base controls in terms of variance shares of corporate tax
revenue: federal income tax treated as state base, sales apportionment weight, throwback rules, federal income
tax deductibility, loss carryforward, and franchise tax.
    Figure 7 shows the results for corporate tax cuts and corporate tax increases that exceed a 0.5 percentage
point change in the rate in absolute value on state outcomes.20 Panel A shows that corporate tax decreases
that exceed 0.5 percentage point cuts in the rate tend to reduce state corporate tax revenue as a share of state
GDP by roughly 6 percentage points cumulatively over a 5 year period. Panels B and C show the importance
of the numerator and denominator separately. Despite modestly higher economic activity, corporate tax cuts
decrease state tax revenue by roughly 10%. The increases in state GDP are imprecise and not statistically
different than zero, though the point estimate is roughly 2%. Controlling for the tax base does not alter these
general patterns. Panels D, E, and F show that tax increases have symmetric impacts, though pre-trends are
a bit more noticeable prior to state corporate tax increases. Specifically, the event studies in D and E show
that tax revenues were also higher preceding the tax increase events by roughly a similar magnitude, so it is
not clear that corporate tax revenues actually increase following tax increases. We view these event studies as
describing the typical evolution of outcomes before and after tax changes. Since these tax changes potentially
include some endogenous changes that are intended to address current (or expected) economic conditions, these
impacts are descriptive and not causal.21 Overall, these point estimates of the effect of state corporate tax
changes are imprecise, but the key finding for our purposes is that they do not depend strongly on base controls
on average.


4.2     Regression Estimates

We summarize these relationships by estimating equation 2 with state and year fixed effects, i.e.,


                                         Rst = αs + φt + γτst + X0st ΨBASE
                                                                      st   + ust ,
   20 We focus on the impacts of non-trivial changes in state corporate tax rates and present analogous results for all state

changes in Appendix Figure A23. The threshold of 0.5 percentage points includes roughly half the state corporate tax changes
(see Appendix Figure A24 for a histogram). A corporate tax cut that exceeds 0.5 percentage points amounts to roughly a one
percentage point cut in state corporate tax rate on average. On average, a corporate tax increase that exceeds 0.5 percentage
points corresponds to a 1.5 percentage point increase in the state corporate tax rate. Controlling for leads and lags of the other
tax base controls (in addition to the ones in our baseline specification) results in similar but slightly noisier estimates as shown
in Appendix Figure A26.
   21 For example, macroeconomic shocks might induce changes in state corporate tax systems. Appendix Figure A25 shows

analogous results to Figure 7 for the subset of state corporate tax changes that Giroud and Rauh (2015) classify as exogenous.




                                                                 11
This specification increases statistical precision relative to the event study equation 4 by combining the periods
before and after tax changes and by imposing symmetry in the effects of tax increases and decreases.22 Column
(1) of Table 5 shows results when we omit tax base controls. This estimate implies that increasing the state
corporate tax rate by 1 percentage point leads to an increase in corporate tax revenues relative to GDP of
1.8 basis points. Relative to the average value of Rst of 35 basis points, a 1 percentage point increase in τ
represents a (1.8/35=) 5% increase in Rst .
    Column (2) of Table 5 shows that including controls for the tax base does not affect this estimate, which
reinforces the results from the event studies in Figure 7. However, including these controls increases the
precision of the estimate. As we discussed in Section 3, these controls have large explanatory power on the
revenue-to-GDP ratio. The coefficients on the tax base controls have a similar interpretation as those in Figure
5. For instance, some controls that narrow the base — including the R&D tax credit, the investment tax
credit, and an indicator for allowing the deductibility of federal income taxes — have negative effects on Rst .
Conversely, controls that correspond to broader bases, such as throwback rules or incremental tax bases for
R&D tax credits, have positive effects on Rst . Having a franchise tax also negatively impacts Rst , as states
with a franchise tax often use it as an alternative to a tax on corporate income.


4.2.1    Base Index

We can use these estimates to construct a composite measure of the tax base. We define an index of the
                                                        x̃jst Ψ̃jst
                                                P
                                                    j∈J
breadth of the tax base: Base Indexst =               σ B             , where J is the set of all 15 base and credit controls, and
where we normalize this index to have unit standard deviation. A regression that replaces the base controls
with the Base Index recovers σ B as a regression coefficient. We report this estimate in the bottom of Column
(2), which is statistically significant at the 1-percent level, and implies that increasing the Base Index by 1
standard deviation leads to an increase in Rst of 30 basis points.


4.2.2    Separating Effects on Revenue and GDP

Taxes may affect the revenue-to-GDP ratio by increasing revenues or by decreasing GDP. We estimate the
effects on the numerator and denominator separately. To facilitate comparisons across states and across time, we
present estimates of the effects on log state corporate tax revenue and on log state GDP. For these specifications
we report the effect of the log keep rate, i.e., ln(1 − τ ).23 Columns (3) and (5) of Table 5 show that an increase
in the log keep rate reduces revenue and increases GDP. Columns (4) and (6) further show that controlling
for the tax base does not have large effects on these estimates. However, some tax base controls affect these
outcomes even when the effect on Rst is not statistically significant. For instance, states with a franchise tax
and states that allow for the deductibility of federal income taxes have both lower revenues and lower GDP.24
   22 In these estimations we weight observations by the mean GDP in the state over our sample, and the standard errors allow

for arbitrary correlation between observations from a given state. We scale the revenue-to-GDP variable so that coefficients can
be interpreted in terms of basis points.
   23 We use ln(1 − τ ) because these expressions are in log form and the keep rate formulation avoids taking logs of zeros for

states that have no state corporate tax.
   24 It may also be the case that tax base controls have dynamic effects on these outcomes. A full discussion of the effects of

each base control is beyond the scope of this paper. Nonetheless, Appendix Figures A30-A44 present results of event studies



                                                                       12
5     Heterogeneous Effects of Tax Rate Changes
This section relaxes the assumption of homogeneous treatment effects of τ . We show that tax base interactions
with the tax rate can lead to heterogeneous effects across time and states, and that omitting these interactions
leads to biased estimates of the average treatment effect of state corporate tax rate changes.
    Changes in state corporate tax rates may have differential effects on tax revenue and economic activity
depending on the breadth of the tax base. Intuitively, a tax increase should raise less revenue whenever the
tax base is relatively narrow. This intuition holds (1) for mechanical effects, since narrow bases by definition
tax a smaller share of profits; (2) for reporting responses, since firms in states with narrow bases may respond
by adopting new deduction strategies; and (3) for behavioral responses, since firms are likely to respond less to
a tax increase whenever the tax affects a smaller share of their profits.25 As a hypothetical example, suppose
that California and New York both increase their state corporate tax rates, but suppose further that California
has a much more lenient treatment of loss carryforward provisions. Firms in California with past losses will
face a smaller increase in their effective tax liability as firms in New York, since the tax base in California is
narrower. Any behavioral response by firms that depends on current rates, such as investment, employment,
or relocation, will therefore be more muted in California than in New York. While this example only mentions
loss carryforward provisions, the treatment of other aspects of the tax base, such as depreciation allowances or
investment tax credits, may also modulate the degree to which tax changes affect tax revenue.


5.1     Econometric Intuition

When the effect of a state corporate tax rate change depends on the tax base, estimates that do not account for
tax-base-driven heterogeneity can lead to bias in average treatment effects. The intuition for this bias follows
directly from the Omitted Variable Bias (OVB) formula. For simplicity, consider the case in which there are
two types of states with narrow and broad bases, and that the effects of tax changes depend on the tax base.
The long regression is:


                      Rst = α + β1 τst + β2 τst × I{Narrow Base}st + δI{Narrow Base}st + ust .


If we assume that the effect of a tax rate change in broad-base states (β1 ) is greater than in narrow-base states
(β1 + β2 ), we might worry that a short regression that omits the interaction term τst × I{Narrow Base}st will
yield a biased estimate of the average effect across states, i.e., β1 + β2 Pr(Narrow Base). The OVB formula
shows that the short regression estimate will be biased:26

                         Cov(τst , τst × I{Narrow Base}st )                             Var(τst |Narrow Base)
    E[b1 ] = β1 + β2 ×                                      = β1 + β2 Pr(Narrow Base) ×                       .
                                       Var(τst )                                              Var(τst )
around changes in the tax base controls. From these graphs, the most interesting case is the adoption of incremental tax base
for R&D tax credits, which led to tax increases in future years by limiting the value of R&D tax credits.
   25 Indeed, our derivation above implies that the marginal effect of taxes will depend on the base through both mechanical and
                                                  dB(τ,X)
behavioral effects of taxes: dR
                             dτ
                                = B(τ, X) + τ ×      dτ
                                                          .
   26 Where the short regression is given by: R
                                                st = a + b1 τst + dI{Narrow Base}st + ust .




                                                              13
The sign and magnitude of the bias is governed by two forces: (1) heterogeneous effects due to the tax base
interactions (i.e., β2 ≷ 0) and (2) the covariance between the interaction term and τ . First, the sign and
magnitude of the effect of tax base provision β2 depends on the base rule. For base-narrowing provisions, we
expect β2 < 0. Second, the term β2 is scaled by the covariance between the tax rate and the interaction. In
contrast to the average treatment effect, which scales β2 by the fraction of the population with a narrow base,
the short regression scales β2 by a different term.27 In the case of indicator variables, this scaling term is the
conditional variance of the state corporate tax rate in narrow-base states.
    If β2 < 0 and narrow-base states change taxes more frequently (i.e.,Var(τst |Narrow Base) > Var(τst )),
then omitting the interaction term will result in a downwardly-biased estimate of the average effect of taxes
on revenues. The general case with 15 interactions is slightly more complex, but the potential biases from not
including interactions have a similar intuition. This type of bias is well known in the econometrics literature
(e.g., Wooldridge (2005)), and has been shown to be empirically important across several fields of applied
economics (Gibbons, Suárez Serrato and Urbancic, 2014).


5.2     Estimates of Heterogeneous Effects of Tax Rate Changes

To explore tax-base-driven heterogeneity, we expand the model of equation 2 to include interaction terms
between the tax rate and the tax base controls:

                                                           15
                                                           X
                              Rst = αs + γt + β0 τst +           βj τst × x̃jst + x̃0st Ψ̃BASE
                                                                                          st   + ust ,                            (5)
                                                           j=1


where x̃j ’s are the standardized base rules, which facilitates the interpretation of β0 as the mean effect of
τ . Column (1) of Table 6 presents the results from a model that controls for the tax base but that omits
interactions (as in Column (2) of Table 5), and Column (2) includes the interactions. In contrast to the
results of Table 5, we find that including interaction terms leads to a larger average effect of the corporate
tax rate on the revenue-to-GDP ratio, with the estimate increasing from 1.6 to 2.4 basis points. This effect
is 50% larger, which is strong evidence that tax-base interactions matter and that the OLS estimator is not a
consistent estimator for the average effect across states. Relative to the mean value of Rst = 35 basis points,
a 1 percentage point increase in τ leads to a (2.4/35 =) 7% increase in the revenue-to-GDP ratio.
    For a given state with a tax base x̃st , the total effect of τ on Rst is given by:

                                                                         15
                                                                        X   βk k
                                             βR (x̃st ) = β0 + σ J             x̃  ,                                              (6)
                                                                            σ J st
                                                                        k=1
                                                                        | {z }
                                                                      Joint Interactions

                                                                                   P                    
                                                                                           15
where σ J equals the standard deviation of the linear combination                          k=1   βk x̃kst . The joint interaction term
has mean zero, since the x̃kst ’s are normalized, and a unit standard deviation since we divide by σ J .28 The
  27 Except   in knife-edge cases, these weights do not coincide with sample frequencies and the resulting weighted average is not
representative of the average effect across states.
   28 We first estimate 5 to recover β ’s. By construction, the estimate of β is not affected by this procedure. Note also that,
                                       k                                     0




                                                                 14
specification in equation 6 has two main advantages. First, the joint interaction term is a useful data-reduction
measure that captures the variation across 15 bases in a single index. Second, the statistical significance of the
the total effect βR (Xst ) for a given state depends on the covariance matrix of the individual βk terms. While
it is hard to evaluate the joint statistical importance of these interactions from individual coefficients, the joint
interaction term collapses the covariance structure and allows for a simple univariate statistical analysis.
    Column (2) in Table 6 reports the coefficient on the joint interactions. The joint interaction term is
statistically significant and shows that interactions between the tax rate and the tax base are economically
important. For instance, a 1 percentage point tax increase in a state with a joint interaction term that is two
standard deviations above the mean would increase Rst by (2.4 + 2 × 1.25 ≈) 5 basis points. Conversely, a
state with a joint interaction term that is two standard deviations below the mean would not see an increase
in revenue.29
    Columns (3)-(6) in Table 6 report the effects of ln(1−τ ) on log-GDP and log-revenue. As before, controlling
for the tax base does not have large effects on our estimates of β0 . While an increase in ln(1 − τ ) both reduces
revenue and increases GDP, we find that the effects on revenue are a larger driver of the net effect on the
revenue-to-GDP ratio. In addition, these columns also show that both state GDP and state tax revenue are
subject to statistically significant joint interactions between ln(1 − τ ) and the tax base. For the case of log-
revenue, we find that the mean effect is much larger in Column (4) than in Column (3), while the mean effect
β0 on log-GDP is less affected by introducing interactions.
    This joint interaction term can be decomposed into the individual interactions, which are presented in the
remaining rows of Table 6.30 Figure 8 further describes how each of the interaction terms contributes to the
joint interaction term for each outcome. Panel A plots the fraction of the variation in the total effect βY (x̃st )
for each outcome that is driven by each of the base controls. Each contribution in this graph is driven by
the coefficient of each interaction term, as well as by the number of tax base changes for each control. This
figure shows that the heterogeneous effects for the revenue-to-GDP ratio are driven mostly by the R&D tax
credit, the presence of a franchise tax, the allowance for federal accelerated depreciation, and the deduction of
federal taxes. Of these four policies, the franchise tax and the allowance for federal depreciation drive variation
through heterogeneous effects on corporate revenue, while the allowance for the deductibility of federal taxes
has a larger effect on GDP. For example, a 1 percentage point tax increase in a state with a franchise tax would
increase Rst by (2.4 + 0.7×1 ≈) 3.1 basis points, while an equal increase in a state without a franchise tax
would only increase Rst by (2.4 + 0.7×0 =) 2.4 basis points. Panel B splits this decomposition by five-year
intervals, and shows that the importance of the franchise tax and the deductibility of federal taxes has waned
over time, while the importance of the allowance for federal accelerated depreciation and the R&D tax credit
has grown in importance over time.
without the standardization of the joint interaction term, we would obtain a coefficient of one on this variable.
   29 These results are robust to including lagged values of the the tax rate, the tax base, and the joint interactions. Table A10

shows that controlling for 1-5 lags of any of these variables does not affect the total cumulative mean effect of tax rates on rev-
enues. See the note to Table A10 for more detail.
   30 We expect interaction terms to have a positive coefficient whenever they rules broaden the base. Conversely, we expect

negative coefficients for rules that narrow the base. In Appendix A.2, we list these predictions for each interaction term.




                                                                 15
5.3      Tax Base Trends and Implications for the Revenue Responses to Rate Changes

We now evaluate how βY (x̃st ) varies across states and over time due to changes in the state corporate tax base
x̃st . Figure 9 plots the average value of βY (x̃st ) in a given year t, and shows that changes in tax bases between
1980 and 2000 diminished the effect of taxes on revenue. Consistent with the descriptive evidence in favor of
narrowing tax bases in Section 2, this figure shows that tax cuts lead to smaller reductions in 2000 than 1980.
This figure also shows that this pattern is slightly reversed during the 2000’s. Two trends that we observe
during this time are the adoption of combined reporting, which tightens the reporting requirements for unitary
businesses, and of throwback rules, which limit the extent to which firms can have “nowhere income” under
the apportionment system.
     Figure 9 shows how the state average has evolved, but masks considerable heterogeneity across states.
Figure 10 plots the estimated total effect βY (x̃st ) for four selected states during our sample period. Delaware,
for example, narrowed its tax base, which is reflected by a decrease in the effect of a tax change on revenue
over time. This pattern is due to changes to the Delaware corporate tax base in the late 1990’s that led to
an increase in the number of years allowed for loss carryforward, and by the adoption of a generous R&D
tax credit. In contrast, Michigan broadened its tax base by disallowing both the MACRS depreciation rule
and federal accelerated and bonus depreciation rules. In addition, the adoption of throwback and combined
reporting rules in the late 2000’s further broadened the tax base. As a result, the second panel in Figure
10 shows that revenue became more responsive to changes in tax rates in the later years of our sample for
Michigan. Pennsylvania and Rhode Island are examples of states whose experience mirrors the reversal pattern
observed on average across states. Pennsylvania narrowed its tax base in the 1990’s by increasing the number
of years allowed for loss carryforward, as well as introducing R&D and investment tax credits. In the 2000’s, it
reversed this trend by reducing the investment tax credit and introducing throwback and combined reporting
rules. In Rhode Island, the narrowing of the base was due to the introduction of R&D and investment tax
credits, and the reversal was due to the disallowance of federal bonus depreciation.31



6      Revenue-Maximizing-Tax Rate
This section evaluates how the structure of the state corporate tax system determines the revenue-maximizing-
tax rate.
     We extend the framework in equation 1 by introducing a quadratic term that can capture the degree to
    31 Appendix Figure A47 shows the total effect for each state year, which can be compared to the base changes by state in Ap-
pendix Figures A7-A19. Appendix Figure A48 compares the estimated effect across all states in 1985 and 2005. These maps are
consistent with the trends in Figure 9, as the map in 2005 has more states with effects closer to zero. However, this average ef-
fect masks considerable heterogeneity in experiences across states. In addition to Michigan, other mid-western states including
Wisconsin, Ohio, and Illinois saw a broadening of the tax base between 1985 and 2000. In contrast, several other states includ-
ing California, Oregon, Florida, and Massachusetts saw a narrowing of the tax base, as evidenced by the diminished effects of
taxes on corporate tax revenue.




                                                               16
which tax rate increases raise progressively less revenue, or even result in revenue losses:32


                                            Rst = β0 τst + δ0 (τst )2 + αs + γt + ust .                                    (7)


A positive value of β0 indicates that introducing a small tax will increase revenue. A negative coefficient for δ0
means that the marginal effect of taxes on revenue is decreasing in τ .33 If δ0 < 0, the revenue-maximizing-tax
rate is given by:
                                                                       β0
                                                               τ∗ =        .
                                                                      −2δ0

   Panel A of Table 7 presents estimates of this regression. Columns (1) and (2) present specifications with
and without state fixed effects. These columns show positive estimates for β0 , but the inclusion of state fixed
effects reduces the precision of the estimate for β0 . The interpretation of a positive value for δ0 is that these
regressions do not detect decreasing returns of increasing taxes, which may be due to the relatively low tax
rates observed in the data. Since the implied relationship between tax rates and corporate tax revenues is
convex, we cannot identify a revenue-maximizing-tax rate using these estimates of β0 and δ0 .
   As in the previous section, we are interested in the possibility that the responsiveness to taxes, and the
implied revenue-maximizing-tax rate, depend on the breadth of the tax base. We explore this possibility by
allowing the linear and quadratic effects of taxes to depend on the Base Indexst defined in Section 4.2.1. This
measure is mean-zero by construction. A higher value of the Base Indexst means that the tax base is broader
in the sense that the tax base controls are associated with a higher revenue-to-GDP ratio.
   Armed with this measure, we estimate the regression:


                      Rst    = β1 τst + β2 τst × Base Indexst + δ1 (τst )2 + δ2 (τst )2 × Base Indexst                     (8)

                             + αs + γt + θBase Indexst + ust .


The revenue-maximizing-tax rate now depends on the base index:

                                                                  β1 + β2 × Base Indexst
                                      τ ∗ (Base Indexst ) =                                  .
                                                                 −2(δ1 + δ2 × Base Indexst )

Column (3), which includes the Base Indexst as a control, still yields a positive estimate of δ0 . Column
(4), however, which includes state fixed effects, results in a negative value of δ0 , and implies a value of τ ∗
of 31%. Column (5), which is our preferred specification, further interacts the Base Indexst and the tax
rate. This specification also detects a negative but statistically insignificant coefficient for τ 2 . Evaluating
the revenue-maximizing rate at the mean value of the base index yields a value of τ ∗ (Base Indexst = 0) of
27%. Panel A of Figure 11 plots the estimated relation between the state corporate tax rate and Rst at the
value Base Indexst = 0. We also explore the heterogeneity in τ ∗ (Base Indexst ) that is implied by variation in
  32 Clausing (2007), Devereux (2007), and Kawano and Slemrod (2015) discuss results of similar specifications using data on

OECD countries.
  33 The                                        dRst                                              dRst
           marginal effect of τ on revenue is    dτ
                                                       = β0 + 2δ0 × τ . For small taxes we have    dτ τ =0
                                                                                                             = β0 > 0.




                                                                     17
Base Indexst . Panel B of Figure 11 plots the cumulative distribution function of the estimated τ ∗ (Base Indexst )
for every state-year in our data. The average revenue-maximizing rate is greater than 45% and the minimum
value is greater than any corporate tax rate we observe in the data.34
    Changes in corporate tax rates affect local economic activity and other forms of tax revenue. Indeed, in
Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) we show that changes to state corporate tax rates affect the location decisions
of firms and workers. These decisions affect the demand and supply of labor, which influences local population
and income. As a result, state tax revenue from personal income taxes and sales taxes may also be affected
by changes in state corporate tax rates. We quantify the importance of these fiscal externalities by estimating
equations 7 and 8 on total tax revenue as a share of state GDP. Panel B of Table 7 presents estimates for
these regressions. These results are qualitatively similar to those in Panel A, in that we do not find statistically
significant decreasing returns to taxation on total tax revenue. Panel C of Figure 11 plots the estimated relation
between the corporate tax rate and the total tax revenue-to-GDP ratio at the mean value of Base Indexst = 0,
and shows that a tax rate of 9.6% maximizes total state tax revenue. Panel D of Figure 11 plots the CDF
of the estimated revenue-maximizing-tax rates and shows a much more compressed distribution that centers
around 10%. As shown in Figure 1, only a few states have ever had tax rates above 10%, and this fraction has
been declining over time.35
    Given the lack of precision in these estimates, we interpret these results as suggesting that the data do not
show strong patterns of decreasing returns from increasing taxes. At the current levels of corporate tax rates,
we can rule out the hypothesis that, for states with corporate tax rates below 10%, cutting corporate tax rates
has tended to raise corporate tax revenue.



7     Discussion of Policy Implications
This paper has established several facts detailing how state tax rates, base rules, and credits determine the
structure of the state corporate tax system. We find that changes to tax base rules and credits are more
common than changes in tax rates, and that changes in tax base rules are not enacted to temporally offset
changes to tax rates. Further, we show that changes in tax base rules and credits play a more important role
in explaining patterns in the revenue-to-GDP ratio across states than do changes in tax rates. We document
trends in individual tax base rules over time and provide evidence that, while some states have broadened their
tax bases by adopting combined reporting and throwback rules in recent years, most other measures of the tax
base point toward a narrowing of the tax base. We analyze the role that tax base rules play in the estimation
of the effects of tax rates on tax revenues and economic activity, and find that controlling for these rules does
not affect the estimated effects. Instead, we show that accounting for heterogeneous effects of tax changes that
depend on the structure of the corporate tax system is important both to obtain consistent estimates of the
   34 For many observations we do not find any evidence of decreasing returns, i.e., δ + δ × Base Index
                                                                                         1     2              st > 0, which results
in a value of τ ∗ (Base Indexst ) of 100%. This result should not be interpreted as literally suggesting that revenue will be maxi-
mized with a tax rate of 100%. Rather, this result suggests that the low values of τ in the data fail to identify a value of δ0 that
implies strong decreasing returns to increasing taxes.
   35 These results are robust to controlling for state personal income taxes and sales taxes, as shown in Appendix Table A12

and Appendix Figure A49.


                                                                18
average effect of changing taxes, and to more precisely forecast the revenue response of individual states with
different corporate tax systems.
   These findings have important implications for policy. First, while changes in tax rates receive public and
media attention, changes in state tax bases may have larger effects on revenue and may also modulate the
effects of state corporate tax rates on revenue and economic activity. For this reason, the public debate should
place relatively more attention to policy changes that affect the structure of state corporate taxation, and not
only the statutory tax rate.
   Second, given the large effects of the structure of the tax base on corporate tax revenue, state policymakers
should be careful to use these policies to accomplish particular goals. States that are able to attract businesses
for non-tax reasons may prefer to have a lower tax rate and a broader base by, for instance, adopting the
federal income tax base as their own. States wishing to increase investment may depart from this strategy by
using tax credits or generous depreciation allowances to encourage investment, but they may see substantial
declines in revenue. Finally, states wishing to attract or retain innovative businesses may craft a treatment of
loss carryforward provisions that is very favorable to new businesses. Policymakers would likely benefit from
further research outlining the relative success of these strategies.
   Third, as states structure the taxation of corporate income for their particular needs and objectives, state
policymakers should bear in mind that changes to the structure of state corporate taxation will influence the
distortionary costs of increasing the state corporate tax rate. In particular, we find that when states narrow
the tax base, they also diminish the relation between tax rates and corporate tax revenue. By making it harder
to raise tax revenue from corporations, it is also likely that state policymakers will be forced to raise revenue
from other sources including sales taxes, property taxes, or personal income taxes, or to reduce spending on
public goods.
   Future work can explore the degree to which tax base determinants affect the incidence of the state corporate
income tax by extending the framework in Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) to allow for deductions that may
affect the response of firms to tax rate changes. Intuitively, a narrower tax base lowers the benefits of a tax
cut to business owners as they only pay taxes on a smaller fraction of profits. As there is a smaller benefit
from the tax cut, firms are less likely to enter a particular location, which will also mute the effect of the tax
cut on employment, wages, and costs of living. Whether the decrease in firm entry is larger than the decrease
in the real wage and employment will determine the extent to which the incidence of a state income tax cut is
borne by workers, landowners, or firm owners. Overall, many exciting questions on the incidence and efficiency
consequences of reforms to the state corporate tax structure remain open.




                                                        19
References
ALEC. 2014. “State Tax Cut Roundup 2014 Legislative Session.” American Legislative Exchange Council.
Auerbach, Alan J., and James M. Poterba. 1987. “Why Have Corporate Tax Revenues Declined?” Tax
 Policy and the Economy, , ed. Lawrence H. Summers, 1–28. MIT Press.
Bartik, Timothy J. 2017. “A New Panel Database on Business Incentives for Economic Development Offered
 by State and Local Governments in the United States.” W.E. Upjohn Institute.
Bernthal, Jamie, Dana Gavrila, Katie Schumacher, Shane Spencer, and Katherine Sydor. 2012.
 “Single Sales-Factor Corporate Income Tax Apportionment: Evaluating the Impact in Wisconsin.” The
 Wisconsin Department of Revenue.
CCH State Tax Handbook. 1980-2010. State Tax Handbook 1980-2010. CCH Incorporated State Tax Hand-
 book, Toolkit Media Group.
Chang, Andrew. 2014. “Tax policy endogeneity: Evidence from R&D tax credits.” FRB Finance and Eco-
 nomics Discussion Series.
Chirinko, Robert S., and Daniel J. Wilson. 2008. “State Investment Tax Incentives: A Zero-Sum Game?”
 Journal of Public Economics, 92(12): 2362–2384.
Clausing, Kimberly A. 2007. “Corporate tax revenues in OECD countries.” International Tax and Public
  Finance, 14(2): 115–133.
Cooper, Michael, John McClelland, James Pearce, Richard Prisinzano, Joseph Sullivan, Danny
 Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick. 2016. “Business in the United States: Who Owns It, and How
 Much Tax Do They Pay?” Tax Policy and the Economy, 30(1): 91–128.
County Business Patterns. 2010. Accessed December 13, 2017.
CSG Book of the State. 1976-2011. Book of the States. Council of State Governments.
Dahlby, Bev, and Ergete Ferede. 2012. “The effects of tax rate changes on tax bases and the marginal cost
 of public funds for Canadian provincial governments.” International Tax and Public Finance, 19(6): 844–883.
Devereux, Michael. 2007. “Developments in the Taxation of Corporate Profit in the OECD Since 1965:
 Rates, Bases, and Revenues.” Oxford University Centre of Business Taxation Working Paper No. 07/04.
Devereux, Michael P., and Peter Birch Sørensen. 2006. “The Corporate Income Tax: International
 Trends and Options for Fundamental Reform.” European Economy European Commission Economic Papers.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Owen M. Zidar. 2015.
  “State Taxes and Spatial Misallocation.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21760.
Feenberg, Daniel, and Elisabeth Coutts. 1993. “An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model.” Journal of
  Policy Analysis and Management, 12(1): 89–194.
Fuest, Clemens, Andreas Peichl, and Sebastian Siegloch. 2018. “Do Higher Corporate Taxes Reduce
  Wages? Micro Evidence from Germany.” American Economic Review, 108(2): 393–418.
Gibbons, Charles E., Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Michael B. Urbancic. 2014. “Broken or Fixed
 Effects?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 20342.

Giroud, Xavier, and Joshua Rauh. 2015. “State Taxation and the Reallocation of Business Activity:
 Evidence from Establishment-Level Data.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21534.
Heider, Florian, and Alexander Ljungqvist. 2015. “As Certain as Debt and Taxes: Estimating the Tax
 Sensitivity of Leverage from Exogenous State Tax Changes.” Journal of Financial Economics, 118(3): 684–
 712.



                                                    20
Holmes, Thomas J. 1998. “The Effect of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing: Evidence from
 State Borders.” Journal of Political Economy, 106(4): 667–705.
Kawano, Laura, and Joel Slemrod. 2015. “How do corporate tax bases change when corporate tax rates
 change? With implications for the tax rate elasticity of corporate tax revenues.” International Tax and
 Public Finance, 23(3): 401–433.
Kessler, Glenn. 2015. “Rand Pauls claim that Reagans tax cuts produced more revenue and tens of millions
 of jobs.” Washington Post, April 10, 2015.
Kopczuk, Wojciech. 2005. “Tax bases, tax rates and the elasticity of reported income.” Journal of Public
 Economics, 89(11–12): 2093 – 2119.

Ljungqvist, Alexander, and Michael Smolyansky. 2014. “To Cut or Not to Cut? On the Impact of
  Corporate Taxes on Employment and Income.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
  20753.
Mclean, Jim. 2017. “Trump’s Tax Plan Has Echoes Of The Kansas Tax Cut Experiment.” NPR, September
 30, 2017.
Ohrn, Eric. 2016. “Investment and Employment Responses to State Adoption of Federal Accelerated Depre-
 ciation Policies.” Grinnell College.
Rao, Nirupama. 2016. “Do tax credits stimulate R&D spending? The effect of the R&D tax credit in its
 first decade.” Journal of Public Economics, 140: 1–12.
Romney, Mitt. 2010. “Romney: Tax deal, bad deal.” USA Today, December 14, 2010.
Suárez Serrato, Juan Carlos, and Owen Zidar. 2016. “Who Benefits from State Corporate Tax Cuts? A
  Local Labor Markets Approach with Heterogeneous Firms.” American Economic Review, 106(9): 2582–2624.
Tax Foundation. 2016. “2015 State Business Tax Climate Index.”
The News & Observer Editorial Board. 2017. “NC is no model for US tax cuts.” The News & Observer,
 September 28, 2017.
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1967-2016. “Annual Gross Domestic Product (GDP) by State.” Ac-
 cessed January 21, 2018.
U.S. Department of Commerce. 1942-2012. “Annual Survey of State Government Tax Collections.” Ac-
 cessed March 20, 2013.
Wilson, Daniel. 2005. “The rise and spread of state R&D tax credits.” FRBSF Economic Letter, 26.
Wilson, Daniel J. 2009. “Beggar Thy Neighbor? The In-State, Out-of-State, and Aggregate Effects of R&D
 Tax Credits.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(2): 431–436.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2005. “Fixed-Effects and Related Estimators for Correlated Random-Coefficient
 and Treatment-Effect Panel Data Models.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(2): 385–390.
Zwick, Eric, and James Mahon. 2017. “Tax Policy and Heterogeneous Investment Behavior.” American
 Economic Review, 107(1): 217–48.




                                                  21
  Figure 1: Densities of State Corporate Tax Rate and State Corporate Revenue-to-GDP Ratio by Decade

                                                    A. State Corporate Tax Rate


                                20
                                15
               Kernel Density
                                10
                                5
                                0




                                     0              .03                   .06                 .09               .12
                                                           State Corporate Tax Rate
                                                                   1980                   1990
                                                                   2000                   2010

                                         B. State Corporate Tax Revenue as a Share of GDP
                                3
               Kernel Density
                                2
                                1
                                0




                                     0    .1   .2     .3      .4     .5         .6   .7      .8     .9   1      1.1
                                               Corporate Tax Revenue as a Share of GDP
                                                                   1980                   1990
                                                                   2000                   2010


Notes: This figure presents kernel density functions for the state corporate tax rate and the state revenue-to-GDP ratio by decade.
See Section 1 for details on data sources.



                                                                     22
                                                                     Figure 2: Changes in State Corporate Tax Structure



                                                                                            A. Time Series




                                            .07




                                                                                                                                          .5
                         .01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06




                                                                                                                                                                      .45
                           Mean State Corporate Tax Rate




                                                                                                                                            State Corporate Tax Rev/GDP
                                                                                                                                          .25
                                                                                                                                          .2      .3     .35     .4
                                            0




                                                                1980                   1990                  2000               2010
                                                                                                     Year

                                                                                Mean Corp. Rate                 Mean Corp. Rev/GDP




                                                                                    B. Frequency of Changes
                                            40
                         # States Changing Corporate Tax Rate
                                          20          30




                                                                                              1983
                                                                                              1987
                              10




                                                                                            1991
                                                                                                                               1985
                                                                                              2000
                                                                                                1994
                                                                                          2008               2009       1999   19811989
                                                                            2012 20011988           2011                  2002
                                                                            2005    1990    2010
                                                                                              1997
                                                                                                2003
                                                                            1984      1992 1993             19822007    1995
                                                                                                                        1998
                                                                                1996    2004
                                            0




                                                                     1980                 19862006

                                                                 0                   10                 20               30                               40
                                                                                              # States Changing Base




Notes: This figure shows annual trends in both the mean state corporate tax rate across states and state corporate tax revenue
as a share of state GDP in Panel A. Panel B shows by year the number of states that changed rates and tax base provisions. It
illustrates that these pairs are not on a 45 degree line, so most years in which many states change base provisions are not years in
which many states also change rates. See Section 1 for details on data sources.




                                                                                                     23
                                                                                             Figure 3: Base Rules and Credits Over Time
                                                                         A. Tax Credits                                                                                              B. Loss Rules




                                          .06




                                                                                                                                                15
                                        .04




                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                              Average Years
                             Average Rate
                           .02




                                                                                                                             5
                                          0




                                                                                                                                                0
                                                          1980            1990                2000                    2010                                      1980                 1990                  2000                    2010
                                                                                      Year                                                                                                         Year

                                                                        R&D Credit           Investment Credit                                                                   Loss Carryforward            Loss Carryback


                                                                 C. Apportionment Weights                                                                              D. Misc. State Tax Base Provisions
24




                                                                                                                                                           50
                                          .8




                                                                                                                              Number of States with Tax Rule
                                                                                                                                                     40
                           Average Apportionment Weight
                                                  .6




                                                                                                                                        20    30
                                        .4




                                                                                                                             0   10
                              .2




                                                                                                                                                                1980                 1990                  2000                    2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Year

                                                                                                                                                                          Throwback Rule                  Combined Reporting Rule
                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                          Fed Inc Tax Deductible          Fed Inc as State Tax Base
                                                          1980            1990                2000                    2010                                                ACRS Depreciation               Fed Accelerated Depreciation
                                                                                      Year
                                                                                                                                                                          Fed Bonus Depreciation          Franchise Tax
                                                                  Payroll Apportionment         Sales Apportionment                                                       R&D Base is Moving Avg          R&D Base is Fixed


     Notes: This figure shows state averages of various base rules between 1980 and 2010. Panels A, B, and C use the mean tax credit rate, loss carry allowance, and apportionment
     weights across all states, respectively. The value is weighted by mean state GDP across the sample period. Panel C does not include property apportionment weights because they
     are almost always the same as payroll weights. Panel D shows annual state averages for the following indicator variables: throwback rule, combined reporting rule, federal income
     tax deductibility, federal bonus depreciation, federal income as state tax base, federal accelerated depreciation, ACRS depreciation, franchise tax, base of incremental R&D credit is
     a moving average, and base of incremental R&D credit is fixed. See Section 1 for details on data sources.
                                                                           Figure 4: Corporate Tax Base and Credit Densities By Decade




                                                                                                                                                                                100
                         25




                                                                                                     .3
                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                80
        Kernel Density




                                                                                    Kernel Density




                                                                                                                                                               Kernel Density
                                                                                                     .2
                         15




                                                                                                                                                                                60
                         10




                                                                                                                                                                                40
                                                                                                     .1




                                                                                                                                                                                20
                         5
                         0




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                0
                              0   .04       .08        .12           .16     .2                           0   4           8          12              16   20                          0   .02        .04         .06          .08   .1
                                            R&D Credit Rate                                                           Loss Carryforward Rule                                                     Investment Credit Rate
                                             1980             1990                                                        1980            1990                                                        1980             1990
                                             2000             2010                                                        2000            2010                                                        2000             2010




                                                                                                     .5
                         .5




                                                                                                                                                                                .6
                                                                                                     .4
                         .4
25



        Kernel Density




                                                                                    Kernel Density




                                                                                                                                                               Kernel Density
                                                                                                                                                                                .4
                                                                                                     .3
                         .3




                                                                                                     .2
                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                                .2
                                                                                                     .1
                         .1
                         0




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                0
                              0         1                     2              3                            0       3              6               9        12                          0   1           2           3           4     5
                                        Loss Carryback Rule                                                   Sales Apportioned Corporate Tax Rate                                        Payroll Apportioned Corporate Tax Rate
                                             1980             1990                                                        1980            1990                                                        1980             1990
                                             2000             2010                                                        2000            2010                                                        2000             2010




     Notes: This figure presents kernel density functions for various tax base rules by decade. Loss carryforward and loss carryback are measured in years allotted by the respective rule.
     See Section 1 for details on each tax base rule and data sources.
                                                                    Figure 5: Variance of State Corporate Tax Revenue as a Share of GDP
                                                                                                                                                                                     Var(xjst Ψjst )
                                               A. Variance Decomposition                                B. Share of Explained Variance by Base Rule (i.e.,                          P         j    j  )
                                                                                                                                                                                      j Var(xst Ψst )



                                                                                                             Federal Inc as State Base


                                1
                                                                                                            Federal Inc Tax Deductible
                                                                                                                      Throwback Rules
                                                                                                          Sales Apportionment Weight
                                          .8
                  % of Explained Variation


                                                                                                                    Loss Carryforward
                                                                                                                       Loss Carryback
                                .6




                                                                                                                  Combined Reporting
                                                                                                                 Investment Tax Credit
                                                                                                                       R&D Tax Credit
                       .4




                                                                                                                   ACRS Depreciation
                                                                                                      Federal Accelerated Depreciation
                                .2




                                                                                                          Federal Bonus Depreciation
                                                                                                                         Franchise Tax
                                                                                                           Incr R&D, Moving Avg Base
                                0




                                                  Rscorp/GDPs       Base vs Rate                                 Incr R&D, Fixed Base
                                                      Unexplained    Base Rules
                                                      Explained      Corporate Rate                                                      0             5              10              15              20
                                                                                                                                                           % Explained Among Base Rules



                                                                                      C. Effects of Standardized Base Rules Ψ̃jst
26




                                                                              Federal Income as State Tax Base
                                                                                       Fed Income Tax Deductible
                                                                                                Throwback Rules
                                                                                       Combined Reporting Rules
                                                                                      Sales Apportionment Weight
                                                                                               Loss Carryforward
                                                                                                 Loss Carryback
                                                                                            Investment Tax Credit
                                                                                                  R&D Tax Credit
                                                                                              ACRS Depreciation
                                                                        Allows Federal Accelerated Depreciation
                                                                                      Federal Bonus Depreciation
                                                                                                   Franchise Tax
                                                                             Incremental R&D, Moving Avg Base
                                                                                   Incremental R&D, Fixed Base
                                                                                                                    -40   -20        0       20   40
                                                                                                                                Basis Points

     Notes: This figure decomposes the variation in the corporate revenue-to-GDP ratio into corporate tax rate and tax base components. Panel A decomposes the variation in state
     corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP from 1980-2010 using equation 2. Panel B displays the contribution to base variation from each base rule. Panel C plots the effect of
     each base rule on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP from 1980-2010. We standardize each base rule prior to determining the coefficients to facilitate comparisons
     across base rules with different variances. Revenue-to-GDP ratio is measured in basis points. See Section 3 for details. The decomposition is weighted by mean state GDP across
     our sample period. See Section 1 for details on data sources.
                   Figure 6: Corporate Tax Revenue Share of GDP - Variance Decomposition by Five-Year Period

                       A. Variance Decomposition                                                                   B. Share of Explained Variance, Rate vs. Base
             100




                                                                                                                                                100
             75




                                                                                                                                                75
                                                                                                                         % Explained Variance
   Percent
             50




                                                                                                                                                50
             25




                                                                                                                                                25
             0




                                                                                                                                                0
               1980     1985                                       1990     1995    2000       2005        2010                                   1980    1985      1990        1995     2000       2005          2010

                           Explained Variance                                       Unexplained Variance                                                   Corporate Tax Rate          Corporate Tax Base Rules


                                                                                                                                                                         Var(xjst Ψjst )
                                                                  C. Share of Explained Variance by Base Rule (i.e.,                                                    P         j    j )
                                                                                                                                                                         j Var(xst Ψst )
                               % Explained Var Among Base Rules
                                                                   100
                                                                   75
                                                                   50
                                                                   25
                                                                   0




                                                                     1980          1985            1990                1995                              2000              2005           2010

                                                                                   Federal Inc as State Base                                             Federal Inc Deductible
                                                                                   Throwback Rules                                                       Sales Apportionment Wgt
                                                                                   Loss Carryforward                                                     Loss Carryback
                                                                                   Combined Reporting                                                    Investment Tax Credit
                                                                                   R&D Credit                                                            ACRS Depreciation
                                                                                   Federal Accelerated Dep                                               Federal Bonus Dep
                                                                                   Franchise Tax                                                         Incr R&D, Moving Avg Base
                                                                                   Incr R&D, Fixed Base



Notes: This figure replicates Figure 5 over five-year periods between 1980 and 2010. Panel A decomposes the variation in state
corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP from 1980-2010 using equation 3. Panel B displays the contribution to base
variation from each base rule. Panel C plots the effect of each base rule on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP
from 1980-2010. See Section 3 for details. The decomposition is weighted by mean state GDP across our sample period. See
Section 1 for details on data sources.




                                                                                                                  27
                                                                          Figure 7: Event Analysis: Impacts on State Corporate Tax Revenue and GDP

                                                         A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                    B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                              C. Log State GDP




                                                                                                                20
                                           .1




                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                10
                                                   .05




                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                 Percentage Points




                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                             Percent




                                                                                                                                                                           Percent
                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                           -10
                                -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                     -5
                                                                                                                -20
                                           -.1




                                                                                                                -30




                                                                                                                                                                                     -10
                                                         -4   -3    -2   -1   0    1    2     3    4   5                -4   -3    -2   -1   0    1    2     3    4    5                   -4   -3    -2   -1   0    1    2     3    4   5
                                                              Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate                         Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate                             Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate


                                                         D. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                    E. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                              F. Log State GDP




                                                                                                                30
                                           .15




                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                20
                                               .1
                                Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                  10
28




                                                                                                            Percent




                                                                                                                                                                           Percent
                                     .05




                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                     -5
                                           0




                                                                                                                -10
                                           -.05




                                                                                                                -20




                                                                                                                                                                                     -10
                                                         -4   -3   -2   -1    0     1    2    3    4   5                -4    -3   -2   -1    0     1    2    3    4   5                   -4   -3   -2   -1    0     1    2    3    4   5
                                                              Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate                          Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate                            Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate




                                                                                                       No Tax Base Controls                                                                95% CI
                                                                                                       Tax Base Controls                                                                   95% CI


     Notes: This figure shows the effect of changes in the state corporate rate of at least 0.5pp on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP, log corporate tax revenue, and
     log state GDP, respectively. The full navy line indicates a specification without additional controls. The dashed red line plots the coefficients from a specification that additionally
     controls for the following tax base rules: federal income tax treated as state base, sales apportionment weight, throwback rules, federal income tax deductibility, loss carryforward,
     and franchise tax. Standard errors are clustered by state. The estimating equation is equation 4. Appendix Figure A23 replicates this figure for changes in the state corporate rate
     of any magnitude. Appendix Figure A25 shows analogous results for the subset of state corporate tax changes that Giroud and Rauh (2015) classify as exogenous. Appendix Figure
     A26 compares the estimated impacts when all tax base controls are included, relative to the aforementioned rules. See Section 1 for details on data sources.
                                 Figure 8: Decomposing the Total Effects of the Corporate Tax Rate

                                            A. Full Decomposition of Total Effects

                           ACRS Depreciation
                    Allow Fed Accelerated Dep
                          Combined Reporting
                    Fed Income Tax Deductible
                 Fed Income as State Tax Base
                   Federal Bonus Depreciation
                                 Franchise Tax
                             Investment Credit
                               Loss Carryback
                            Loss Carryforward
                        R&D Incremental Fixed
                     R&D Incremental Mov Avg
                                R&D Tax Credit
                   Sales Apportionment Weight
                               Throwback Rule

                                                  0            .1              .2               .3               .4
                                                                            % Explained

                                                                Rev/GDP            Corp Rev            GDP




                      B. Decomposition of Total Effect on Revenue-to-GDP over Time
                            1  .75
                     % Explained
                   .25   .5 0




                                1980       1985        1990          1995        2000         2005           2010

                                           Federal Inc as State Base            Federal Inc Deductible
                                           Throwback Rules                      Sales Apportionment Wgt
                                           Loss Carryforward                    Loss Carryback
                                           Combined Reporting                   Investment Tax Credit
                                           R&D Credit                           ACRS Depreciation
                                           Federal Accelerated Dep              Federal Bonus Dep
                                           Franchise Tax                        Incr R&D, Moving Avg Base
                                           Incr R&D, Fixed Base




Notes: This figure decomposes the variance in the estimated total effects of τ on the revenue-to-GDP ratio, and of ln(1 − τ )
on log-GDP and log-revenue. The total effect varies across states and years since it accounts for interactions between the state
corporate tax rate and base controls. This figure describes the relative importance of different tax base controls in explaining the
heterogeneity in the total effect that is driven by interactions with tax base controls. By construction, the variance in the model
is equal to the total variance. The bars in Panel A report the fraction of the variance that is due to changes in each of the tax
base parameters for each of the the three estimated total effects. Panel B focuses on the revenue-to-GDP ratio and describes how
the importance of different tax base controls has evolved over time. The total effect is defined in equation 6 and estimates of the
coefficients for the total effect are reported in Column (3) of Table 6; see Section 5 for more details.



                                                                    29
              Figure 9: Average Estimated Total Effect of τ on the Revenue-to-GDP Ratio by Year




                                           3
                          Estimated Average Effect by Year
                                  2        1.5   2.5




                                                             1980   1990           2000                2010
                                                                            Year




Notes: This figure plots the average total effect of τ on the revenue-to-GDP ratio by year. The total effect is presented in terms
of basis points of the revenue-to-GDP ratio. The effect varies across states and years since it accounts for interactions between the
state corporate tax rate and base controls. In general, the effect is smaller when states adopt policies that narrow the tax base.
This figure shows that, on average, the total effect declined in magnitude as the tax base narrowed between 1980 and 2000, and
that it increased during the last decade as the tax base broadened. The total effect is defined in equation 6 and estimates of the
coefficients for the total effect are reported in Column (3) of Table 6; see Section 5 for more details.




                                                                           30
      Figure 10: Estimated Total Effect of τ on the Revenue-to-GDP Ratio by Year For Selected States

                                                                  Delaware                          Michigan



                                                    6
              Effect of τ on Revenue to GDP Ratio
                                                    4
                                                    2
                                                    0




                                                                Pennsylvania                  Rhode Island
                                                    6
                                                    4
                                                    2
                                                    0




                                                        1980   1990       2000   2010 1980   1990              2000   2010

                                                                                 Year


Notes: This figure plots the estimated total effect of τ on the revenue-to-GDP ratio for selected states. The total effect is presented
in terms of basis points of the revenue-to-GDP ratio. The effect varies across states and years since it accounts for interactions
between the state corporate tax rate and base controls. These plots show that the aggregate pattern described in Figure 9 is a
result of states that have a mirror experience to the national average (such as Pennsylvania and Rhode Island), as well as of states
that have contracting (Delaware) and expanding (Michigan) bases. Appendix Figure A47 presents similar plots for the rest of the
states. The total effect is defined in equation 6 and estimates of the coefficients for the total effect are reported in Column (3) of
Table 6; see Section 5 for more details.




                                                                                 31
                                                                                  Figure 11: Estimate Revenue-Maximizing-Tax Rates
           A. Estimated Laffer Curve for State Corporate Tax Revenue                                          B. CDF of Corporate Tax Revenue Maximizing Tax Rates
                                                                                                                                                           Base-independent Rate Mean Base-dependent Rate




                           50
                                                                                                                                           1

                           40

                                                                                                                                           .8




                                                                                                                  Cumulative Probability
                   Tax Revenue/GDP
                              30




                                                                                                                                           .6
                      20




                                                                                                                                           .4
                           10




                                                                                                                                           .2



                                                                                                                                           0
                           0




                                      0   .05   .1   .15   .2    .25    .3    .35  .4   .45   .5   .55   .6                                     0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55 .6 .65 .7 .75 .8 .85 .9 .95 1
                                                                Corporate Tax Rate                                                                                        Corporate Tax Rate
32




              C. Estimated Laffer Curve for Total State Tax Revenues                                          D. CDF of Total State Tax Revenue Maximizing Tax Rates
                                                                                                                                                            Base-independent Rate Mean Base-dependent Rate
                           150




                                                                                                                                           1



                                                                                                                                           .8




                                                                                                                  Cumulative Probability
                                100
                   Tax Revenue/GDP




                                                                                                                                           .6



                                                                                                                                           .4
                   50




                                                                                                                                           .2



                                                                                                                                           0
                           0




                                      0   .05   .1   .15   .2    .25    .3    .35  .4   .45   .5   .55   .6                                     0   .02 .04 .06 .08           .1     .12 .14 .16 .18         .2   .22 .24 .26 .28
                                                                Corporate Tax Rate                                                                                                 Corporate Tax Rate



     Notes: This figure plots the implied revenue-maximizing-state-corporate-tax rates. Panel A plots the estimated relation between state corporate tax revenues and the state cor-
     porate tax rate at the mean value of the base index. Panel B plots the distribution of the estimated revenue-maximizing-tax rates as a function of the base index. These estimates
     are based on estimates coefficients from equation 8 in Table 7. Panel C and D replicate Panel A and B for total state tax revenue. See Appendix Figure A49 for a version that
     controls for state sales and top personal income tax rates. See Section 6 for details. Note that the mass of observations in Panel B at 100% corporate tax rate are cases where we
     do not find decreasing returns to taxation. We interpret these estimates as suggesting that current levels of tax rates are below revenue maximizing corporate tax rates and there-
     fore the variation in the data do not identify decreasing returns to taxation. See Section 1 for details on data sources.
                                         Table 1: Summary Statistics
            Panel A. 1980-2010 Pooled Sample
                                                             Observations                   Mean       Std. Dev.
            Corp Tax Revenue as Share of GDP (%)                  1550                       0.355       0.284
            Throwback Rules                                       1550                       0.492       0.500
            Combined Reporting                                    1550                       0.281       0.450
            Investment Tax Credit                                 1550                       1.062       2.323
            R&D Tax Credit                                        1550                       2.629       4.369
            Loss Carryback Rules                                  1550                       1.183       1.381
            Loss Carryforward Rules                               1550                      11.379       6.707
            Franchise Tax                                         1550                       0.534       0.499
            Fed Income Tax Deductible                             1550                       0.105       0.306
            Fed Income as State Tax Base                          1550                       0.814       0.389
            Fed Accelerated Depreciation                          1550                       0.851       0.356
            ACRS Depreciation                                     1550                       0.802       0.399
            Federal Bonus Depreciation                            1550                       0.692       0.462
            Sales Apportionment Weight                            1550                      51.043      23.856
            Incremental R&D Credit, Base is Fixed                 1550                       0.203       0.402
            Incremental R&D Credit, Base is Moving Average        1550                       0.097       0.296

            Panel B. 2010 Cross Section
                                                                          Observations      Mean       Std. Dev.
            Corp Tax Revenue as Share of GDP (%)                              50             0.259       0.214
            Throwback Rules                                                   50             0.480       0.505
            Combined Reporting                                                50             0.500       0.505
            Investment Tax Credit                                             50             2.120       3.280
            R&D Tax Credit                                                    50             5.695       5.608
            Loss Carryback Rules                                              50             0.700       1.055
            Loss Carryforward Rules                                           50            14.220       7.081
            Franchise Tax                                                     50             0.560       0.501
            Fed Income Tax Deductible                                         50             0.080       0.274
            Fed Income as State Tax Base                                      50             0.860       0.351
            Fed Accelerated Depreciation                                      50             0.820       0.388
            ACRS Depreciation                                                 50             0.860       0.351
            Federal Bonus Depreciation                                        50             0.380       0.490
            Sales Apportionment Weight                                        50            66.142      27.984
            Incremental R&D Credit, Base is Fixed                             50             0.400       0.495
            Incremental R&D Credit, Base is Moving Average                    50             0.160       0.370
Notes: This table provides summary statistics for state corporate tax revenue as a share of GDP and the main fifteen tax base
measures described in Section 1. Panel A provides pooled summary statistics. Data range from 1980-2010 and include all 50 states.
Panel B summarizes the tax base measures for the 2010 cross-section. Indicators for throwback rule and combined reporting equal
zero for states with no corporate income tax rate.




                                                               33
                                     Table 2: Summary of Base Changes
          Base narrowing/broadening:                       -1 +1 Total Changes                           No Change
          Sales Apportionment Weight                       92 33      125                                   1375
          Loss Carryback                                   23 42       65                                   1435
          Loss Carryforward                                85 15      100                                   1400
          Franchise Tax                                     3    3      6                                   1494
          Federal Income Tax Deductible                     2    4      6                                   1494
          Federal Income Tax as State Tax Base              0    8      8                                   1492
          Federal Accelerated Depreciation                  2    5      7                                   1493
          ACRS Depreciation                                57 14       71                                   1429
          Federal Bonus Depreciation                       18 43       61                                   1439
          Throwback                                        23 23       46                                   1454
          Combined Reporting                                2   20     22                                   1478
          Investment Credit                                34    9     43                                   1457
          R&D Credit                                       51    8     59                                   1441
          Incremental R&D Credit, Base is Moving Average 10 18         28                                   1472
          Incremental R&D Credit, Base is Fixed             2   22     24                                   1476

Notes: This table reports the number of state-year observations from 1980-2010 where there was a change in tax base and tax
rate. A change that represents a narrowing of the base is counted in the −1 column, while a year that represents a broadening of
the base is counted as +1. An increase in the rate of investment credits, R&D credits, or sales apportionment weight corresponds
to a narrowing of the base, while a decrease corresponds to a broadening. An increase in the number of years allowed for both
loss carryforward and loss carryback corresponds to a narrowing of the base, while a decrease corresponds to a broadening. For
franchise taxes, federal income tax deductibility, federal accelerated depreciation and ACRS depreciation, the rule being turned
off corresponds to a narrowing of the base, while it being turned on corresponds to a narrowing. For instance, if a state adopts
MACRS depreciation, then we say that the tax base has narrowed. For throwback rules, combined reporting, moving average base
for incremental R&D, fixed base for incremental R&D and federal income as state tax base, the rule being turned off corresponds to
a narrowing of the base, while it being turned on corresponds to a broadening. For instance, if a state adopts combined reporting,
then we say that the tax base has broadened. If that state gets rid of combined reporting, then the tax base has narrowed. See
Section 1 for details on data sources, and Appendix A for definitions of broadening and narrowing for each measure. Appendix
Table A3 provides a more detailed breakdown along with the co-movement of tax rates.




                             Table 3: Frequency of State Tax Rate and Base Changes
                       Base Change Rate Decrease No Change Rate Increase           Total
                       Narrowing           20.0           18.9           8.7       18.3
                                         (14.0)         (260.0)         (9.0)     (283.0)
                       No Change           61.4           70.9          82.5        71.2
                                         (43.0)         (976.0)        (85.0)    (1104.0)
                       Broadening          18.6           10.2           8.7       10.5
                                         (13.0)         (141.0)         (9.0)     (163.0)
                       Total              100.0          100.0         100.0       100.0
                                         (70.0)        (1377.0)       (103.0)    (1550.0)

Notes: This table reports the fraction of state-year observations that saw a simultaneous change in tax base and in tax rate.
Numbers in parenthesis report the number of state-year observations that correspond to a given cell. See Section 1 for details on
data sources, and Appendix A for definitions of broadening and narrowing for each measure. Overall, this table shows that the
majority of times when there is a change in the tax base (either a narrowing or a broadening) there is no accompanying change in
the tax rate.




                                                               34
                      Table 4: Probit Estimates of the Coincidence of Base and Rate Changes

                                                    Panel A: Base Change
                                            Any Base Change Base Broadening                  Base Narrowing
                     Rate decrease                0.1885             0.1240                      0.1827
                                                (0.2306)            (0.2662)                    (0.3165)
                     No rate change              -0.0983             -0.2728                     0.0955
                                                (0.1850)            (0.2347)                    (0.2040)


                                                Panel B: Tax Rate Change
                                            Any Tax Change      Tax Increase                  Tax Decrease
                     Base narrowed               0.0705            -0.0558                       0.1293
                                               (0.1440)           (0.1734)                      (0.1949)
                     Base broadened             0.3102*             0.1835                      0.3142*
                                               (0.1322)           (0.2187)                      (0.1310)
Notes: This table estimates the coincidence of corporate tax base and tax rate changes. Panel A reports coefficients from a
probit model estimating the probability of a change in the tax base using changes in tax rates. Panel B reports coefficients from
a probit model estimating the probability of a change in the tax rate using changes in the tax base. See Section 1 for details on
data sources and Appendix A for definitions of broadening and narrowing for each measure. Year fixed effects are included in each
panel. Standard errors are clustered by state (∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01). Overall, this table shows that tax rate changes and
tax base changes do not occur simultaneously.




                                                                 35
  Table 5: Effects of Corporate Tax Rates and Tax Base Controls on Tax Revenues and Economic Activity
                                                  (1)         (2)            (3)       (4)           (5)     (6)
                                                Revenue to GDP Ratio          Log(Revenue)             Log(GDP)
               τ                                1.776*     1.608**
                                                (1.054)     (0.763)
               ln(1 − τ )                                                   -2.318       -2.585     1.077       0.818
                                                                           (2.699)      (1.898)    (1.363)    (0.988)
               R&D Tax Credit                                 -31.171                     0.173                -0.078
                                                             (31.453)                   (0.969)               (0.274)
               Sales Apportionment Wgt                         -0.073                    -0.001               -0.001*
                                                              (0.069)                   (0.002)               (0.001)
               Loss Carryback                                  -0.357                     0.005                 0.014
                                                              (0.637)                   (0.022)               (0.012)
               Loss Carryforward                                0.034                     0.001                 0.001
                                                              (0.165)                   (0.004)               (0.002)
               Franchise Tax                                   -9.615                  -0.406**              -0.126***
                                                              (6.834)                   (0.164)               (0.043)
               Fed Income Tax Deductible                      -7.649*                 -0.336***              -0.182***
                                                              (3.847)                   (0.115)               (0.061)
               Fed Income as Tax Base                          -2.675                    -0.028                -0.036
                                                              (2.536)                   (0.095)               (0.051)
               Allow Fed Acc Dep                                6.242                     0.055                -0.007
                                                              (5.339)                   (0.132)               (0.026)
               ACRS Depreciation                               -0.698                    -0.033                -0.018
                                                              (1.312)                   (0.032)               (0.021)
               Federal Bonus Depreciation                       1.185                    -0.006                 0.031
                                                              (1.575)                   (0.052)               (0.021)
               Throwback Rules                                1.431*                      0.008                -0.022
                                                              (0.749)                   (0.045)               (0.014)
               Combined Reporting                              -0.699                    -0.016                 0.004
                                                              (1.965)                   (0.114)               (0.033)
               Investment tax credit                        -76.918***                   -1.382                 0.276
                                                             (25.973)                   (0.837)               (0.523)
               R&D Incremental Mov Avg                          2.614                    -0.013                 0.004
                                                              (2.560)                   (0.085)               (0.023)
               R&D Incremental Fixed                            1.875                     0.009                 0.052
                                                              (3.288)                   (0.113)               (0.032)
               Observations                      1,550          1,550       1,426         1,426    1,550        1,550
               Base Index                                       2.663
               (se)                                              .788

Notes: This table reports the results of regressions that estimate the effects of changes in tax rates on tax revenue and economic
activity. Each specification weights observations by the mean state GDP in our sample and includes state and year fixed effects.
The 15 base controls included in Columns (2)-(3) are described in Section 1. Details of the specification and the definition of the
joint interaction can be found in Section 5. The revenue-to-GDP ratio is measured in basis points. Standard errors are clustered
by state (∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01). Overall this table shows that, while including tax base controls does not have significant
effects on the average effect of taxes on revenues and economic activity, estimators that do not allow for heterogeneous effects of
taxes that depend on the structure of the state corporate tax system result in inconsistent estimates of the average partial effect
of taxes on revenues and economic activity.




                                                                  36
           Table 6: Effects of Corporate Tax Rate Changes on Tax Revenues and Economic Activity
                                                (1)         (2)            (3)      (4)          (5)     (6)
                                              Revenue to GDP Ratio         Log(Revenue)            Log(GDP)
               τ                              1.608∗∗    2.423∗∗∗
                                              (0.763)     (0.517)
               log(1 − τ )                                                -2.585   -4.661∗∗∗    0.818       0.889
                                                                         (1.898)    (1.233)    (0.988)     (0.816)
               Joint Interaction                           1.244∗∗∗                4.582∗∗∗               1.710∗∗∗
                                                            (0.215)                 (0.795)                (0.338)
               Individual Interactions
               R&D Credit                                      0.016                -2.618∗∗              1.798∗∗∗
                                                             (0.481)                 (1.198)               (0.390)
               Sales Apportionment Wgt                         0.194                 -0.557∗             -0.266∗∗∗
                                                             (0.120)                 (0.291)               (0.098)
               Loss Carryback                                 -0.038                 0.545∗                0.171∗
                                                             (0.119)                 (0.289)               (0.097)
               Loss Carryforward                              -0.160                 0.744∗∗              0.408∗∗∗
                                                             (0.127)                 (0.346)               (0.104)
               Franchise Tax                                0.695∗∗∗               -2.294∗∗∗             -0.551∗∗∗
                                                             (0.150)                 (0.378)               (0.121)
               Federal Inc Deductible                         -0.185                   0.611              0.758∗∗∗
                                                             (0.185)                 (0.432)               (0.149)
               Federal Inc as State Base                    0.326∗∗                -1.786∗∗∗             -0.411∗∗∗
                                                             (0.155)                 (0.358)               (0.125)
               Federal Accelerated Dep                     -0.750∗∗∗                 0.889∗∗               0.206∗
                                                             (0.150)                 (0.413)               (0.123)
               ACRS Depreciation                            0.357∗∗∗                -0.784∗∗               0.200∗∗
                                                             (0.106)                 (0.349)               (0.087)
               Federal Bonus Dep                               0.143                 0.597∗                 0.065
                                                             (0.117)                 (0.325)               (0.096)
               Throwback Rules                                0.063                   -0.241              -0.160∗∗
                                                             (0.079)                 (0.278)               (0.065)
               Combined Reporting                          0.255∗∗∗                   0.377              -0.244∗∗∗
                                                             (0.083)                 (0.350)               (0.069)
               Investment Tax Credit                          -0.041                  -0.245             -0.345∗∗∗
                                                             (0.128)                 (0.308)               (0.103)
               R&D Incremental Mov Avg                        -0.174                 1.265∗              -0.688∗∗∗
                                                             (0.260)                 (0.657)               (0.211)
               R&D Incremental Fixed                        -0.730∗∗               5.454∗∗∗               -0.493∗∗
                                                             (0.291)                 (0.909)               (0.237)
               N                               1,550           1,550      1,426        1,426    1,550       1,550
               Base Controls                     Y               Y          Y            Y        Y           Y
               Year Fixed Effects                Y               Y          Y            Y        Y           Y
               State Fixed Effects               Y               Y          Y            Y        Y           Y

Notes: This table reports the results of regressions that estimate the effects of changes in tax rates on tax revenue and economic
activity. Each specification weights observations by the mean state GDP in our sample and includes state and year fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered by state (∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01). The 15 base controls included in Columns (1)-(6)
are described in Section 1. Details of the specification and the definition of the joint interaction can be found in Section 5. The
revenue-to-GDP ratio is measured in basis points. The number of observations is lower in Columns (3) and (4) because some states
do not collect corporate income taxes. Overall this table shows that, while including tax base controls does not have significant
effects on the average effect of taxes on revenues and economic activity, estimators that do not allow for heterogeneous effects of
taxes that depend on the structure of the state corporate tax system result in inconsistent estimates of the average partial effect
of taxes on revenues and economic activity.




                                                                37
            Table 7: Linear and Quadratic Effects of Corporate Tax Rate Changes on Tax Revenues

                                 Panel A. State Corporate Tax Revenue-to-GDP Ratio
                                                                        (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)
        State Corporate Tax Rate τ                                    3.95∗∗     0.49       2.74        3.10         3.46
                                                                      (1.87)    (4.88)     (2.16)      (3.94)      (3.69)
        State Corporate Tax Rate2 (τ )2                                2.53     14.12       9.99        -5.06       -6.65
                                                                     (23.00)   (31.91)    (24.56)     (25.00)     (24.23)
        Base Index × 100                                                                    5.33      5.32∗∗∗      11.69
                                                                                           (3.21)      (1.87)      (8.00)
        State Corporate Tax Rate τ × Base Index                                                                     -1.78
                                                                                                                   (1.72)
        State Corporate Tax Rate2 (τ )2 × Base Index                                                               11.27
                                                                                                                  (10.28)
        Observations                                                 1,550      1,550      1,550       1,550       1,550
        Year Fixed Effects                                            Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
        State Fixed Effects                                                      Yes                    Yes          Yes
        Revenue-Maximizing Rate                                                                        0.307       0.260

                                    Panel B. Total State Tax Revenue-to-GDP Ratio
                                                                        (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)
        State Corporate Tax Rate τ                                      6.4      26.0        6.2         20.2       29.9∗
                                                                      (13.3)    (18.5)     (13.0)      (18.8)      (15.8)
        State Corporate Tax Rate2 (τ )2                                53.1     -113.1      56.9        -98.8      -156.2
                                                                     (112.3)   (130.3)    (109.1)     (129.4)     (106.6)
        Base Index × 100                                                                    10.1       22.9∗∗       -15.5
                                                                                           (12.2)       (9.2)      (25.2)
        State Corporate Tax Rate τ × Base Index                                                                      8.3
                                                                                                                    (7.7)
        State Corporate Tax Rate2 (τ )2 × Base Index                                                                -38.6
                                                                                                                   (53.1)
        Observations                                                 1,550      1,550       1,550      1,550        1,550
        Year Fixed Effects                                            Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
        State Fixed Effects                                                      Yes                    Yes          Yes
        Revenue-Maximizing Rate                                                                        0.102       0.096
Notes: This table reports the results of regressions that estimate the effects of changes in tax rates and tax bases on tax revenue.
Each specification weights observations by the mean state GDP in our sample and includes state and year fixed effects. See
Appendix Table A12 for a version of that controls for state sales and top personal income tax rates. The revenue-to-GDP ratio is
measured in basis points. Standard errors are clustered by state (∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01). The 15 base controls included
in the base index are described in Section 1.




                                                                38
Appendices for Online Publication
A     Data
A.1   Tax Base Rules
 1. Throwback Rules
      • Variable: throwback
      • Source: Bernthal et al. (2012)
      • Definition: Indicator for whether state eliminates “nowhere income” that would be untaxed by either
        the state with the corporation’s nexus or the state in which the relevant sales were being made.
 2. Combined Reporting Rules
      • Variable: combined
      • Source: Bernthal et al. (2012)
      • Definition: Indicator for whether a state requires a unitary business to submit combined reporting.
 3. Investment Tax Credit
      • Variable: investment credit
      • Source: Chirinko and Wilson (2008)
      • Definition: Rate of investment tax credit for a given state-year.
 4. Research and Development Tax Credit
      • Variable: rec val
      • Source: Dan Wilson (2009)
      • Definition: Statutory credit rate adjusted for recapture and type of credit.
 5. Research and Development Tax Credit Base: Incremental Fixed Period
      • Variable: incr fixed
      • Source: Computed using data from Dan Wilson (2009)
      • Definition: Indicator for whether the tax base is incremental with a fixed base. See Appendix A.3
        for more details.
 6. Research and Development Tax Credit Base: Incremental Moving Average

      • Variable: incr ma
      • Source: Computed using data from Dan Wilson (2009)
      • Definition: Indicator for whether the tax base is incremental with a moving average. See Appendix
        A.3 for more details.
 7. Loss Carryback Rules
      • Variable: Losscarryback
      • Source: CCH (1980 - 2010)
      • Definition: Number of years prior to the loss year that a corporation may carry back net operating
        loss.

 8. Loss Carryforward Rules
      • Variable: Losscarryforward
      • Source: CCH (1980 - 2010)


                                                    39
      • Definition: Number of years a corporation may carry forward any excess loss following the loss year.
 9. Franchise Tax (indicator)
      • Variable: FranchiseTax
      • Source: CCH (1980 - 2010)
      • Definition: An indicator for whether or not a Franchise tax is levied on corporations in a given
        state-year. Franchise taxes are levied on firms for the “privilege” of doing business in a given state.
        In Texas, for example, franchise taxes are based on corporate margins, but they may also be based
        on par value of stock, paid-in capital, net worth, gross receipts or assessed value of property. In some
        cases, such as Alabama, franchise taxes are based on corporate income, thus raising the effective
        corporate tax rate. Franchise taxes can therefore be an alternative to a corporate income tax, or to
        taxing corporate income at a higher rate.
10. Federal Income Tax Deductible
      • Variable: FedIncomeTaxDeductible
      • Source: CCH (1980 - 2010)
      • Definition: An indicator for whether or not federal income tax is deductible in a given state-year.
11. Federal Income as State Tax Base
      • Variable: FederalIncomeasStateTaxBase
      • Source: CCH (1980 - 2010)
      • Definition: An indicator for whether or not federal income is used as the state tax base in a given
        state-year.
12. Federal Accelerated Depreciation
      • Variable: AllowFedAccDep
      • Source: CCH (1980 - 2010)
      • Definition: An indicator for whether or not federal accelerated depreciation is allowed in a given
        state-year.
13. Accelerated Cost Recovery System (ACRS) Depreciation
      • Variable: ACRSDepreciation
      • Source: CCH (1980 - 2010)
      • Definition: An indicator for whether or not ACRS is allowed in a given state-year.
14. Federal Bonus Depreciation

      • Variable: FederalBonusDepreciation
      • Source: CCH (1980 - 2010)
      • Definition: An indicator for whether or not federal bonus depreciation is allowed in a given state-year.
15. Sales Apportionment Weight

      • Variable: sales wgt
      • Source: Bernthal et al. (2012)
      • Definition: The share of national profits of multi-state firms that are allocated to sales (for tax
        purposes) in a given state.




                                                     40
A.2    Definitions of Broadening/Narrowing and Expected Sign of Interaction Terms
In Tables 2-4 and Appendix Table A3 we analyze changes in base rules and code changes as narrowing or
broadening. This definition also maps into expected signs for the interaction between taxes and base controls
in equation 5 as follows:

   • Throwback Rules: “no” to “yes” is base broadening. Expected interaction sign: positive.
   • Combined Reporting Rules: “no” to “yes” is base broadening. Expected interaction sign: positive.
   • Investment Tax Credit: increase in credit is base narrowing. Expected interaction sign: negative.

   • Research and Development Tax Credit: increase in credit is base narrowing. Expected interaction sign:
     negative.
   • Incremental R&D Credit, Base is Moving Average: “no” to “yes” is base broadening. Expected interaction
     sign: positive.
   • Incremental R&D Credit, Base is Fixed: “no” to “yes” is base broadening. Expected interaction sign:
     positive.
   • Loss Carryback Rules: increase in years is base narrowing. Expected interaction sign: negative.
   • Loss Carryforward Rules: increase in years is base narrowing. Expected interaction sign: negative.
   • Franchise Tax (indicator): “no” to “yes” is base narrowing. Expected interaction sign: negative.
   • Federal Income Tax Deductible: “no” to “yes” is base narrowing, “yes” to “no” is base broadening.
     Expected interaction sign: negative.
   • Federal Income as State Tax Base: “no” to “yes” is base broadening, “yes” to “no” is base narrowing.
     Expected interaction sign: positive.
   • Federal Accelerated Depreciation: “no” to “yes” is base narrowing. Expected interaction sign: negative.
   • Accelerated Cost Recovery System (ACRS) Depreciation: “no” to “yes” is base narrowing. Expected
     interaction sign: negative.
   • Federal Bonus Depreciation: “no” to “yes” is base narrowing. Expected interaction sign: negative.
   • Sales Apportionment Weight: increase in sales weight is base narrowing. Expected interaction sign:
     negative.

A.3    R&D Tax Credit Base
The effective R&D tax credit rate is a combination of 3 factors: the statutory R&D tax credit rate, the base
level definition, and the recapture policy (Wilson, 2005). States vary in the definition of the applicable base
for R&D tax credits. As pointed out in Wilson (2009), such definitions fall into 3 major categories:

  1. Non-incremental credit: all R&D expenditures are eligible for credit.
  2. Incremental credit with a moving average base: only R&D expenditures above a base level deter-
     mined by the firm’s recent activity are eligible for credit. This base level is usually a moving average of
     the firm’s R&D over the past 1-4 years (Wilson, 2005).

  3. Incremental credit with a fixed-period base: only R&D expenditures above a base level determined
     by the firm’s activity during a fixed past period are eligible for credit.




                                                      41
    From 1980-2010, several states rely on the federal definition of the base level. The federal definition used a
3-year moving average until 1989, which was computed as the multiplication of current sales and the average
R&D-to-sales ratio over the past 3 years (Wilson (2009); Chang (2014); Rao (2016)). With the passage
of Public Law 101-239 on December 19, 1989, the federal R&D regime shifted to a fixed-period base level
definition (Chang, 2014). Under this regime, the base level is computed as a firm’s recent sales times the
average R&D-sales ratio over the period 1984-1988 (Wilson, 2005). In addition, states have set their own
definitions of the R&D tax base. To account for the effects of different R&D tax credit regimes on state tax
revenues and economic activity, we control for two indicators of the type of incremental base a state might
have: fixed or moving average. We use data from Wilson (2009) to generate these indicators.

A.4     Bartik Tax Base Rules
  1. Property taxes
        • Variable: propertytax
        • Source: Bartik (2017)
        • Definition: Real property tax rate for industrial real property, industrial machinery and equip-
          ment, and industrial inventories. Real property includes both land and buildings. For all non-
          manufacturing industries, the commercial tax rates are applied. The tax rates are applied to real
          property, and to personal property excluding inventories. Inventories are assumed to always be
          exempt. The tax rates were interpolated for missing years, assuming the tax rate changes linearly
          between the two years given.
  2. Property tax abatement
        • Variable: propabatement
        • Source: Bartik (2017)
        • Definition: The nominal value of the property tax abatement rate for each city under consideration
          in Bartik (2017). The database in Bartik (2017) seeks to determine not just what the state allows
          in property tax abatements, but what specific cities do.
  3. Job creation tax credits
        • Variable: jobcreationcred
        • Source: Bartik (2017)
        • Definition: The nominal value of the job creation tax credit, calculated before considering any limits
          on the tax credit.




                                                       42
B      Construction of Neighbor and Similar States
B.1      Neighboring States
Neighbor states are states that share a border of any length. There exist 109 unique state border pairs, including
pairs sharing a single-point border. States with no interstate border are not included in the sample. We draw
our border data from Holmes (1998). It includes 48 states (Alaska and Hawaii share no borders with other US
states). The District of Columbia is excluded from our sample. We then construct a dataset with 218 state
border pairs such that for each bordering states i and j, we have the state pair ij and ji. We then merge
corporate tax rate and base measure data for each state i and bordering state j from 1980-2010.

B.2      Similar States
We use state-level demographic and economic characteristics to construct a measure of state similarity. For
each state i and year t in our sample, we fit a logistic regression to estimate the probability that state j 6= i
is state i in year t. The estimates from this regression provide a measure of how similar states are to a given
state in a given year.
    Specifically, for each state-year, we estimate the specification:

                    P rob(j = i)jt = β0 + β1 manufjt + β2 servicejt + β3 agrjt + β4 constr minejt
                                        + β5 skilljt + β6 log(pop)jt + εjt                                                    (9)

where P rob(j = i) is the probability that state j is state i; manuf is manufacturing share of state GDP;
service is information and professional services’ share of state GDP; agr is agriculture, forestry, fishing and
hunting share of state GDP; constr mine is construction, mining and utilities share of state GDP; skill is the
share of the state population over 18 with a Bachelor’s Degree or above; and log(pop) is log state population in
year t. Appendix Table A13 summarizes the covariates used to construct the similarity index. Industry share
of GDP was measured by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. We then calculate the “distance” between j and
i, defined as dij = [LP rob(i = j) − LP rob(i = i)]2 , or the squared difference between the linear probabilities.36
State i’s “similar” state in year t is the state whose estimated probability yields the smallest dij in year t − 1.
    A key difference between identifying border and similar states is that state similarity is not necessarily
reciprocal. In other words, Maine may be similar to Vermont in year t, but Vermont is not necessarily similar
to Maine.
    One shortcoming of this method is that it does not identify similar matches for all states in all years.
Only 25 states have a “similar” state for every sample year; the other 25 are missing matches in some or all
sample years. The reason is that some states are too economically different from the rest of the nation. For
example, California has no matches because it is exactly identified by its population, and the probability that
any other state is California is infinitely close to 0.37 Appendix Table A14 lists all states in our sample and
their “similar” states in the year before a tax rate or base change. We hold the “similar” state constant in the
years surrounding an event when estimating the results of Appendix Tables A5 and A6, and Appendix Figure
A29.

B.3      Estimating Event Probability Subject to Events in Similar States
Appendix Tables A5 and A6 describe how the probability of a corporate tax rate or base change is affected by
events in states’ neighbors and economically similar counterparts. Let Yit indicate a corporate rate increase or
decrease, or broadening or narrowing of the tax base in state i and year t. Denote the set of neighbors and
similar states j 6= i. The results in Appendix Table A5 are estimated by running a probit regression of the
   36 We estimate the Hosmer-Lemeshow statistic for each logistic regression, and fail to reject the null that the indicator of

wether any state is state i is orthogonal to the covariates listed in equation 9. This suggests that the matching regression has
high predictive power.
   37 We explored using OLS to avoid these issues when estimating P rob(j = i) , but this approach can yield predicted proba-
                                                                                  jt
bilities that fall outside the range of 0 to 100%.




                                                               43
form:

                  P (Yit = 1) = β0 + β1 D[RateInc]j,t−1 + β2 D[RateDec]j,t−1
                                   + β3 D[BaseN arrow]j,t−1 + β3 D[BaseBroaden]j,t−1 + εit                   (10)

while the results in Appendix Table A6 are estimated by similarly estimating

                    P (Yit = 1) = β0 + β1 D[RateInc]j,t0 + β2 D[RateDec]j,t0
                                     + β3 D[BaseN arrow]j,t0 + β3 D[BaseBroaden]j,t0 + εit                   (11)

where t0 ∈ [t − 5, t − 1].
    In the neighbor states case, we consider changes in corporate tax rate and in tax base that took place in
any of i’s border states. For example, the indicator for whether a corporate rate increase took place in Maine’s
neighboring states in the previous year equals 1 if Vermont’s corporate tax rate increased in year t − 1. We
present results for k = 1, i.e., a neighbor changed rates last year, and k ∈ [1, 5], i.e., if an event occurred at
least once in the previous five years.




                                                       44
                       Figure A1: Changes in State Corporate Tax Structure - Bartik Sample



                                                                                       A. Time Series




                                            .07




                                                                                                                                            .5
                         .01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06




                                                                                                                                                                        .45
                           Mean State Corporate Tax Rate




                                                                                                                                              State Corporate Tax Rev/GDP
                                                                                                                                            .25
                                                                                                                                            .2      .3     .35     .4
                                            0




                                                                1990        1995              2000                 2005             2010
                                                                                                 Year

                                                                           Mean Corp. Rate                    Mean Corp. Rev/GDP




                                                                                B. Frequency of Changes
                                            20
                         # States Changing Corporate Tax Rate
                                         10         15




                                                                                                           2000
                                                                                                               1991
                              5




                                                                                      2001                                           1999
                                                                                                                                     2009
                                                                                              1994
                                                                                              2003
                                                                                              2008          2011
                                                                       20052012    19921990             1997              1995   1998                                         2002
                                                                               19961993                 2004
                                                                                                        2010
                                            0




                                                                                                        2006                 2007

                                                                 0               5                10                       15               20
                                                                                         # States Changing Base




Notes: This figure shows annual trends in both the mean corporate tax rate across states and corporate tax revenue as a share of
GDP in Panel A. Panel B shows by year the number of states that changed rates and tax base provisions. It illustrates that these
pairs are not on a 45 degree line, so most years in which many states change base provisions are not years in which many states
also change rates. Note that this figure is analogous to Figure 2, but only on 33 states from 1990-2010 (i.e. availability along the
Bartik controls dimension). See Section 1 for details on data sources.




                                                                                                 45
                                                                     Figure A2: Variance of Log State Corporate Tax Revenue as a Share of GDP

                                                                                                                                                                                             Var(xjst Ψjst )
                                                A. Variance Decomposition                                      B. Share of Explained Variance by Base Rule (i.e.,                           P         j    j )
                                                                                                                                                                                             j Var(xst Ψst )



                                                                                                              Federal Inc as State Base
                                                                                                             Federal Inc Tax Deductible
                                 1
                                                                                                                       Throwback Rules
                                                                                                          Payroll Apportionment Weight
                                           .8
                   % of Explained Variation




                                                                                                                     Loss Carryforward
                                                                                                                        Loss Carryback
                                                                                                                   Combined Reporting
                                 .6




                                                                                                                  Investment Tax Credit
                                                                                                                        R&D Tax Credit
                        .4




                                                                                                                    ACRS Depreciation
                                                                                                       Federal Accelerated Depreciation
                                                                                                           Federal Bonus Depreciation
                                 .2




                                                                                                                          Franchise Tax
                                                                                                            Incr R&D, Moving Avg Base
                                 0




                                                Log (Rscorp/GDPs)      Base vs Rate
                                                                                                                  Incr R&D, Fixed Base

                                                       Unexplained      Base Rules
                                                                                                                                           0                      .1                .2              .3           .4
                                                       Explained        Corporate Rate                                                                                 % Explained Among Base Rules


                                                                                             C. Effects of Standardized Base Rules Ψ̃jst
46




                                                                                           Federal Income as State Tax Base
                                                                                                  Fed Income Tax Deductible
                                                                                                            Throwback Rules
                                                                                                  Combined Reporting Rules
                                                                                                Payroll Apportionment Weight
                                                                                                           Loss Carryforward
                                                                                                             Loss Carryback
                                                                                                        Investment Tax Credit
                                                                                                              R&D Tax Credit
                                                                                                          ACRS Depreciation
                                                                                      Allows Federal Accelerated Depreciation
                                                                                                  Federal Bonus Depreciation
                                                                                                               Franchise Tax
                                                                                          Incremental R&D, Moving Avg Base
                                                                                                Incremental R&D, Fixed Base
                                                                                                                                -.3   -.2    -.1     0       .1        .2
                                                                                                                                         Standardized Effect
     Notes: This figure replicates Figure 5 using ln Rst as the outcome. Panel A decomposes the variation in log state corporate tax revenue share of state GDP from 1980-2010 using
     equation 2. Panel B displays the contribution to base variation from each base rule. Panel C plots the effect of each base rule on the state corporate tax revenue share of state GDP
     from 1980-2010. We standardize each base rule prior to determining the coefficients to facilitate comparisons across base rules with different variances. See Section 3 for details. The
     decomposition is weighted by mean state GDP across our sample period. See Section 1 for details on data sources.
                Figure A3: Log Corporate Tax Revenue Share of GDP - Variance Decomposition - 5-Year Splits

                       A. Variance Decomposition                                                                                  B. Share of Explained Variance, Rate vs. Base
              100




                                                                                                                                            100
              75




                                                                                                                                            75
                                                                                                                     % Explained Variance
    Percent
              50




                                                                                                                                            50
              25




                                                                                                                                            25
              0




                                                                                                                                            0
                1980   1985                                    1990      1995     2000       2005        2010                                 1980    1985      1990        1995     2000       2005          2010

                          Explained Variance                                      Unexplained Variance                                                 Corporate Tax Rate          Corporate Tax Base Rules


                                                                                                                                                               Var(xjst Ψjst )
                                                                   C. Share of Explained Variance by Base Rule (i.e.,                                         P         j    j )
                                                                                                                                                               j Var(xst Ψst )
                          % Explained Var Among Base Rules
                                                             100
                                                             75
                                                             50
                                                             25
                                                             0




                                                               1980             1985           1990              1995                                2000              2005           2010

                                                                                Federal Inc as State Base                                            Federal Inc Deductible
                                                                                Throwback Rules                                                      Sales Apportionment Wgt
                                                                                Loss Carryforward                                                    Loss Carryback
                                                                                Combined Reporting                                                   Investment Tax Credit
                                                                                R&D Credit                                                           ACRS Depreciation
                                                                                Federal Accelerated Dep                                              Federal Bonus Dep
                                                                                Franchise Tax                                                        Incr R&D, Moving Avg Base
                                                                                Incr R&D, Fixed Base



Notes: This figure replicates Figure 6 using ln Rst as the outcome.Panel A decomposes the variation in log state corporate tax
revenue share of state GDP from 1980-2010 using equation 3. Panel B displays the contribution to base variation from each base
rule. Panel C plots the effect of each base rule on the state corporate tax revenue share of state GDP from 1980-2010. See Section
3 for details. The decomposition is weighted by mean state GDP across our sample period. See Section 1 for details on data
sources.




                                                                                                                47
              Figure A4: Corporate Rate Changes Relative to State Share of Pass-through Activity




                            Change in Corp Tax Rev Share of GDP (pp), 1980-2010
                               -.8         -.6        -.4        -.2          0




                                                                                  25               30                      35               40
                                                                                       Pass-Through Share of Annual State Payroll in 2010

Notes: This figure plots the percentage-point change in state corporate income tax revenue as a share of GDP between 1980
and 2010, relative to share of annual state payroll attributed to pass-through corporations in 2010. The cross-section includes
all 50 states. Annual payroll includes all forms of compensation, such as salaries, wages, commissions, dismissal pay, bonuses,
vacation allowances, sick-leave pay, and employee contributions to qualified pension plans paid during the year to all employees.
For corporations, payroll includes amounts paid to officers and executives; for unincorporated businesses, it does not include profit
or other compensation of proprietors or partners. Payroll is reported before deductions for social security, income tax, insurance,
union dues, etc. This definition of payroll is the same as that used by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) on Form 941 as taxable
Medicare Wages and Tips (even if not subject to income or FICA tax). Data on annual pass-through payroll are from the 2010
County Business Patterns survey. See Section 1 for details on other data sources.




                                                                                                           48
              Figure A5: Rates & Revenue


              Corporate Tax Rate - 2012




                                                  8.84 − 12.00
                                                  8.38 − 8.84
                                                  7.50 − 8.38
                                                  6.50 − 7.50
                                                  6.00 − 6.50
                                                  4.63 − 6.00
                                                  No Corporate Tax

Corporate Revenue Share of Total Tax Revenue (%) - 2012




                                                  6.105 − 21.993
                                                  5.127 − 6.105
                                                  4.736 − 5.127
                                                  4.160 − 4.736
                                                  3.058 − 4.160
                                                  0.603 − 3.058
                                                  No Corporate Tax

          Sales Apportionment Weight - 2012




                                                            100%
                                                            90%
                                                            87%
                                                            80%
                                                            60%
                                                            50%
                                                            33%

                          49
                                                           Figure A6: Corporate Tax Base Rules

            R&D Credit Rate - 2010                                 Loss Carryforward - 2012                    Throwback Rule - 2010




                                             0.10 − 0.20
                                             0.08 − 0.10                                         15 − 20
                                             0.05 − 0.08                                         10 − 15
                                             0.00 − 0.05                                         5 − 10                                Throwback Rule
                                             No Credit                                           0−5                                   No Throwback Rule


         Investment Credit Rate - 2012                               Loss Carryback - 2012                 Combined Reporting Rule - 2010
50




                                             0.08 − 0.10
                                             0.04 − 0.08
                                             0.03 − 0.04                                               3
                                             0.00 − 0.03                                               2                               Combined Rule
                                             No Credit                                                 0                               No Combined Rule


     Moving Average R&D Credit Base - 2010                       Fixed R&D Credit Base - 2010                   Franchise Tax - 2012




                                                                                                                                         Franchise Tax
                                         Moving Average                                            Fixed                                 No Franchise Tax
                                                                           Figure A7: Corporate Tax Rate By State-Year

                                                          Alabama                        Alaska                      Arizona                       Arkansas                      California




                                         10 15
                                         5
                                         0

                                                          Colorado                    Connecticut                   Delaware                         Florida                      Georgia
                                         10 15
              State Corporate Tax Rate
                                         5
                                         0




                                                           Hawaii                        Idaho                       Illinois                       Indiana                           Iowa
                                         10 15
                                         5
                                         0




                                                           Kansas                       Kentucky                    Louisiana                        Maine                       Maryland
                                         10 15
                                         5
                                         0




                                                        Massachusetts                   Michigan                   Minnesota                       Mississippi                    Missouri
                                         10 15
                                         5
                                         0




                                                 1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                                   Year


                                                          Montana                      Nebraska                      Nevada                      New Hampshire                  New Jersey
                                         10 15
                                         5
                                         0




                                                         New Mexico                    New York                   North Carolina                  North Dakota                        Ohio
                                         10 15
              State Corporate Tax Rate
                                         5
                                         0




                                                          Oklahoma                      Oregon                    Pennsylvania                    Rhode Island                 South Carolina
                                         10 15
                                         5
                                         0




                                                        South Dakota                   Tennessee                      Texas                             Utah                      Vermont
                                         10 15
                                         5
                                         0




                                                           Virginia                   Washington                  West Virginia                    Wisconsin                     Wyoming
                                         10 15
                                         5
                                         0




                                                 1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                                   Year

Notes: This figure plots corporate tax rate by state from 1980-2012. See Section 1 for details on data sources.




                                                                                                                   51
                                                                                    Figure A8: Loss Carryforward Rule By State-Year

                                                                      Alabama                        Alaska                      Arizona                       Arkansas                      California




                                                10 20 30
                                                0

                                                                      Colorado                    Connecticut                   Delaware                         Florida                      Georgia
              Loss Carryforward Rules (Years)
                                                10 20 30
                                                0




                                                                       Hawaii                        Idaho                       Illinois                       Indiana                           Iowa
                                                10 20 30
                                                0




                                                                       Kansas                       Kentucky                    Louisiana                        Maine                       Maryland
                                                10 20 30
                                                0




                                                                    Massachusetts                   Michigan                   Minnesota                       Mississippi                    Missouri
                                                10 20 30
                                                0




                                                             1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                                               Year


                                                                      Montana                      Nebraska                      Nevada                      New Hampshire                  New Jersey
                                                5 10 15 20
                                                0




                                                                     New Mexico                    New York                   North Carolina                  North Dakota                        Ohio
              Loss Carryforward Rules (Years)
                                                5 10 15 20
                                                0




                                                                      Oklahoma                      Oregon                    Pennsylvania                    Rhode Island                 South Carolina
                                                5 10 15 20
                                                0




                                                                    South Dakota                   Tennessee                      Texas                             Utah                      Vermont
                                                5 10 15 20
                                                0




                                                                       Virginia                   Washington                  West Virginia                    Wisconsin                     Wyoming
                                                5 10 15 20
                                                0




                                                             1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                                               Year

Notes: This figure plots the number of loss carryforward years allowed by state from 1980-2012. See Section 1 for details on data
sources.




                                                                                                                               52
                                                                           Figure A9: Loss Carryback Rule By State-Year

                                                          Alabama                        Alaska                      Arizona                       Arkansas                      California




                                             4
                                             3
                                             2
                                             1
                                             0

                                                          Colorado                    Connecticut                   Delaware                         Florida                      Georgia
                                             4
              Loss Carryback Rules (Years)
                                             3
                                             2
                                             1
                                             0




                                                           Hawaii                        Idaho                       Illinois                       Indiana                           Iowa
                                             4
                                             3
                                             2
                                             1
                                             0




                                                           Kansas                       Kentucky                    Louisiana                        Maine                       Maryland
                                             4
                                             3
                                             2
                                             1
                                             0




                                                        Massachusetts                   Michigan                   Minnesota                       Mississippi                    Missouri
                                             4
                                             3
                                             2
                                             1
                                             0




                                                 1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                                   Year


                                                          Montana                      Nebraska                      Nevada                      New Hampshire                  New Jersey
                                             4
                                             3
                                             2
                                             1
                                             0




                                                         New Mexico                    New York                   North Carolina                  North Dakota                        Ohio
                                             4
              Loss Carryback Rules (Years)
                                             3
                                             2
                                             1
                                             0




                                                          Oklahoma                      Oregon                    Pennsylvania                    Rhode Island                 South Carolina
                                             4
                                             3
                                             2
                                             1
                                             0




                                                        South Dakota                   Tennessee                      Texas                             Utah                      Vermont
                                             4
                                             3
                                             2
                                             1
                                             0




                                                           Virginia                   Washington                  West Virginia                    Wisconsin                     Wyoming
                                             4
                                             3
                                             2
                                             1
                                             0




                                                 1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                                   Year

Notes: This figure plots the number of loss carryback years allowed by state from 1980-2012. See Section 1 for details on data
sources.




                                                                                                                   53
                                                                   Figure A10: R&D Credit Rate By State-Year

                                              Alabama                        Alaska                      Arizona                       Arkansas                      California




                                .2
                                .1
                                0

                                              Colorado                    Connecticut                   Delaware                         Florida                      Georgia
                                .2
                                .1
              R&D Credit Rate
                                0




                                               Hawaii                        Idaho                       Illinois                       Indiana                           Iowa
                                .2
                                .1
                                0




                                               Kansas                       Kentucky                    Louisiana                        Maine                       Maryland
                                .2
                                .1
                                0




                                            Massachusetts                   Michigan                   Minnesota                       Mississippi                    Missouri
                                .2
                                .1
                                0




                                     1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                       Year


                                              Montana                      Nebraska                      Nevada                      New Hampshire                  New Jersey
                                .2
                                .1
                                0




                                             New Mexico                    New York                   North Carolina                  North Dakota                        Ohio
                                .2
                                .1
              R&D Credit Rate
                                0




                                              Oklahoma                      Oregon                    Pennsylvania                    Rhode Island                 South Carolina
                                .2
                                .1
                                0




                                            South Dakota                   Tennessee                      Texas                             Utah                      Vermont
                                .2
                                .1
                                0




                                               Virginia                   Washington                  West Virginia                    Wisconsin                     Wyoming
                                .2
                                .1
                                0




                                     1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                       Year

Notes: This figure plots the R&D credit rates by state from 1980-2011. See Section 1 for details on data sources.




                                                                                                       54
                                                                    Figure A11: Investment Credit Rate By State-Year

                                                      Alabama                        Alaska                      Arizona                       Arkansas                      California




                                       .1
                                       .05
                                       0

                                                      Colorado                    Connecticut                   Delaware                         Florida                      Georgia
                                       .1
                                       .05
              Investment Credit Rate
                                       0




                                                       Hawaii                        Idaho                       Illinois                       Indiana                           Iowa
                                       .1
                                       .05
                                       0




                                                       Kansas                       Kentucky                    Louisiana                        Maine                       Maryland
                                       .1
                                       .05
                                       0




                                                    Massachusetts                   Michigan                   Minnesota                       Mississippi                    Missouri
                                       .1
                                       .05
                                       0




                                             1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                               Year


                                                      Montana                      Nebraska                      Nevada                      New Hampshire                  New Jersey
                                       .1
                                       .05
                                       0




                                                     New Mexico                    New York                   North Carolina                  North Dakota                        Ohio
                                       .1
                                       .05
              Investment Credit Rate
                                       0




                                                      Oklahoma                      Oregon                    Pennsylvania                    Rhode Island                 South Carolina
                                       .1
                                       .05
                                       0




                                                    South Dakota                   Tennessee                      Texas                             Utah                      Vermont
                                       .1
                                       .05
                                       0




                                                       Virginia                   Washington                  West Virginia                    Wisconsin                     Wyoming
                                       .1
                                       .05
                                       0




                                             1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                               Year

Notes: This figure plots the investment credit rate by state from 1980-2012. See Section 1 for details on data sources.




                                                                                                               55
                                                                Figure A12: Throwback Rule By State-Year

                                           Alabama                        Alaska                      Arizona                       Arkansas                      California




                              1
                              0

                                           Colorado                    Connecticut                   Delaware                         Florida                      Georgia
                              1
                              0
             Throwback Rule




                                            Hawaii                        Idaho                       Illinois                       Indiana                           Iowa
                              1
                              0




                                            Kansas                       Kentucky                    Louisiana                        Maine                       Maryland
                              1
                              0




                                         Massachusetts                   Michigan                   Minnesota                       Mississippi                    Missouri
                              1
                              0




                                  1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                    Year


                                           Montana                      Nebraska                      Nevada                      New Hampshire                  New Jersey
                              1
                              0




                                          New Mexico                    New York                   North Carolina                  North Dakota                        Ohio
                              1
                              0
             Throwback Rule




                                           Oklahoma                      Oregon                    Pennsylvania                    Rhode Island                 South Carolina
                              1
                              0




                                         South Dakota                   Tennessee                      Texas                             Utah                      Vermont
                              1
                              0




                                            Virginia                   Washington                  West Virginia                    Wisconsin                     Wyoming
                              1
                              0




                                  1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                    Year

Notes: This figure plots an indicator for having a throwback rule by state from 1980-2010. See Section 1 for details on data
sources.




                                                                                                    56
                                                                 Figure A13: Combined Reporting Rule By State-Year

                                                     Alabama                        Alaska                      Arizona                       Arkansas                      California




                                        1
                                        0

                                                     Colorado                    Connecticut                   Delaware                         Florida                      Georgia
                                        1
              Combined Reporting Rule
                                        0




                                                      Hawaii                        Idaho                       Illinois                       Indiana                           Iowa
                                        1
                                        0




                                                      Kansas                       Kentucky                    Louisiana                        Maine                       Maryland
                                        1
                                        0




                                                   Massachusetts                   Michigan                   Minnesota                       Mississippi                    Missouri
                                        1
                                        0




                                            1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                              Year


                                                     Montana                      Nebraska                      Nevada                      New Hampshire                  New Jersey
                                        1
                                        0




                                                    New Mexico                    New York                   North Carolina                  North Dakota                        Ohio
                                        1
              Combined Reporting Rule
                                        0




                                                     Oklahoma                      Oregon                    Pennsylvania                    Rhode Island                 South Carolina
                                        1
                                        0




                                                   South Dakota                   Tennessee                      Texas                             Utah                      Vermont
                                        1
                                        0




                                                      Virginia                   Washington                  West Virginia                    Wisconsin                     Wyoming
                                        1
                                        0




                                            1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                              Year

Notes: This figure plots an indicator for having a combined reporting rules by state from 1980-2010. See Section 1 for details on
data sources.




                                                                                                              57
                                                                   Figure A14: Federal Income Tax Deductible By State-Year

                                                             Alabama                        Alaska                      Arizona                       Arkansas                      California




                                              Yes
                                              No

                                                             Colorado                    Connecticut                   Delaware                         Florida                      Georgia
                                              Yes
              Federal Income Tax Deductible
                                              No




                                                              Hawaii                        Idaho                       Illinois                       Indiana                           Iowa
                                              Yes
                                              No




                                                              Kansas                       Kentucky                    Louisiana                        Maine                       Maryland
                                              Yes
                                              No




                                                           Massachusetts                   Michigan                   Minnesota                       Mississippi                    Missouri
                                              Yes
                                              No




                                                    1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                                      Year


                                                             Montana                      Nebraska                      Nevada                      New Hampshire                  New Jersey
                                              Yes
                                              No




                                                            New Mexico                    New York                   North Carolina                  North Dakota                        Ohio
                                              Yes
              Federal Income Tax Deductible
                                              No




                                                             Oklahoma                      Oregon                    Pennsylvania                    Rhode Island                 South Carolina
                                              Yes
                                              No




                                                           South Dakota                   Tennessee                      Texas                             Utah                      Vermont
                                              Yes
                                              No




                                                              Virginia                   Washington                  West Virginia                    Wisconsin                     Wyoming
                                              Yes
                                              No




                                                    1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                                      Year

Notes: This figure plots an indicator for federal income tax deductibility by state from 1980-2012. See Section 1 for details on
data sources.




                                                                                                                      58
                                                                     Figure A15: Federal Income as State Tax Base By State-Year

                                                                Alabama                        Alaska                      Arizona                       Arkansas                      California




                                                 Yes
                                                 No
              Federal Income as State Tax Base

                                                                Colorado                    Connecticut                   Delaware                         Florida                      Georgia
                                                 Yes
                                                 No




                                                                 Hawaii                        Idaho                       Illinois                       Indiana                           Iowa
                                                 Yes
                                                 No




                                                                 Kansas                       Kentucky                    Louisiana                        Maine                       Maryland
                                                 Yes
                                                 No




                                                              Massachusetts                   Michigan                   Minnesota                       Mississippi                    Missouri
                                                 Yes
                                                 No




                                                       1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                                         Year


                                                                Montana                      Nebraska                      Nevada                      New Hampshire                  New Jersey
                                                 Yes
                                                 No
              Federal Income as State Tax Base




                                                               New Mexico                    New York                   North Carolina                  North Dakota                        Ohio
                                                 Yes
                                                 No




                                                                Oklahoma                      Oregon                    Pennsylvania                    Rhode Island                 South Carolina
                                                 Yes
                                                 No




                                                              South Dakota                   Tennessee                      Texas                             Utah                      Vermont
                                                 Yes
                                                 No




                                                                 Virginia                   Washington                  West Virginia                    Wisconsin                     Wyoming
                                                 Yes
                                                 No




                                                       1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                                         Year

Notes: This figure plots an indicator for federal income as state tax base by state from 1980-2012. See Section 1 for details on
data sources.




                                                                                                                         59
                                                              Figure A16: ACRS Depreciation Rule By State-Year

                                                 Alabama                        Alaska                      Arizona                       Arkansas                      California




                                  Yes
                                  No

                                                 Colorado                    Connecticut                   Delaware                         Florida                      Georgia
                                  Yes
              ACRS Depreciation
                                  No




                                                  Hawaii                        Idaho                       Illinois                       Indiana                           Iowa
                                  Yes
                                  No




                                                  Kansas                       Kentucky                    Louisiana                        Maine                       Maryland
                                  Yes
                                  No




                                               Massachusetts                   Michigan                   Minnesota                       Mississippi                    Missouri
                                  Yes
                                  No




                                        1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                          Year


                                                 Montana                      Nebraska                      Nevada                      New Hampshire                  New Jersey
                                  Yes
                                  No




                                                New Mexico                    New York                   North Carolina                  North Dakota                        Ohio
                                  Yes
              ACRS Depreciation
                                  No




                                                 Oklahoma                      Oregon                    Pennsylvania                    Rhode Island                 South Carolina
                                  Yes
                                  No




                                               South Dakota                   Tennessee                      Texas                             Utah                      Vermont
                                  Yes
                                  No




                                                  Virginia                   Washington                  West Virginia                    Wisconsin                     Wyoming
                                  Yes
                                  No




                                        1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                          Year

Notes: This figure plots an indicator for ACRS depreciation by state from 1980-2012. See Section 1 for details on data sources.




                                                                                                          60
                                                                      Figure A17: Federal Accelerated Depreciation Rule By State-Year

                                                                      Alabama                        Alaska                      Arizona                       Arkansas                      California




                                                       Yes
                                                       No
              Allow Federal Accelerated Depreciation

                                                                      Colorado                    Connecticut                   Delaware                         Florida                      Georgia
                                                       Yes
                                                       No




                                                                       Hawaii                        Idaho                       Illinois                       Indiana                           Iowa
                                                       Yes
                                                       No




                                                                       Kansas                       Kentucky                    Louisiana                        Maine                       Maryland
                                                       Yes
                                                       No




                                                                    Massachusetts                   Michigan                   Minnesota                       Mississippi                    Missouri
                                                       Yes
                                                       No




                                                             1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                                               Year


                                                                      Montana                      Nebraska                      Nevada                      New Hampshire                  New Jersey
                                                       Yes
                                                       No
              Allow Federal Accelerated Depreciation




                                                                     New Mexico                    New York                   North Carolina                  North Dakota                        Ohio
                                                       Yes
                                                       No




                                                                      Oklahoma                      Oregon                    Pennsylvania                    Rhode Island                 South Carolina
                                                       Yes
                                                       No




                                                                    South Dakota                   Tennessee                      Texas                             Utah                      Vermont
                                                       Yes
                                                       No




                                                                       Virginia                   Washington                  West Virginia                    Wisconsin                     Wyoming
                                                       Yes
                                                       No




                                                             1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                                               Year

Notes: This figure plots an indicator for federal accelerated depreciation by state from 1980-2012. See Section 1 for details on
data sources.




                                                                                                                               61
                                                                     Figure A18: Federal Bonus Depreciation Rule By State-Year

                                                                Alabama                        Alaska                      Arizona                       Arkansas                      California




                                                 Yes
                                                 No
              Allow Federal Bonus Depreciation

                                                                Colorado                    Connecticut                   Delaware                         Florida                      Georgia
                                                 Yes
                                                 No




                                                                 Hawaii                        Idaho                       Illinois                       Indiana                           Iowa
                                                 Yes
                                                 No




                                                                 Kansas                       Kentucky                    Louisiana                        Maine                       Maryland
                                                 Yes
                                                 No




                                                              Massachusetts                   Michigan                   Minnesota                       Mississippi                    Missouri
                                                 Yes
                                                 No




                                                       1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                                         Year


                                                                Montana                      Nebraska                      Nevada                      New Hampshire                  New Jersey
                                                 Yes
                                                 No
              Allow Federal Bonus Depreciation




                                                               New Mexico                    New York                   North Carolina                  North Dakota                        Ohio
                                                 Yes
                                                 No




                                                                Oklahoma                      Oregon                    Pennsylvania                    Rhode Island                 South Carolina
                                                 Yes
                                                 No




                                                              South Dakota                   Tennessee                      Texas                             Utah                      Vermont
                                                 Yes
                                                 No




                                                                 Virginia                   Washington                  West Virginia                    Wisconsin                     Wyoming
                                                 Yes
                                                 No




                                                       1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                                         Year

Notes: This figure plots an indicator for federal bonus depreciation by state from 1980-2012. See Section 1 for details on data
sources.




                                                                                                                         62
                                                                                Figure A19: Sales Apportionment Weight By State-Year

                                                                    Alabama                        Alaska                      Arizona                       Arkansas                      California




                                           .2 .4 .6 .8 1

                                                                    Colorado                    Connecticut                   Delaware                         Florida                      Georgia
                                           .2 .4 .6 .8 1
              Sales Apportionment Weight




                                                                     Hawaii                        Idaho                       Illinois                       Indiana                           Iowa
                                           .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                     Kansas                       Kentucky                    Louisiana                        Maine                       Maryland
                                           .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                  Massachusetts                   Michigan                   Minnesota                       Mississippi                    Missouri
                                           .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                           1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                                             Year


                                                                    Montana                      Nebraska                      Nevada                      New Hampshire                  New Jersey
                                           1
                                           .8
                                           .6
                                           .4




                                                                   New Mexico                    New York                   North Carolina                  North Dakota                        Ohio
                                           1
              Sales Apportionment Weight
                                           .8
                                           .6
                                           .4




                                                                    Oklahoma                      Oregon                    Pennsylvania                    Rhode Island                 South Carolina
                                           1
                                           .8
                                           .6
                                           .4




                                                                  South Dakota                   Tennessee                      Texas                             Utah                      Vermont
                                           1
                                           .8
                                           .6
                                           .4




                                                                     Virginia                   Washington                  West Virginia                    Wisconsin                     Wyoming
                                           1
                                           .8
                                           .6
                                           .4




                                                           1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                                             Year

Notes: This figure plots sales apportionment weights by state from 1980-2012. See Section 1 for details on data sources.




                                                                                                                             63
                                                                  Figure A20: Franchise Tax By State-Year

                                            Alabama                        Alaska                      Arizona                       Arkansas                      California




                              1
                              .5
                              0

                                            Colorado                    Connecticut                   Delaware                         Florida                      Georgia
                              1
                              .5
                              0
              Franchise Tax




                                             Hawaii                        Idaho                       Illinois                       Indiana                           Iowa
                              1
                              .5
                              0




                                             Kansas                       Kentucky                    Louisiana                        Maine                       Maryland
                              1
                              .5
                              0




                                          Massachusetts                   Michigan                   Minnesota                       Mississippi                    Missouri
                              1
                              .5
                              0




                                   1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                     Year


                                            Montana                      Nebraska                      Nevada                      New Hampshire                  New Jersey
                              1
                              .5
                              0




                                           New Mexico                    New York                   North Carolina                  North Dakota                        Ohio
                              1
                              .5
                              0
              Franchise Tax




                                            Oklahoma                      Oregon                    Pennsylvania                    Rhode Island                 South Carolina
                              1
                              .5
                              0




                                          South Dakota                   Tennessee                      Texas                             Utah                      Vermont
                              1
                              .5
                              0




                                             Virginia                   Washington                  West Virginia                    Wisconsin                     Wyoming
                              1
                              .5
                              0




                                   1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                     Year

Notes: This figure plots an indicator for franchise taxes by state from 1980-2012. See Section 1 for details on data sources.




                                                                                                     64
                                                                    Figure A21: Moving Average Base for Incremental R&D By State-Year

                                                                       Alabama                        Alaska                      Arizona                       Arkansas                      California




                                                        1
                                                        .5
             Incremental R&D Credit is Moving Average
                                                        0

                                                                       Colorado                    Connecticut                   Delaware                         Florida                      Georgia
                                                        1
                                                        .5
                                                        0




                                                                        Hawaii                        Idaho                       Illinois                       Indiana                           Iowa
                                                        1
                                                        .5
                                                        0




                                                                        Kansas                       Kentucky                    Louisiana                        Maine                       Maryland
                                                        1
                                                        .5
                                                        0




                                                                     Massachusetts                   Michigan                   Minnesota                       Mississippi                    Missouri
                                                        1
                                                        .5
                                                        0




                                                             1980    1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                                                Year


                                                                       Montana                      Nebraska                      Nevada                      New Hampshire                  New Jersey
                                                        1
                                                        .5
             Incremental R&D Credit is Moving Average
                                                        0




                                                                      New Mexico                    New York                   North Carolina                  North Dakota                        Ohio
                                                        1
                                                        .5
                                                        0




                                                                       Oklahoma                      Oregon                    Pennsylvania                    Rhode Island                 South Carolina
                                                        1
                                                        .5
                                                        0




                                                                     South Dakota                   Tennessee                      Texas                             Utah                      Vermont
                                                        1
                                                        .5
                                                        0




                                                                        Virginia                   Washington                  West Virginia                    Wisconsin                     Wyoming
                                                        1
                                                        .5
                                                        0




                                                             1980    1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                                                Year

Notes: This figure plots an indicator for whether the incremental R&D credit base is a moving average. Sample includes all 50
states from 1980-2010. See Section 1 for details on data sources.




                                                                                                                                65
                                                                   Figure A22: Fixed Base for Incremental R&D By State-Year

                                                              Alabama                        Alaska                      Arizona                       Arkansas                      California




                                                1
                                                .5
                                                0

                                                              Colorado                    Connecticut                   Delaware                         Florida                      Georgia
              Incremental R&D Credit is Fixed
                                                1
                                                .5
                                                0




                                                               Hawaii                        Idaho                       Illinois                       Indiana                           Iowa
                                                1
                                                .5
                                                0




                                                               Kansas                       Kentucky                    Louisiana                        Maine                       Maryland
                                                1
                                                .5
                                                0




                                                            Massachusetts                   Michigan                   Minnesota                       Mississippi                    Missouri
                                                1
                                                .5
                                                0




                                                     1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                                       Year


                                                              Montana                      Nebraska                      Nevada                      New Hampshire                  New Jersey
                                                1
                                                .5
                                                0




                                                             New Mexico                    New York                   North Carolina                  North Dakota                        Ohio
              Incremental R&D Credit is Fixed
                                                1
                                                .5
                                                0




                                                              Oklahoma                      Oregon                    Pennsylvania                    Rhode Island                 South Carolina
                                                1
                                                .5
                                                0




                                                            South Dakota                   Tennessee                      Texas                             Utah                      Vermont
                                                1
                                                .5
                                                0




                                                               Virginia                   Washington                  West Virginia                    Wisconsin                     Wyoming
                                                1
                                                .5
                                                0




                                                     1980   1990   2000     2010   1980   1990   2000   2010   1980   1990    2000     2010   1980   1990     2000   2010   1980   1990     2000    2010

                                                                                                                       Year

Notes: This figure plots an indicator for whether the incremental R&D credit base is fixed. Sample includes all 50 states from
1980-2010. See Section 1 for details on data sources.




                                                                                                                       66
                    Figure A23: Event Analysis: Impact of Corporate Rate Changes of All Magnitudes on State Corporate Tax Revenue and GDP
                                            A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                    B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                               C. Log State GDP




                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                 .05




                                                                                                    10




                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                    0
                        Percentage Points
                                       0




                                                                                                 Percent




                                                                                                                                                               Percent
                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                  -10
                         -.05




                                                                                                    -20




                                                                                                                                                                         -5
                                 -.1




                                                                                                    -30




                                                                                                                                                                         -10
                                            -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2    3    4     5              -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2    3    4     5                   -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2    3    4     5
                                                 Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate                         Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate                              Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate


                                            D. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                    E. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                               F. Log State GDP




                                                                                                    20
                                 .1




                                                                                                                                                                         5
67




                                                                                                    10
                        Percentage Points
                                     .05




                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                 Percent




                                                                                                                                                               Percent
                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                         -5
                         0




                                                                                                    -10
                                 -.05




                                                                                                    -20




                                                                                                                                                                         -10
                                            -4   -3    -2   -1    0     1    2     3    4   5              -4   -3    -2   -1    0     1    2     3    4   5                   -4   -3    -2   -1    0     1    2     3    4   5
                                                  Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate                         Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate                              Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate




                                                                                                No Controls                                                              95% CI
                                                                                                Tax Base Controls                                                        95% CI
     Notes: This figure shows the effect of increases and decreases in the state corporate rate of any magnitude on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP, log corporate
     tax revenue and log state GDP, respectively. The full navy line indicates a specification without additional controls. The dashed red line plots the coefficients from a specification
     that additionally controls for the following tax base rules: federal income tax treated as state base, sales apportionment weight, throwback rules, federal income tax deductibility,
     loss carryforward, and franchise tax. Standard errors are clustered by state. The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4. See Section 1 for details on data
     sources.
                                  Figure A24: Histogram of State Corporate Rate Changes




                           40
                           30
                        Percent
                         2010
                           0




                                  -3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5
                                                         Corporate Rate Change (pp)


Notes: This figure plots the magnitude of changes in the corporate tax rate across states between 1980 and 2010. Changes smaller
than 0.5pp in absolute value make up 50.407% of all changes in the sample. See Section 1 for details on data sources.




                                                              68
                          Figure A25: Event Analysis: Impact of Selected Corporate Rate Changes on State Corporate Tax Revenue and GDP
                                                A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                      B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                               C. Log State GDP




                                    .05




                                                                                                         40




                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                         20
                                            0
                          Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                             5
                                                                                                     Percent




                                                                                                                                                                      Percent
                                -.05




                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                         -20
                                    -.1




                                                                                                                                                                               -5
                                    -.15




                                                                                                         -40




                                                                                                                                                                               -10
                                                -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2    3    4     5                -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2    3    4     5                   -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2    3    4     5
                                                     Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate                           Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate                              Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate


                                                D. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                      E. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                               F. Log State GDP
                                    .15




                                                                                                         30




                                                                                                                                                                               5
                                                                                                         20
                                    .1
                          Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                     .05




                                                                                                            10
69




                                                                                                      Percent




                                                                                                                                                                     Percent
                              0




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                               -5
                                    -.05




                                                                                                         -10
                                                                                                         -20




                                                                                                                                                                               -10
                                    -.1




                                                -4   -3    -2   -1    0     1    2     3    4   5                -4   -3    -2   -1    0     1    2     3    4   5                   -4   -3    -2   -1    0     1    2     3    4   5
                                                      Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate                           Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate                              Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate




                                                                                                    No Controls                                                                95% CI
                                                                                                    Tax Base Controls                                                          95% CI

     Notes: This figure shows the effect of increases and decreases in the state corporate rate of at least 0.5pp for state corporate tax changes that Giroud and Rauh (2015) classify
     as exogenous. Year and state fixed effects are included in each specification. The full navy line indicates a specification without additional controls. The dashed red line plots the
     coefficients from a specification that additionally controls for the following tax base rules: federal income tax treated as state base, sales apportionment weight, throwback rules,
     federal income tax deductibility, loss carryforward, and franchise tax. Standard errors are clustered by state. The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4.
     See Section 1 for details on data sources.
                                                        Figure A26: Event Analysis: Impact on State Corporate Tax Revenue and GDP, All Tax Base Controls
                                                 A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                     B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                               C. Log State GDP



                                   .1




                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                         20
                                           .05




                                                                                                         10




                                                                                                                                                                               5
                         Percentage Points




                                                                                                     Percent




                                                                                                                                                                     Percent
                                  0




                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                         -10
                      -.05




                                                                                                                                                                               -5
                                                                                                         -20
                                   -.1




                                                                                                                                                                               -10
                                                 -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2    3    4     5               -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2    3    4     5                   -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2    3    4     5
                                                      Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate                          Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate                              Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate


                                                 D. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                     E. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                               F. Log State GDP




                                                                                                         30
                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                                               5
70




                                   .15




                                                                                                         20
                      Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                            10
                                 .1




                                                                                                      Percent




                                                                                                                                                                     Percent
                         .05




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                               -5
                                                                                                         -10
                                   0
                                   -.05




                                                                                                         -20




                                                                                                                                                                               -10
                                                 -4   -3    -2   -1    0     1    2     3    4   5               -4   -3    -2   -1    0     1    2     3    4   5                   -4   -3    -2   -1    0     1    2     3    4   5
                                                       Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate                          Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate                              Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate




                                                                                                 All Tax Base Controls                                                               95% CI
                                                                                                 Tax Base Controls                                                                   95% CI
     Notes: This figure shows the effect of increases and decreases in the state corporate rate of at least 0.5pp on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP, log corporate tax
     revenue and log state GDP, respectively. Year and state fixed effects are included in each specification. The dashed red line plots the coefficients from a specification that additionally
     controls for the following tax base rules: federal income tax treated as state base, sales apportionment weight, throwback rules, federal income tax deductibility, loss carryforward,
     and franchise tax.The full navy line includes all tax base controls. Standard errors are clustered by state. The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4. See
     Section 1 for details on data sources.
                                                   Figure A27: Event Analysis: Impacts on State Wages, Establishments, Employment, and GOS

                                             A. Log Wages                                        B. Log Establishments                                C. Log Employment                                      D. Log GOS




                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                            6




                                                                                       4




                                                                                                                                         5
                            4




                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                       2
                             2
                       Percent




                                                                              Percent




                                                                                                                                      Percent




                                                                                                                                                                                         Percent
                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                        0
                       0




                                                                             -2




                                                                                                                                                                                            -10
                            -2




                                                                                       -4
                                                                                       -6




                                                                                                                                         -5
                            -4




                                                                                                                                                                                            -20
                                      -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5                                  -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5
                                    Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate                   Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate             Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate             Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate


                                             E. Log Wages                                        F. Log Establishments                               G. Log Employment                                       H. Log GOS




                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                            2




                                                                                       5




                                                                                                                                         5




                                                                                                                                                                                            5
                                0




                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                        Percent




                                                                             Percent




                                                                                                                                      Percent




                                                                                                                                                                                         Percent
                                                                                                                                          0
71




                                                                                                                                                                                         -5
                       -2




                                                                                       -5




                                                                                                                                                                                            -10
                                                                                                                                         -5
                            -4




                                                                                                                                                                                            -15
                                                                                       -10




                                     -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5                                  -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5
                                    Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate                   Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate             Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate             Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate



                                                                                                      No Tax Base Controls                                                95% CI
                                                                                                      Tax Base Controls                                                   95% CI

     Notes: This figure shows the effect of increases and decreases in the state corporate rate of at least 0.5pp on log state average wages, establishments, employment and gross
     operating surplus. Year and state fixed effects are included in each specification. The full navy line indicates a specification without additional controls. The dashed red line plots
     the coefficients from a specification that additionally controls for the following tax base rules: federal income tax treated as state base, sales apportionment weight, throwback rules,
     federal income tax deductibility, loss carryforward, and franchise tax. Note that “wages” are the average earnings among workers in a state. Standard errors are clustered by state.
     The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4. See Section 1 for details on data sources.
                                                   Figure A28: Event Analysis: Impact on State Corporate Tax Revenue and GDP, Neighboring State Controls

                                                  A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                    B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                              C. Log State GDP




                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                    .1




                                                                                                         20
                                            .05




                                                                                                         10




                                                                                                                                                                              5
                           Percentage Points




                                                                                                       Percent




                                                                                                                                                                    Percent
                                                                                                            0
                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                    -10
                        -.05




                                                                                                                                                                              -5
                                                                                                         -20
                                                                                                         -30




                                                                                                                                                                              -10
                                    -.1




                                                  -4   -3    -2   -1   0    1    2     3    4   5                -4   -3    -2   -1   0    1    2     3    4    5                   -4   -3    -2   -1   0    1    2     3    4   5
                                                       Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate                         Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate                             Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate


                                                  D. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                    E. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                              F. Log State GDP
                                    .15




                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                         30
72




                                          .1




                                                                                                         20
                        Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                    Percent




                                                                                                                                                                    Percent
                               .05




                                                                                                     10




                                                                                                                                                                              -5
                                    0




                                                                                                         0
                                    -.05




                                                                                                         -10




                                                                                                                                                                              -10
                                                  -4   -3   -2   -1    0     1    2    3    4   5                -4    -3   -2   -1    0     1    2    3    4   5                   -4   -3   -2   -1    0     1    2    3    4   5
                                                       Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate                          Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate                            Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate




                                                                                                No Tax Base Controls                                                                95% CI
                                                                                                Tax Base Controls                                                                   95% CI
     Notes: This figure shows the effect of increases and decreases in the state corporate rate of at least 0.5pp on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP, log corporate tax
     revenue and log state GDP, respectively. Leads and lags of corporate tax rate and tax base changes in neighboring states are included in each specification. Year and state fixed
     effects are also included. The full navy line indicates a specification without additional controls. The dashed red line plots the coefficients from a specification that additionally
     controls for the following tax base rules: federal income tax treated as state base, sales apportionment weight, throwback rules, federal income tax deductibility, loss carryforward,
     and franchise tax. Standard errors are clustered by state. The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4. Neighboring states are states that share a border,
     as defined in Section B.2. See Section 1 for details on data sources.
                                                 Figure A29: Event Analysis: Impact on State Corporate Tax Revenue and GDP, Similar State Controls

                                            A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                   B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                              C. Log State GDP




                                 .1




                                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                  10




                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                      .05
                        Percentage Points




                                                                                              Percent




                                                                                                                                                             Percent
                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                               0
                           0




                                                                                                  -10




                                                                                                                                                                       -5
                                                                                                  -20
                                 -.05




                                                                                                                                                                       -10
                                            -4   -3    -2   -1   0    1    2     3    4   5               -4   -3    -2   -1   0    1    2     3    4    5                   -4   -3    -2   -1   0    1    2     3    4   5
                                                 Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate                        Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate                             Years Since Decrease in Corporate Rate


                                            D. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                   E. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                              F. Log State GDP




                                                                                                  30
                                 .1




                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                  20
73




                        Percentage Points
                                     .05




                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                     10
                                                                                               Percent




                                                                                                                                                             Percent
                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                       -5
                         0




                                                                                                  -10
                                 -.05




                                                                                                  -20




                                                                                                                                                                       -10
                                            -4   -3   -2   -1    0     1    2    3    4   5               -4    -3   -2   -1    0     1    2    3    4   5                   -4   -3   -2   -1    0     1    2    3    4   5
                                                 Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate                         Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate                            Years Since Increase in Corporate Rate




                                                                                          No Tax Base Controls                                                               95% CI
                                                                                          Tax Base Controls                                                                  95% CI
     Notes: This figure shows the effect of increases and decreases in the state corporate rate of at least 0.5pp on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP, log corporate tax
     revenue and log state GDP, respectively. Leads and lags of corporate tax rate and tax base changes in similar states are included in each specification. Year and state fixed effects
     are also included. The full navy line indicates a specification without additional controls. The dashed red line plots the coefficients from a specification that additionally controls for
     the following tax base rules: federal income tax treated as state base, sales apportionment weight, throwback rules, federal income tax deductibility, loss carryforward, and franchise
     tax. Standard errors are clustered by state. The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4. We construct an artificial similar state using the most similar
     state the year before an event, as defined in Section B.2. See Section 1 for details on data sources.
                                                    Figure A30: Event Analysis: Impacts of Federal Accelerated Depreciation Changes on Revenue and GDP

                                              A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                       B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                             C. Log State GDP




                                                                                                          20
                                .1




                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                          10
                                       .05
                     Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                Percent




                                                                                                                                                                      Percent
                                                                                                    0
                             0




                                                                                                                                                                    -2
                                                                                                          -10
                                -.05




                                                                                                                                                                         -4
                                                                                                          -20
                                -.1




                                                                                                                                                                         -6
                                             -4   -3   -2    -1    0    1     2    3    4   5                   -4   -3   -2    -1    0    1     2    3    4    5                 -4   -3   -2    -1    0    1     2    3    4   5
                                                   Years Since Broadening of Fed Acc Depr                             Years Since Broadening of Fed Acc Depr                            Years Since Broadening of Fed Acc Depr


                                              D. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                       E. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                              F. Log State GDP



                                                                                                          100




                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                .4
74




                                                                                                                                                                         2
                     Percentage Points




                                                                                                          50
                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                Percent




                                                                                                                                                                    Percent
                                                                                                                                                                    -2
                     0




                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                         -4
                                                                                                                                                                         -6
                                                                                                          -50
                                -.2




                                             -4   -3   -2    -1   0    1     2    3     4   5                   -4   -3   -2    -1   0    1     2    3     4    5                 -4   -3   -2    -1   0    1     2    3     4   5
                                                   Years Since Narrowing of Fed Acc Depr                              Years Since Narrowing of Fed Acc Depr                             Years Since Narrowing of Fed Acc Depr




                                                                                                                     Impact                                    95% CI

     Notes: This figure shows the effect of broadening and narrowing of whether the state allows federal accelerated depreciation on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state
     GDP, log corporate tax revenue and log state GDP, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by state. The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4. See
     Appendix A for detailed definitions of broadening and narrowing for each measure. See Section 1 for details on data sources.
                                                               Figure A31: Event Analysis: Impacts of ACRS Depreciation Changes on Revenue and GDP

                                              A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                           B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                            C. Log State GDP




                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                .1




                                                                                                             10
                                       .05




                                                                                                                                                                            10
                     Percentage Points




                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                     Percent




                                                                                                                                                                         Percent
                             0




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                   -10
                                -.05




                                                                                                                                                                            -10
                                                                                                             -20
                                                                                                             -30




                                                                                                                                                                            -20
                                -.1




                                             -4     -3   -2    -1   0     1    2   3     4    5                    -4     -3   -2    -1   0     1    2   3     4    5              -4     -3   -2    -1   0     1    2   3     4    5
                                                  Years Since Broadening of ACRS Depreciation                           Years Since Broadening of ACRS Depreciation                     Years Since Broadening of ACRS Depreciation


                                              D. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                           E. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                            F. Log State GDP



                                                                                                             20
                                .05
75




                                                                                                                                                                            5
                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                             0
                     Percentage Points




                                                                                                   Percent




                                                                                                                                                                         Percent
                          -.05




                                                                                                                                                                          -5
                                                                                                             -20
                                -.1




                                                                                                                                                                            -10
                                                                                                             -40
                                -.15




                                                                                                                                                                            -15
                                             -4    -3    -2   -1    0    1    2    3     4     5                   -4    -3    -2   -1    0    1    2    3     4     5             -4    -3    -2   -1    0    1    2    3     4     5
                                                  Years Since Narrowing of ACRS Depreciation                            Years Since Narrowing of ACRS Depreciation                      Years Since Narrowing of ACRS Depreciation




                                                                                                                        Impact                                  95% CI

     Notes: This figure shows the effect of broadening and narrowing of whether the state allows ACRS depreciation on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP, log corporate
     tax revenue and log state GDP, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by state. The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4. See Section 1 for details
     on data sources and Appendix A for detailed definitions of broadening and narrowing for each measure.
                                                        Figure A32: Event Analysis: Impacts of Federal Bonus Depreciation Changes on Revenue and GDP

                                              A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                 B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                               C. Log State GDP




                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                .05




                                                                                                   10
                       Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                   0




                                                                                                Percent




                                                                                                                                                             Percent
                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                       -5
                     -.05




                                                                                                   -10
                                                                                                   -20




                                                                                                                                                                       -10
                                -.1




                                             -4   -3    -2   -1   0     1     2    3   4    5             -4   -3    -2   -1   0     1     2    3   4    5                   -4   -3    -2   -1   0     1     2    3   4    5
                                                  Years Since Broadening of Fed Bonus Dep                      Years Since Broadening of Fed Bonus Dep                            Years Since Broadening of Fed Bonus Dep


                                              D. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                 E. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                               F. Log State GDP



                                                                                                   40




                                                                                                                                                                       10
                                .1
76




                                       .05




                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                       5
                     Percentage Points




                                                                                                Percent




                                                                                                                                                             Percent
                                                                                                   0
                             0




                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                -.05




                                                                                                   -20




                                                                                                                                                                       -5
                                                                                                   -40
                                -.1




                                             -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2    3    4    5             -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2    3    4    5                   -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2    3    4    5
                                                  Years Since Narrowing of Fed Bonus Dep                       Years Since Narrowing of Fed Bonus Dep                             Years Since Narrowing of Fed Bonus Dep




                                                                                                               Impact                                   95% CI

     Notes: This figure shows the effect of broadening and narrowing of whether the state allows federal bonus depreciation on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP, log
     corporate tax revenue and log state GDP, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by state. The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4. See Section 1
     for details on data sources and Appendix A for detailed definitions of broadening and narrowing for each measure.
                                                        Figure A33: Event Analysis: Impacts of Federal Income Tax Deductibility Changes on Revenue and GDP

                                                  A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                    B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                                 C. Log State GDP




                                                                                                          60
                                  .1




                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                          40
                                           .05
                         Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                      Percent




                                                                                                                                                                      Percent
                                 0




                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                0
                     -.05




                                                                                                          -20
                                  -.1




                                                                                                          -40




                                                                                                                                                                                -10
                                                 -4    -3   -2   -1    0    1     2     3    4    5              -4    -3   -2   -1    0    1     2     3    4    5                   -4    -3   -2   -1    0    1     2     3    4    5
                                                      Years Since Broadening of Fed Inc Tax Ded                       Years Since Broadening of Fed Inc Tax Ded                            Years Since Broadening of Fed Inc Tax Ded


                                                  D. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                    E. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                                 F. Log State GDP



                                                                                                          40
                                  .1




                                                                                                                                                                                6
77




                                  .05




                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                          20
                     Percentage Points
                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                      Percent




                                                                                                                                                                      Percent
                                                                                                         0
                       -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                          -20
                                  -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                -2
                                  -.15




                                                                                                          -40




                                                                                                                                                                                -4
                                                 -4   -3   -2    -1    0    1    2      3    4    5              -4   -3   -2    -1    0    1    2      3    4    5                   -4   -3   -2    -1    0    1    2      3    4    5
                                                      Years Since Narrowing of Fed Inc Tax Ded                        Years Since Narrowing of Fed Inc Tax Ded                             Years Since Narrowing of Fed Inc Tax Ded




                                                                                                                      Impact                                     95% CI

     Notes: This figure shows the effect of broadening and narrowing of whether federal income tax is deductible on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP, log corporate
     tax revenue and log state GDP, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by state. The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4. See Section 1 for details
     on data sources and Appendix A for detailed definitions of broadening and narrowing for each measure.
                                                                   Figure A34: Event Analysis: Impacts of Investment Tax Credit Changes on Revenue and GDP

                                                  A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                               B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                                      C. Log State GDP




                                                                                                                    40




                                                                                                                                                                                             5
                                  .1       .05




                                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                         Percentage Points




                                                                                                          Percent




                                                                                                                                                                                   Percent
                                 0




                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                             -5
                     -.05




                                                                                                                    -20




                                                                                                                                                                                             -10
                                  -.1




                                                 -4      -3    -2   -1   0     1     2    3     4     5                   -4      -3    -2   -1   0     1     2    3     4     5                   -4      -3    -2   -1   0     1     2    3     4     5
                                                      Years Since Broadening of Investment Tax Credit                          Years Since Broadening of Investment Tax Credit                          Years Since Broadening of Investment Tax Credit


                                                  D. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                               E. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                                      F. Log State GDP



                                                                                                                    20
                                  .05
78




                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                    10




                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                       Percentage Points
                                     0




                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                            Percent




                                                                                                                                                                                   Percent
                                                                                                          -10




                                                                                                                                                                                             -2
                     -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                             -4
                                                                                                                    -20




                                                                                                                                                                                             -6
                                                                                                                    -30
                                  -.1




                                                 -4     -3    -2   -1    0     1     2    3    4     5                    -4     -3    -2   -1    0     1     2    3    4     5                    -4     -3    -2   -1    0     1     2    3    4     5
                                                      Years Since Narrowing of Investment Tax Credit                           Years Since Narrowing of Investment Tax Credit                           Years Since Narrowing of Investment Tax Credit




                                                                                                                                Impact                                     95% CI

     Notes: This figure shows the effect of broadening and narrowing of investment tax credits on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP, log corporate tax revenue and
     log state GDP, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by state. The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4. See Section 1 for details on data sources
     and Appendix A for detailed definitions of broadening and narrowing for each measure.
                                                              Figure A35: Event Analysis: Impacts of Franchise Tax Changes on Revenue and GDP

                                          A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                      B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                            C. Log State GDP




                                                                                                  100
                              .3




                                                                                                                                                                    10
                              .2




                                                                                                  50




                                                                                                                                                                    5
                     Percentage Points
                                 .1




                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                               Percent




                                                                                                                                                                Percent
                          0




                                                                                             -50




                                                                                                                                                                    -5
                              -.1




                                                                                                  -100




                                                                                                                                                                    -10
                              -.2




                                                                                                  -150




                                                                                                                                                                    -15
                                         -4   -3    -2   -1    0    1     2    3     4   5                 -4   -3    -2   -1    0    1     2    3     4    5              -4   -3    -2   -1    0    1     2    3     4   5
                                               Years Since Broadening of Franchise Tax                           Years Since Broadening of Franchise Tax                         Years Since Broadening of Franchise Tax


                                          D. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                      E. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                            F. Log State GDP



                                                                                                  40
                              .1




                                                                                                                                                                    15
79




                              .05




                                                                                                  20




                                                                                                                                                                    10
                     Percentage Points
                                 0




                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                               Percent




                                                                                                                                                                Percent
                       -.05




                                                                                             -20




                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                  -40
                              -.1




                                                                                                                                                                    -5
                              -.15




                                                                                                  -60




                                                                                                                                                                    -10
                                         -4   -3   -2    -1   0     1     2    3     4   5                 -4   -3   -2    -1   0     1     2    3     4    5              -4   -3   -2    -1   0     1     2    3     4   5
                                               Years Since Narrowing of Franchise Tax                            Years Since Narrowing of Franchise Tax                          Years Since Narrowing of Franchise Tax




                                                                                                                Impact                                     95% CI

     Notes: This figure shows the effect of broadening and narrowing of whether the state has a franchise tax on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP, log corporate tax
     revenue and log state GDP, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by state. The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4. See Section 1 for details on
     data sources and Appendix A for detailed definitions of broadening and narrowing for each measure.
                                                          Figure A36: Event Analysis: Impacts of Loss Carryforward Changes on Revenue and GDP

                                          A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                    B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                             C. Log State GDP




                                                                                                 30




                                                                                                                                                                  10
                              .1




                                                                                                 20




                                                                                                                                                                  5
                                   .05
                     Percentage Points




                                                                                                  10
                                                                                            Percent




                                                                                                                                                             Percent
                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                 0
                     0




                                                                                                                                                                  -5
                                                                                                 -10
                              -.05




                                                                                                 -20




                                                                                                                                                                  -10
                                         -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2    3     4   5                -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2    3     4    5                 -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2    3     4   5
                                              Years Since Broadening of Loss Carryfwd                         Years Since Broadening of Loss Carryfwd                           Years Since Broadening of Loss Carryfwd


                                          D. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                    E. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                              F. Log State GDP
                              .05




                                                                                                 10




                                                                                                                                                                  4
80




                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                 5
                                     0
                     Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                     0
                                                                                              Percent




                                                                                                                                                               Percent
                      -.05




                                                                                                                                                             -2
                                                                                            -5   -10




                                                                                                                                                                  -4
                              -.1




                                                                                                 -15




                                                                                                                                                                  -6
                                         -4   -3   -2    -1    0    1     2    3    4   5                -4   -3   -2    -1    0    1     2    3    4    5                 -4   -3   -2    -1    0    1     2    3    4   5
                                               Years Since Narrowing of Loss Carryfwd                          Years Since Narrowing of Loss Carryfwd                            Years Since Narrowing of Loss Carryfwd




                                                                                                              Impact                                    95% CI

     Notes: This figure shows the effect of broadening and narrowing of loss carryforward years on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP, log corporate tax revenue and
     log state GDP, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by state. The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4. See Section 1 for details on data sources
     and Appendix A for detailed definitions of broadening and narrowing for each measure.
                                                              Figure A37: Event Analysis: Impacts of Loss Carryback Changes on Revenue and GDP

                                           A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                  B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                          C. Log State GDP




                                                                                                 30
                              .1




                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                 20




                                                                                                                                                               4
                                    .05
                     Percentage Points




                                                                                              Percent




                                                                                                                                                            Percent
                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                10




                                                                                                                                                               0
                      0




                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                               -2
                              -.05




                                                                                                                                                               -4
                                                                                                 -10
                                          -4   -3    -2   -1   0     1     2    3    4    5             -4   -3    -2   -1   0     1     2    3    4    5             -4   -3    -2   -1   0     1     2    3    4    5
                                               Years Since Broadening of Loss Carryback                      Years Since Broadening of Loss Carryback                      Years Since Broadening of Loss Carryback


                                           D. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                  E. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                          F. Log State GDP




                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                 20
81




                              .05




                                                                                                 10




                                                                                                                                                               5
                     Percentage Points




                                                                                              Percent




                                                                                                                                                            Percent
                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                               0
                            0




                                                                                                 -10




                                                                                                                                                               -5
                              -.05




                                                                                                 -20




                                                                                                                                                               -10
                                          -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2    3     4    5             -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2    3     4    5             -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2    3     4    5
                                               Years Since Narrowing of Loss Carryback                       Years Since Narrowing of Loss Carryback                       Years Since Narrowing of Loss Carryback




                                                                                                             Impact                                    95% CI

     Notes: This figure shows the effect of broadening and narrowing of loss carryback years on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP, log corporate tax revenue and log
     state GDP, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by state. The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4. See Section 1 for details on data sources and
     Appendix A for detailed definitions of broadening and narrowing for each measure.
                                                                  Figure A38: Event Analysis: Impacts of R&D Credit Changes on Revenue and GDP

                                          A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                           B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                               C. Log State GDP




                                                                                                         50
                              .2




                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                          5
                     Percentage Points




                                                                                                         0
                                   .1




                                                                                               Percent




                                                                                                                                                                       Percent
                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                         -50
                     0




                                                                                                                                                                          -5
                                                                                                                                                                          -10
                                                                                                         -100
                              -.1




                                         -4   -3   -2    -1    0    1     2   3      4     5                    -4   -3   -2    -1    0    1     2   3      4      5             -4   -3   -2    -1    0    1     2   3      4     5
                                                Years Since Broadening of R&D Credit                                   Years Since Broadening of R&D Credit                             Years Since Broadening of R&D Credit


                                          D. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                           E. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                               F. Log State GDP
                              .06




                                                                                                         20
82




                                                                                                                                                                          4
                              .04




                                                                                                         10




                                                                                                                                                                          2
                     Percentage Points
                                 .02




                                                                                               Percent




                                                                                                                                                                       Percent
                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                        0
                          0   -.02




                                                                                                         -10




                                                                                                                                                                          -2
                              -.04




                                                                                                         -20




                                                                                                                                                                          -4
                                         -4   -3      -2    -1   0    1     2    3     4   5                    -4   -3      -2    -1   0    1     2    3     4    5             -4   -3      -2    -1   0    1     2    3     4   5
                                                   Years Since Narrowing of R&D Credit                                    Years Since Narrowing of R&D Credit                              Years Since Narrowing of R&D Credit




                                                                                                                     Impact                                       95% CI

     Notes: This figure shows the effect of broadening and narrowing of R&D tax credits on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP, log corporate tax revenue and log
     state GDP, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by state. The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4. See Section 1 for details on data sources and
     Appendix A for detailed definitions of broadening and narrowing for each measure.
                                                      Figure A39: Event Analysis: Impacts of Sales Apportionment Weight Changes on Revenue and GDP

                                             A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                  B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                         C. Log State GDP




                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                   30
                               .3




                                                                                                   20
                                       .2




                                                                                                                                                                 5
                     Percentage Points




                                                                                                     10
                                                                                               Percent




                                                                                                                                                              Percent
                            .1




                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                 -5
                               0




                                                                                                   -10
                                                                                                   -20




                                                                                                                                                                 -10
                               -.1




                                            -4   -3   -2    -1   0    1     2     3   4    5              -4   -3   -2    -1   0    1     2     3   4     5             -4   -3   -2    -1   0    1     2     3   4    5
                                                 Years Since Broadening of Sales App Wgt                       Years Since Broadening of Sales App Wgt                       Years Since Broadening of Sales App Wgt


                                             D. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                  E. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                          F. Log State GDP



                                                                                                   30
                               .1




                                                                                                                                                                 5
83




                                                                                                   20
                                   .05
                     Percentage Points




                                                                                               Percent




                                                                                                                                                              Percent
                                                                                                 10




                                                                                                                                                                 0
                     0




                                                                                                   0
                               -.05




                                                                                                   -10




                                                                                                                                                                 -5
                                            -4   -3   -2    -1    0    1     2    3    4   5              -4   -3   -2    -1    0    1     2    3    4    5             -4   -3   -2    -1    0    1     2    3    4   5
                                                  Years Since Narrowing of Sales App Wgt                        Years Since Narrowing of Sales App Wgt                        Years Since Narrowing of Sales App Wgt




                                                                                                               Impact                                    95% CI

     Notes: This figure shows the effect of broadening and narrowing of sales apportionment weights on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP, log corporate tax revenue
     and log state GDP, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by state. The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4. See Section 1 for details on data
     sources and Appendix A for detailed definitions of broadening and narrowing for each measure.
                                                          Figure A40: Event Analysis: Impacts of Federal Income as State Base Changes on Revenue and GDP
                                                A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                    B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                             C. Log State GDP




                                                                                                        40




                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                 .1      .05




                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                        5
                       Percentage Points




                                                                                                     Percent




                                                                                                                                                                     Percent
                                0




                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                        0
                     -.05




                                                                                                        -20




                                                                                                                                                                        -5
                                 -.1




                                                                                                        -40




                                                                                                                                                                        -10
                                               -4    -3   -2    -1   0     1    2      3    4    5             -4    -3   -2    -1   0     1    2      3    4    5             -4    -3   -2    -1   0     1    2      3    4    5
                                                    Years Since Broadening of Fed Inc Tax Base                      Years Since Broadening of Fed Inc Tax Base                      Years Since Broadening of Fed Inc Tax Base


                                                                                                                            Impact               95% CI
84




     Notes: This figure shows the effect of broadening and narrowing of whether states use federal income as the tax base on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP, log
     corporate tax revenue and log state GDP, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by state. The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4. See Section 1
     for details on data sources and Appendix A for detailed definitions of broadening and narrowing for each measure.
                                                             Figure A41: Event Analysis: Impacts of Combined Reporting Changes on Revenue and GDP

                                            A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                      B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                            C. Log State GDP




                                                                                                                                                                    10
                               .2




                                                                                                    20
                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                    10
                     Percentage Points




                                                                                                 Percent




                                                                                                                                                                 Percent
                                                                                                      0
                            -.2




                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                    -10
                               -.4




                                                                                                                                                                    -5
                                                                                                    -20
                                                                                                    -30




                                                                                                                                                                    -10
                               -.6




                                           -4     -3    -2   -1   0     1    2    3    4     5             -4     -3    -2   -1   0     1    2    3    4     5             -4     -3    -2   -1   0     1    2    3    4     5
                                                Years Since Broadening of Combined Reporting                    Years Since Broadening of Combined Reporting                    Years Since Broadening of Combined Reporting


                                            D. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                      E. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                            F. Log State GDP




                                                                                                                                                                    40
                               .4
85




                                                                                                    60




                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                    40
                     Percentage Points
                                    .2




                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                 Percent




                                                                                                                                                                 Percent
                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                    0
                     0




                                                                                                                                                                    -20
                                                                                                    -20
                                                                                                    -40




                                                                                                                                                                    -40
                               -.2




                                           -4     -3   -2    -1   0     1   2     3    4    5              -4     -3   -2    -1   0     1   2     3    4    5              -4     -3   -2    -1   0     1   2     3    4    5
                                                Years Since Narrowing of Combined Reporting                     Years Since Narrowing of Combined Reporting                     Years Since Narrowing of Combined Reporting




                                                                                                                Impact                                   95% CI

     Notes: This figure shows the effect of broadening and narrowing of combined reporting on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP, log corporate tax revenue and log
     state GDP, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by state. The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4. See Section 1 for details on data sources and
     Appendix A for detailed definitions of broadening and narrowing for each measure.
                                                                Figure A42: Event Analysis: Impacts of Throwback Rule Changes on Revenue and GDP

                                              A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                     B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                                C. Log State GDP




                                                                                                      30
                                .1




                                                                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                                      20
                                      .05
                     Percentage Points




                                                                                                         10




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                 Percent




                                                                                                                                                                  Percent
                            0




                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                            -5
                                -.05




                                                                                                      -10
                                                                                                      -20




                                                                                                                                                                            -10
                                -.1




                                             -4   -3    -2   -1    0    1     2    3    4    5                -4   -3    -2   -1    0    1     2    3    4    5                   -4   -3    -2   -1    0    1     2    3    4    5
                                                  Years Since Broadening of Throwback Rule                         Years Since Broadening of Throwback Rule                            Years Since Broadening of Throwback Rule


                                              D. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                     E. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                                F. Log State GDP



                                                                                                      30




                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                .1
86




                                                                                                      20
                                       .05




                                                                                                                                                                            5
                     Percentage Points




                                                                                                 Percent




                                                                                                                                                                  Percent
                                                                                                     10
                            0




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                      0
                                -.05




                                                                                                      -10




                                                                                                                                                                            -5
                                -.1




                                             -4   -3   -2    -1    0    1     2   3    4     5                -4   -3   -2    -1    0    1     2   3    4     5                   -4   -3   -2    -1    0    1     2   3    4     5
                                                  Years Since Narrowing of Throwback Rule                          Years Since Narrowing of Throwback Rule                             Years Since Narrowing of Throwback Rule




                                                                                                                   Impact                                    95% CI

     Notes: This figure shows the effect of broadening and narrowing of throwback rules on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP, log corporate tax revenue and log state
     GDP, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by state. The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4. See Section 1 for details on data sources and
     Appendix A for detailed definitions of broadening and narrowing for each measure.
                                            Figure A43: Event Analysis: Impacts of Incremental R&D Base as Moving Average Changes on Revenue and GDP

                                            A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                             B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                              C. Log State GDP




                                                                                                            30
                              .1




                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                            20
                                    .05
                     Percentage Points




                                                                                                  Percent




                                                                                                                                                                           Percent
                                                                                                      10




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                      0




                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                            -10
                              -.05




                                                                                                                                                                              -5
                                           -4    -3   -2   -1    0     1    2    3     4     5                      -4    -3   -2   -1    0     1    2    3     4     5               -4    -3   -2   -1    0     1    2    3     4     5
                                          Years Since Broadening of Incr R&D Base is Moving Avg                    Years Since Broadening of Incr R&D Base is Moving Avg             Years Since Broadening of Incr R&D Base is Moving Avg


                                            D. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                             E. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                              F. Log State GDP



                                                                                                            50




                                                                                                                                                                              5
                              .15
87




                              .1
                     Percentage Points




                                                                                                            0
                               .05




                                                                                                  Percent




                                                                                                                                                                           Percent
                                                                                                                                                                                0
                        0




                                                                                                            -50
                              -.05




                                                                                                                                                                              -5
                                                                                                            -100
                              -.1




                                           -4   -3    -2   -1    0     1    2    3    4     5                       -4   -3    -2   -1    0     1    2    3    4     5                -4   -3    -2   -1    0     1    2    3    4     5
                                          Years Since Narrowing of Incr R&D Base is Moving Avg                     Years Since Narrowing of Incr R&D Base is Moving Avg              Years Since Narrowing of Incr R&D Base is Moving Avg




                                                                                                                       Impact                                    95% CI

     Notes: This figure shows the effect of broadening and narrowing of whether the incremental R&D base is a moving average on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP,
     log corporate tax revenue and log state GDP, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by state. The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4. See Section
     1 for details on data sources and Appendix A for detailed definitions of broadening and narrowing for each measure.
                                                      Figure A44: Event Analysis: Impacts of Fixed Incremental R&D Base Changes on Revenue and GDP

                                          A. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                               B. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                                     C. Log State GDP




                                                                                                            20
                              .1




                                                                                                                                                                                     6
                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                     Percentage Points
                                 .05




                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                  Percent




                                                                                                                                                                           Percent
                                                                                                                                                                                2    0
                                                                                                            0
                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                     -2
                              -.05




                                                                                                            -10




                                                                                                                                                                                     -4
                                         -4   -3    -2    -1   0     1     2   3      4    5                      -4   -3    -2    -1   0     1     2   3      4    5                     -4   -3    -2    -1   0     1     2   3      4    5
                                           Years Since Broadening of Incr R&D Base is Fixed                         Years Since Broadening of Incr R&D Base is Fixed                        Years Since Broadening of Incr R&D Base is Fixed


                                          D. Corp Tax Revenue Share of GDP                                               E. Log Corporate Tax Revenue                                                     F. Log State GDP
                              .3




                                                                                                            60




                                                                                                                                                                                     10
88




                              .2




                                                                                                            40
                     Percentage Points




                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                  Percent




                                                                                                                                                                           Percent
                              .1




                                                                                                      20
                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                            -20
                              -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                     -5
                                         -4      -3    -2   -1    0     1    2    3     4     5                   -4      -3    -2   -1    0     1    2    3     4     5                  -4      -3    -2   -1    0     1    2    3     4     5
                                              Years Since Narrowing of Incr R&D Base is Fixed                          Years Since Narrowing of Incr R&D Base is Fixed                         Years Since Narrowing of Incr R&D Base is Fixed




                                                                                                                        Impact                                     95% CI

     Notes: This figure shows the effect of broadening and narrowing of whether the incremental R&D base is fixed on state corporate tax revenue as a share of state GDP, log corporate
     tax revenue and log state GDP, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by state. The construction of these event studies follows the form of equation 4. See Section 1 for details
     on data sources and Appendix A for detailed definitions of broadening and narrowing for each measure.
                                               Figure A45: Corporate Tax Revenue Share by Region




                                          20
                                          15
                         Kernel Density
                                          10
                                          5
                                          0




                                               0                     .1                  .2                  .3
                                                      Share of Total Rev as Corporate Tax Rev - 1980-2010
                                                                     North East           Midwest
                                                                     South                West


                                          Figure A46: Individual Income Tax Revenue Share by Region
                                          6
                         Kernel Density
                                          4
                                          2
                                          0




                                               0                .2               .4           .6             .8
                                                   Share of Total Rev as Individual Income Tax Rev - 1980-2010
                                                                     North East           Midwest
                                                                     South                West



Notes: Sample spans 1980-2010. Regions are based on standard U.S. Census regions. The District of Columbia is excluded from
the density calculation. Note that the kernel density is equally weighted by state-year observation. That is, a single observation
is one state-year (within a single region). The alternative would be to take the total single tax revenue for a given state over the
sample period (1980-2010) and divide it by the total tax revenue for that state over the sample period. Both produce similar
results. See Section 1 for details on data sources.




                                                                            89
              Figure A47: Estimated Total Effect of τ on the Revenue-to-GDP Ratio By State-Year

                                                                  Alabama                      Alaska                       Arizona                     Arkansas                      California




                                                    5
                                                    0
                                                    -5
              Effect of τ on Revenue to GDP Ratio

                                                                  Colorado                   Connecticut                   Delaware                      Florida                       Georgia
                                                    5
                                                    0
                                                    -5




                                                                   Hawaii                       Idaho                        Illinois                    Indiana                        Iowa
                                                    5
                                                    0
                                                    -5




                                                                   Kansas                     Kentucky                     Louisiana                      Maine                       Maryland
                                                    5
                                                    0
                                                    -5




                                                                Massachusetts                 Michigan                     Minnesota                   Mississippi                     Missouri
                                                    5
                                                    0
                                                    -5




                                                         1980   1990    2000    2010 1980   1990    2000     2010 1980    1990     2000   2010 1980   1990    2000     2010 1980     1990    2000   2010

                                                                                                                          Year


                                                                  Nebraska                     Nevada                    New Hampshire                 New Jersey                    New Mexico
                                                    10
                                                    5
                                                    0
                                                    -5
              Effect of τ on Revenue to GDP Ratio




                                                                  New York                  North Carolina                North Dakota                    Ohio                        Oklahoma
                                                    10
                                                    5
                                                    0
                                                    -5




                                                                   Oregon                   Pennsylvania                  Rhode Island                South Carolina                 South Dakota
                                                    10
                                                    5
                                                    0
                                                    -5




                                                                 Tennessee                      Texas                        Utah                        Vermont                       Virginia
                                                    10
                                                    5
                                                    0
                                                    -5




                                                                                                                                                                              1980   1990    2000   2010

                                                                 Washington                 West Virginia                  Wisconsin                    Wyoming
                                                    10
                                                    5
                                                    0
                                                    -5




                                                         1980   1990    2000    2010 1980   1990    2000     2010 1980    1990     2000   2010 1980   1990    2000     2010

                                                                                                                          Year

Notes: This figure plots estimated total effects of τ on the revenue-to-GDP ratio for every state-year. The total effect is defined
in equation 6 as a result of estimating equation 5, which is reported in Column (3) of Table 6. Data used for this estimation is
discussed in Section 1, and details of the estimation can be found in Section 5. The coefficients on the terms τ and interactions
are multiplied by 100 to ease interpretation.




                                                                                                                          90
               Figure A48: Maps of the Estimated Total Effect of τ on the Revenue-to-GDP Ratio
                                                              1985




                                                                                            3.93 − 6.13
                                                                                            3.15 − 3.93
                                                                                            1.48 − 3.15
                                                                                            0.33 − 1.48
                                                                                            -1.07 − 0.33


                                                              2005




                                                                                            3.93 − 6.13
                                                                                            3.15 − 3.93
                                                                                            1.48 − 3.15
                                                                                            0.33 − 1.48
                                                                                            -3.18 − 0.33


Notes: These maps plot total effects of τ on the revenue-to-GDP ratio for every state in 1985 and 2005. The category (color)
ranges are held constant across time except for the maximum and minimum values. The total effect is defined in equation 6 as a
result of estimating equation 5, which is reported in Column (3) of Table 6. Data used for this estimation is discussed in Section
1, and details of the estimation can be found in Section 5. The revenue-to-GDP ratio is measured in basis points. Overall, these
maps show a decrease in the absolute value of the total effect of τ on the revenue-to-GDP ratio, while showcasing considerable
heterogeneity across states.




                                                               91
                                                           Figure A49: Estimate Revenue-Maximizing-Tax Rates: Robustness to State Tax Controls
           A. Estimated Laffer Curve for State Corporate Tax Revenue                                            B. CDF of Corporate Tax Revenue Maximizing Tax Rates
                                                                                                                                                         Base-independent Rate Mean Base-dependent Rate




                           50
                                                                                                                                             1



                                                                                                                                             .8




                                                                                                                    Cumulative Probability
                    Tax Revenue/GDP
                                  0




                                                                                                                                             .6



                                                                                                                                             .4
                   -50




                                                                                                                                             .2
                           -100




                                                                                                                                             0
                                      0   .05   .1   .15     .2    .25    .3    .35  .4   .45   .5   .55   .6                                     0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55 .6 .65 .7 .75 .8 .85 .9 .95 1
                                                                  Corporate Tax Rate                                                                                        Corporate Tax Rate
92




              C. Estimated Laffer Curve for Total State Tax Revenues                                            D. CDF of Total State Tax Revenue Maximizing Tax Rates
                                                                                                                                                                 Base-independent Rate Mean Base-dependent Rate

                                                                                                                                             1
                           100




                                                                                                                                             .8
                           80




                                                                                                                    Cumulative Probability
                   Tax Revenue/GDP




                                                                                                                                             .6
                             60




                                                                                                                                             .4
                     40




                                                                                                                                             .2
                           20




                                                                                                                                             0
                           0




                                      0   .05   .1   .15     .2    .25    .3    .35  .4   .45   .5   .55   .6                                     0   .02 .04 .06 .08              .1     .12 .14 .16 .18         .2   .22 .24 .26 .28
                                                                  Corporate Tax Rate                                                                                                    Corporate Tax Rate



     Notes: This figure plots the implied revenue-maximizing-state-corporate-tax rates, replicating Figure 11 and additionally controlling for state sales tax rates and top personal
     income tax rates. These estimates are based on estimates coefficients from equation 8 in Table A12. See Section 6 for details on estimation. See Section 1 for details on data
     sources.
                                  Table A1: Bartik Tax Base Summary Statistics
                           Panel A. 1980-2010 Pooled Sample
                                                     Observations Mean Std. Dev.
                           Property Tax Rate             672      2.545      0.939
                           Property Tax Abatement        672      0.353      0.529
                           Job Creation Tax Credit       672      0.300      0.514

                           Panel B. 2010 Cross Section
                                                      Observations             Mean      Std. Dev.
                           Property Tax Rate              32                   2.223       0.787
                           Property Tax Abatement         32                   0.411       0.590
                           Job Creation Tax Credit        32                   0.572       0.674
Notes: This table provides summary statistics for the measures from Bartik (2017). Panel A provides pooled summary statistics.
Data on property tax rates, property tax abatement and job creation tax credits range from 1990 to 2015. Panel B summarizes
the tax base measures for the 2010 cross-section. Data on property tax rates, property tax abatement and job creation tax credits
are from the Bartik (2017) dataset, which is restricted to 46 cities in 32 states that make up roughly 90 percent of aggregate U.S.
GDP. Details on each of the variables, sources, and coverage are available in Appendix A.




                                                                93
     Table A2: Variance Decomposition - Corporate Tax Revenue Share of GDP - Bartik and Unweighted

                                                                               Corp Rev Share of GDP
                     % Variance Explained                                      66.06     27.53      51.04
                       Corporate Rate % of Explained Variance                   0.31     71.29       3.82
                       Base Measures % of Explained Variance                   99.69     28.71      96.18

                     % Base Variation Explained by Base Rule
                       Federal Inc as State Base                               71.96      2.72      61.05
                       Federal Inc Deductible                                  1.63      24.55      3.65
                       Throwback Rules                                         2.20      8.02       1.98
                       Sales Apportionment Wgt                                 1.16      8.52       6.78
                       Loss Carryforward                                        6.67      1.34       7.05
                       Loss Carryback                                          0.08      0.56       0.03
                       Combined Reporting                                       0.06      6.15       0.30
                       Investment Tax Credit                                    0.07     13.77       0.40
                       R&D Credit                                              0.11      2.04       0.65
                       ACRS Depreciation                                       0.53      7.96       0.31
                       Federal Accelerated Dep                                 0.69      0.03       1.83
                       Federal Bonus Dep                                       0.40      0.37       0.02
                       Franchise Tax                                           4.08      5.91       6.35
                       Incremental R&D, Moving Avg                              0.53      7.56       1.15
                       Incremental R&D, Fixed                                   0.75     10.51      1.90
                       Property Tax                                            0.66                  0.31
                       Property Tax Abatement                                  7.96                  6.07
                       Job Creation Credit                                      0.45                 0.16
                       Mean GDP Weighted                                        Yes       No          No

Notes: This table shows the general explanatory power for the corporate tax rate, base rules, and additional bartik controls.
The following tax base rules are included in all decompositions: loss carryforward, loss carryback, R&D credit, investment credit,
throwback rule, combined reporting rule, federal income tax deductibility, federal bonus depreciation, federal income as state
tax base, federal accelerated depreciation, ACRS depreciation, and the sales apportionment weight. In addition, we include the
job creation tax credit rate, property tax rate, and property tax abatement as part of the “Bartik” controls where indicated.
Decompositions are not weighted by state GDP where specified. Note that the variance decomposition shown in this figure is only
performed on 33 states due to data limitations along the “Bartik” dimension. This table replicates Figure 5. See Section 1 for
details on data sources.




                                                               94
                    Table A3: Frequency of tax base changes accompanying rate changes
     Tax Rate Change:                          Dec. Dec. Inc. Inc. None None Total                                   Total
     Total Rate Changes:                        76           237        1469          313
     Base narrowing/broadening:                 -1    +1      -1  +1     -1      +1    -1                             +1
     Sales Apportionment Weight                 4      2      2    1     86      30   92                              33
     Loss Carryback                             0      3       1   0     22      39   23                              42
     Loss Carryforward                          8      1       4   1     73      13   85                              15
     Francise Tax                               1      0      1    1      1       2    3                              3
     Federal Income Tax Deductible              0      1       0   2      2       1    2                              4
     Federal Income Tax as State Tax Base       0      2       0   0      0       6     0                              8
     Federal Accelerated Depreciation            0     0       0   0      2       5     2                              5
     ACRS Depreciation                           1     0       6   1     50      13   57                              14
     Federal Bonus Depreciation                  1     1       1   2     16      40    18                             43
     Throwback                                   3     4       0   4     20      15   23                              23
     Combined Reporting                          0     1       0   2      2      17    2                              20
     Investment Credit                           1     1       0   0     33       8    34                              9
     R&D Credit                                  4     2       2   0     45       6   51                               8
     R&D Credit Incremental Base, Mov Avg       0      1       0   0     10      17    10                             18
     R&D Credit Incremental Base, Fixed          0     1       0   0      2      21     2                             22
Notes: This table reports the number of state-year observations where there was a change in tax base and tax rate. A change
that represents a narrowing of the base is counted in the −1 column, while a year that represents a broadening of the base is
counted as +1. The data used for this table are described in Section 1. See Appendix A for detailed definitions of broadening and
narrowing for each measure.




                                                               95
             Table A4: Sensitivity of Probit Estimates of the Coincidence of Base and Rate Changes

                                                    Panel A: Base Change
                                            Any Base Change Base Broadening                   Base Narrowing
                     Rate decrease                0.1157             0.0703                       0.1304
                                                (0.2408)            (0.2769)                     (0.3173)
                     No rate change              -0.0942             -0.2683                      0.0981
                                                (0.1851)            (0.2349)                     (0.2043)


                                                 Panel B: Tax Rate Change
                                             Any Tax Change      Tax Increase                   Tax Decrease
                     Base narrowed                0.0231            -0.0558                        0.0621
                                                (0.1467)           (0.1734)                       (0.1993)
                     Base broadened              0.2611*             0.1835                        0.2449
                                                (0.1466)           (0.2187)                       (0.1563)
Notes: This table describes the relationship between the timing of tax rate changes and the timing of tax base changes. Panel A
reports coefficients from a probit model estimating the probability of a change in the tax base using changes in tax rates. Panel B
reports coefficients from a probit model estimating the probability of a change in the tax rate using changes in the tax base. The
data used for this table are described in Section 1. See Appendix A for definitions of broadening and narrowing for each measure.
Year fixed effects are included in each panel. Standard errors are clustered by state (∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01). Overall, this
table shows that tax rate changes and tax base changes do not occur simultaneously.




                                                                  96
       Table A5: Probability of Rate and Base Changes Border and Similar State Changes in Past Year

                                                Panel A. Neighboring States
                                  (1)               (2)             (3)                        (4)                   (5)
  Dep Var                       Baseline      Corp Rate Inc Corp Rate Dec                Base Broadened         Base Narrowed
  Corp Rate Increase             0.313            -0.077          -0.190                    0.000∗∗∗
  (N = 1476)                                     (0.183)         (0.429)                     (0.362)

  Corp Rate Decrease              0.025            -0.018                0.000
  (N = 1458)                                      (0.383)               (0.290)

  Tax Base Broadening             0.008            0.000
  (N = 1326)                                      (0.399)

  Tax Base Narrowing
  (N = 1193)

                                                   Panel B. Similar States
                                  (1)               (2)              (3)                        (4)                  (5)
  Dep Var                       Baseline      Corp Rate Inc Corp Rate Dec                Base Broadened         Base Narrowed
  Corp Rate Increase             0.058            -0.003                                      -0.023               0.000∗∗
  (N = 1186)                                     (0.405)                                     (0.254)               (0.167)

  Corp Rate Decrease              0.055            0.043                 0.012                  0.043                 0.022
  (N = 1210)                                      (0.336)               (0.440)                (0.193)               (0.225)

  Tax Base Broadening             0.271            -0.107               0.069∗∗              -0.180∗∗∗               0.069∗∗
  (N = 1210)                                      (0.329)               (0.296)               (0.243)                (0.101)

  Tax Base Narrowing              0.224            -0.093                0.000                  -0.080                -0.032
  (N = 1210)                                      (0.274)               (0.337)                (0.195)               (0.110)

Notes: This table describes how the probability of a rate or base change in a given state in year t (“event”) is affected by changes
in other states in t − 1. Panel A calculates the impact of an increase or decrease in the corporate tax rate of at least 0.5pp, and/or
the broadening or narrowing of the tax base in neighboring states. Panel B does the same for similar states. These estimates
follow the form of equation 10. Column (1) indicates the probability of an event absent a rate of base change in comparison states.
Column (2) calculates the change in probability of an event given a corporate rate increase of at least 0.5pp in a border or similar
state. Columns (3)-(5) replicate Column (2) for a decrease of at least 0.5pp in the corporate rate, broadening of the tax base
and narrowing of the tax base, respectively. Note 57 observations are excluded when calculating the probability of corporate tax
rate decreases in neighboring states because the absence of base narrowing changes in the previous 5 years perfectly predicts that
corporate rates will not decrease. Standard errors are clustered by state (∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01). Section B describes the
construction of neighbor and similar state matches.




                                                                 97
 Table A6: Probability of Rate and Base Changes Given Border and Similar State Changes in Past 5 Years

                                                Panel A. Neighboring States
                                  (1)              (2)              (3)                         (4)                    (5)
  Dep Var                       Baseline      Corp Rate Inc Corp Rate Dec                 Base Broadened         Base Narrowed
  Corp Rate Increase             0.112            0.023           -0.019                      0.023∗∗                -0.086
  (N = 1488)                                     (0.143)         (0.163)                      (0.315)               (0.560)

  Corp Rate Decrease              0.027             0.008                0.008
  (N = 1388)                                       (0.184)              (0.209)

  Tax Base Broadening             0.004             0.002                0.002
  (N = 1388)                                       (0.244)              (0.256)

  Tax Base Narrowing              0.004             0.000
  (N = 1018)                                       (0.375)

                                                  Panel B. Similar States
                                  (1)              (2)              (3)                         (4)                   (5)
  Dep Var                       Baseline      Corp Rate Inc Corp Rate Dec                 Base Broadened         Base Narrowed
  Corp Rate Increase             0.086            0.000           0.000                      -0.043∗∗                0.000
  (N = 1210)                                     (0.204)         (0.258)                      (0.164)               (0.153)

  Corp Rate Decrease              0.072             0.000                0.000                  0.000                  -0.008
  (N = 1210)                                       (0.226)              (0.315)                (0.146)                (0.177)

  Tax Base Broadening             0.206             0.000                0.000                 -0.048∗                 0.000
  (N = 1210)                                       (0.164)              (0.194)                (0.096)                (0.091)

  Tax Base Narrowing              0.219             -0.044               0.006                  0.006                 -0.043∗
  (N = 1210)                                       (0.129)              (0.239)                (0.094)                (0.090)

Notes: This table describes how the probability of a rate or base change in a given state in year t (“event”) is affected by changes
in other states in years t − 1, t − 2, t − 3, t − 4 or t − 5. Panel A calculates the impact of an increase or decrease in the corporate
tax rate of at least 0.5pp, and/or the broadening or narrowing of the tax base in neighboring states. Panel B does the same for
similar states. These estimates follow the form of equation 11. Column (1) indicates the probability of an event absent a rate of
base change in comparison states. Column (2) calculates the change in probability of an event given a corporate rate increase of at
least 0.5pp in a border or similar state. Columns (3)-(5) replicate Column (2) for a decrease of at least 0.5pp in the corporate rate,
broadening of the tax base and narrowing of the tax base, respectively. Standard errors are clustered by state (∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05,
∗∗∗ p < .01). Section B describes the construction of neighbor and similar state matches.




                                                                  98
                                          Table A7: Variance Decomposition - Corporate Revenue Share of GDP, Level and Log
                                                                            Corp Rev Share of GDP                                   Log Corp Rev Share of GDP
          % Variance Explained                              48.57   83.88    85.50   57.23   84.97   86.70   85.56      40.35   78.13   82.29   46.40   79.76   83.82   82.36
            Corporate Rate % of Explained Variance          43.78   19.54    32.08    0.85    0.97    1.23   29.11      24.33   12.76   30.10    2.47    0.21    0.86   26.46
            Base Measures % of Explained Variance           56.22   80.46    67.92   49.63   61.82   61.83   70.89      75.67   87.24   69.90   50.54   51.29   51.66   73.54

          % Base Variation Explained by Base Rule
            Federal Inc as State Base                       18.02    1.67     2.41   18.63   1.04     1.69    2.02       0.01   0.10     0.05    6.77    1.63    2.02   0.01
            Federal Inc Deductible                          16.36    7.92    12.17    0.00   1.12     0.00   10.31      35.88   3.79     8.36    0.25    7.37    3.85    6.89
            Throwback Rules                                 8.77    1.24     1.14    0.04    0.25    0.08     2.18       7.00   1.28    0.99    0.02     0.01   0.04    2.31
            Sales Apportionment Wgt                         20.01    7.49     6.65    2.01   3.26     2.65   11.96       2.70   0.96     0.22    0.70    0.01    0.00    3.25
            Loss Carryforward                               5.05    0.68     0.12    3.63    9.02    11.91    0.18      24.87   3.46    0.08    3.31     0.75   2.76    0.09
            Loss Carryback                                  0.29    0.18     0.54    7.46    5.63    4.73     0.30       0.13   0.02    0.10    4.86     0.28   0.22    0.01
            Combined Reporting                              2.47    2.12     0.22    2.13    0.58    0.58     0.11       0.01   6.37    0.60    4.15     2.20   1.47    1.34
            Investment Tax Credit                            0.92    5.38     7.09    0.55    0.00    0.03    5.40       1.13    4.93    6.65    0.49    0.04    0.03    5.60
            R&D Credit                                       1.35    3.09     4.12   31.02   3.26    1.16     3.81       0.27   0.03    0.06    43.07   26.29   22.01   0.00
            ACRS Depreciation                                3.83    1.49     0.17   0.18    3.42     0.70    0.22      10.96   1.19    0.16     0.26    3.77   2.05    0.25
            Federal Accelerated Dep                         0.04    12.72    10.98   0.23    5.93    2.49     9.43       6.58   3.26    2.03    0.45     0.71   0.15    1.91
            Federal Bonus Dep                               0.26    0.71     0.66    0.04    2.24    2.41     0.55       0.13   0.00    0.43    0.44     2.25   2.80    0.32
            Franchise Tax                                   20.64   52.62    51.14    4.18   57.01   66.13   46.71       4.72   73.88   79.72    1.94   22.59   33.11   71.32
            Incremental R&D, Moving Avg                      1.19    1.94     1.33   17.43    1.61    0.40    1.36       2.27    0.27    0.00   20.03    5.70    3.51    0.03
99




            Incremental R&D, Fixed                           0.80    0.76     1.26   12.47    5.64    5.04    1.18       3.35    0.45    0.54   13.24   26.40   25.97    0.20
            Throwback Rules × Sales App Wgt                                                                   4.28                                                      6.49
            State Fixed Effects                              No      Yes      Yes    No      Yes      Yes      Yes       No      Yes     Yes     No      Yes     Yes     Yes
            Year Fixed Effects                               No      No       Yes    No      No       Yes      Yes       No      No      Yes     No      No      Yes     Yes
            Base Measures × Corporate Rate                   No      No       No     Yes     Yes      Yes      No        No      No      No      Yes     Yes     Yes      No


     Notes: This table decomposes the variation of corporate revenue share of GDP and its logged counterpart. State fixed effects are included where indicated. Five-year-period fixed
     effects are included in all specifications where year fixed effects are not included. See Section 1 for details on data sources.
                                     Table A8: Correlation Between Tax Base Measures and Change in Corporate Keep Rate
          Panel A. Level of Tax Base Rules
                           d(1 − τ )    ACRSDep    FedAccDep    FedIncTxDed    FedBonusDep    FedIncTxBase    FranchiseTx    LossCarryback    LossCarryfwd   Combined     ITC      R&D     R&D MA    R&D Fixed   PayAppWgt   Throwback
          d(1 − τ )          1.000
          ACRSDep           -0.026        1.000
          FedAccDep         -0.006       0.736        1.000
          FedIncTxDed        0.005       0.126        0.143         1.000
          FedBonusDepr      -0.010        0.386       0.504        0.080           1.000
          FedIncTxBase      -0.010        0.533      0.528          0.019          0.425         1.000
          FranchiseTx       -0.014       0.032       -0.057         0.070         -0.101         -0.123           1.000
          LossCarryback     -0.067        0.290      0.346          0.192          0.350         0.251            0.002          1.000
          LossCarryfwd      -0.006       0.525        0.513         0.148         0.172          0.556           -0.045          0.432           1.000
          CombinedRep        0.049        0.127       0.183        -0.104         0.120          0.176           -0.285          -0.013          0.071         1.000
          ITC                0.032        0.147       0.157        -0.021         -0.098         0.122            0.172          -0.057          0.078          0.050     1.000
          R&DCredit          0.029        0.119       0.090        -0.001         -0.136         0.254           -0.144          -0.078          0.173          0.233     0.238    1.000
          R&D Base is MA     0.012       0.122        0.053         0.061         -0.023         0.117            0.063          0.026           0.200         0.163     -0.070    0.336    1.000
          Fixed R&D Base     0.030        0.073      0.097          0.077         -0.079         0.200           -0.283          -0.110          0.088          0.211     0.148    0.596    -0.172     1.000
          SalesAppWgt       -0.000       -0.502      -0.594        -0.026         -0.527         -0.395           0.011          -0.328          -0.311        -0.025     0.068    0.026    -0.005     0.132        1.000
          ThrowbackRules    -0.031        0.228      0.264          0.045          0.143         0.070           -0.142          0.126           0.115         0.389     -0.004    0.075    0.121      0.057       -0.337      1.000

          Panel B. Change in Tax Base Rules
                           1−τ         ACRSDep    FedAccDep    FedIncTxDed    FedBonusDep    FedIncTxBase    FranchiseTx    LossCarryback    LossCarryfwd    Combined   ITC       R&D      R&D MA    R&D Fixed   PayAppWgt   Throwback
          1−τ              1.000
          ACRSDep          -0.082        1.000
          FedAccDep        -0.001        0.185       1.000
          FedIncTxDed       0.033        0.003      -0.001         1.000
          FedBonusDepr     -0.010        0.073       0.240        -0.002          1.000
          FedIncTxBase      0.079        0.033       0.002         0.002         -0.039          1.000
100




          FranchiseTx      -0.026        0.049       0.000         0.000         0.052          0.000          1.000
          LossCarryback    -0.054        0.024      -0.002        -0.001         -0.005         -0.062         0.000            1.000
          LossCarryfwd      0.041        0.232       0.055         0.003         -0.011          0.074         -0.027           0.110            1.000
          CombinedRep      -0.059        0.038       0.003        0.002           0.036         -0.007         0.087           -0.020           -0.022         1.000
          ITC              -0.001       -0.006       0.003         0.002         0.008          -0.007         0.000            0.079            0.037        -0.010    1.000
          R&DCredit        -0.043        0.007       0.004        -0.107         0.007          -0.031         0.010           -0.057           -0.001        -0.007     0.035     1.000
          R&D Base is MA    0.005        0.017       0.001        -0.076         0.003          -0.003         0.000           -0.056            0.019        -0.004    -0.009     0.382     1.000
          Fixed R&D Base    0.013       -0.014       0.003         0.086          0.009         -0.008         0.000           -0.057           -0.003        -0.011     0.062     0.449    -0.315      1.000
          SalesAppWgt      0.058        -0.014      0.005         -0.036          0.033         0.064          0.042           -0.071           -0.014        0.063     -0.017    -0.022    -0.007     -0.016      1.000
          ThrowbackRules   -0.093        0.018       0.000         0.000         0.019          0.000          0.060           -0.028            0.012        0.063     -0.000     0.004     0.000      0.000      0.053       1.000



      Notes: This table shows the correlation between tax base measures and changes in the corporate keep rate. Panel A and B calculate the correlation for levels of and changes in tax
      base rules, respectively. Corporate keep rate is denoted 1 − τ . See Section 1 for details on data sources.
                          Table A9: Pass-through Share of State Economic Activity (2010)
                                                        Pass-through Share of State
                               State               Employment Establishments Payroll
                               Alabama               35.47           45.67          32.21
                               Alaska                35.83           45.77          32.00
                               Arizona               35.39           54.00          27.88
                               Arkansas              34.61           49.91          28.78
                               California            33.21           42.22          27.62
                               Colorado              38.30           60.96          31.68
                               Connecticut           29.73           39.57          27.29
                               Delaware              33.86           47.33          31.17
                               Florida               37.97           64.14          33.87
                               Georgia               33.93           54.89          28.47
                               Hawaii                26.73           37.26          22.99
                               Idaho                 43.93           57.31          39.18
                               Illinois              35.56           51.35          31.05
                               Indiana               39.76           54.14          35.07
                               Iowa                  33.01           43.50          28.83
                               Kansas                32.77           43.17          27.72
                               Kentucky              35.04           49.25          29.86
                               Louisiana             38.98           47.25          36.69
                               Maine                 35.71           48.04          31.34
                               Maryland              34.61           48.82          31.33
                               Massachusetts         29.73           44.75          25.49
                               Michigan              35.06           45.90          30.12
                               Minnesota             35.07           54.20          28.43
                               Mississippi           32.63           42.66          28.34
                               Missouri              32.69           43.01          27.94
                               Montana               42.74           56.31          37.01
                               Nebraska              35.39           49.69          31.07
                               Nevada                37.68           54.00          34.39
                               New Hampshire         31.83           36.53          28.97
                               New Jersey            35.77           47.60          29.76
                               New Mexico            37.39           45.90          34.23
                               New York              34.36           47.88          31.91
                               North Carolina        34.50           50.28          28.46
                               North Dakota          35.98           45.02          31.42
                               Ohio                  33.36           42.88          28.61
                               Oklahoma              36.98           50.29          32.36
                               Oregon                37.34           50.67          30.25
                               Pennsylvania          33.32           44.96          29.92
                               Rhode Island          37.77           54.41          32.65
                               South Carolina        35.46           48.06          30.34
                               South Dakota          39.29           49.18          36.26
                               Tennessee             29.06           35.31          26.18
                               Texas                 33.70           43.06          28.88
                               Utah                  40.45           65.33          33.84
                               Vermont               34.11           48.10          30.62
                               Virginia              34.02           48.81          30.09
                               Washington            35.59           50.79          28.54
                               West Virginia         29.22           35.26          25.04
                               Wisconsin             35.81           43.91          30.99
                               Wyoming               41.12           54.48          36.30

Notes: This table describes the share of state-level economic activity attributed to pass-through corporations in 2010. Aggregate
activity is the sum of employment, establishments and annual payroll across all business forms. The cross-section was drawn from
County Business Patterns and includes all 50 states. See Section 1 for details on data sources.




                                                              101
Table A10: Heterogeneous Effects of Corp Tax Rates on Rscorp /GDPs : Robustness to Including Lagged Val-
ues
                                                                  (1)        (2)       (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)
       τ                                                         0.004     -0.001     0.010       0.002      0.001     -0.001
                                                                (0.010)   (0.005)    (0.007)    (0.005)     (0.006)   (0.006)
       L1 Lagged τ                                              0.014*    0.019**    0.018*     0.029**    0.022***   0.023**
                                                                (0.008)   (0.008)    (0.010)    (0.012)     (0.007)   (0.009)
       L2 Lagged τ                                                                               -0.008                -0.002
                                                                                                (0.009)               (0.008)
       L3 Lagged τ                                                                               0.002                 -0.000
                                                                                                (0.005)               (0.006)
       L4 Lagged τ                                                                               -0.007                -0.001
                                                                                                (0.006)               (0.008)
       L5 Lagged τ                                                                               0.008                 -0.001
                                                                                                (0.006)               (0.007)
       τ × Joint Interactions From Table 4                                          0.013***     0.001
                                                                                     (0.003)    (0.003)
       L1 Lagged τ × Lagged Joint Interactions From Table 4                           0.001    0.007***
                                                                                     (0.001)    (0.002)
       L2 Lagged τ × Lagged Joint Interactions From Table 4                                       0.000
                                                                                                (0.002)
       L3 Lagged τ × Lagged Joint Interactions From Table 4                                       0.004
                                                                                                (0.002)
       L4 Lagged τ × Lagged Joint Interactions From Table 4                                       0.002
                                                                                                (0.002)
       L5 Lagged τ × Lagged Joint Interactions From Table 4                                       0.003
                                                                                                (0.002)
                          βiτ
                      P
       Total Effect   t                                          0.019     0.019      0.028       0.025     0.023      0.019
                                                                (0.011)   (0.009)    (0.006)    (0.013)    (0.011)    (0.012)
                                                                 0.083     0.031      0.000       0.052     0.026      0.110
       Base and L1 Lagged Base Controls                            N         Y          Y           Y         Y          Y
       L2-L5 Lagged Base Controls                                  N         N          N           Y         N          Y
       Base Interaction and Lagged Base Interaction                N         N          N           N         Y          Y
       L2-L5 Lagged Base Interaction                               N         N          N           N         N          Y
       State Fixed Effects                                         Y         Y          Y           Y         Y          Y
       Year Fixed Effects                                          Y         Y          Y           Y         Y          Y

Notes: This table reports the coefficients of regressions of the revenue-to-GDP ratio on the corporate tax rate τ . The models
in this table expand those of Table 6 by including lagged values of τ , the tax base measures, and the joint interactions. Each
specification includes state and year fixed effects and we report the total effect t βtτ in the table, along with standard error and
                                                                                  P

p-value. Columns (1) and (2) show that including lagged values of τ and the base measures does not impact the total effect. By
comparison, Table 6, Column (2), reports a value of 0.016, while this table reports 0.019. Columns (3) and (4) include lagged
values of the the joint interaction term from Table 6. This table finds a total effect of 0.028, compared to the effect reported in
Table 6 of 0.024. Columns (5) and (6) include interactions between lagged values of the tax rate and each of the controls and also
find quantitatively similar effects to those in Table 6. The data used for this table are described in Section 1. Standard errors are
clustered by state (∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01).




                                                                102
 Table A11: Variance Decomposition - Corporate Revenue Share of GDP - Including Top Income Tax Rate

                                                                      Corp Tax Rev Share of GDP
                       % Explained                                       47.02            47.06
                         Corporate Rate                                  42.35            40.22
                         Base Measures                                   57.65            59.47
                         Top Personal Rate                                                 0.31

                       % Explained Var Among Base Rules
                         Federal Inc as State Base                       15.24            16.33
                         Federal Inc Deductible                          14.25            13.62
                         Throwback Rules                                 8.12              8.04
                         Payroll Apportionment Wgt                       18.55            17.64
                         Loss Carryforward                               9.74             10.50
                         Loss Carryback                                  0.01              0.00
                         Combined Reporting                              2.73              2.27
                         Investment Tax Credit                            0.20             0.12
                         R&D Credit                                      1.77              1.84
                         ACRS Depreciation                               4.89              4.22
                         Federal Accelerated Dep                         0.29              0.17
                         Federal Bonus Dep                               0.81              0.96
                         Franchise Tax                                   19.63            20.04
                         Incremental R&D, Moving Avg                      0.66             0.76
                         Incremental R&D, Fixed                           3.10             3.51

Notes: This table replicates the baseline specification in Table A7, but includes the top statutory personal income tax rate as an
additional control. See Section 1 for details on data sources.




                                                              103
   Table A12: Effects of Corporate Tax Rate Changes on Tax Revenues: Robustness to State Tax Controls

                                 Panel A. State Corporate Tax Revenue-to-GDP Ratio
                                                                      (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)             (5)
        State Corporate Tax Rate τ                                 6.13∗∗∗       0.98      4.17∗∗         2.99            3.04
                                                                    (2.23)      (4.67)     (2.05)       (3.98)           (3.84)
        State Corporate Tax Rate2 (τ )2                              -5.15       9.93       8.86         -5.01            -4.82
                                                                   (20.58)     (30.79)    (20.84)      (25.31)          (24.94)
        Base Index × 100                                                                   5.87∗∗      5.12∗∗∗          11.74∗∗
                                                                                           (2.54)       (1.66)           (5.83)
        State Corporate Tax Rate τ × Base Index                                                                           -1.95
                                                                                                                         (1.33)
        State Corporate Tax Rate2 (τ )2 × Base Index                                                                     12.81
                                                                                                                         (8.90)
        Observations                                                 1,550      1,550      1,550         1,550           1,550
        Year Fixed Effects                                            Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes              Yes
        State Fixed Effects                                                      Yes                      Yes              Yes
        Sales and Personal Income Tax                                Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes              Yes
        Revenue-Maximizing Rate                                                                          0.299           0.315

                                    Panel B. Total State Tax Revenue-to-GDP Ratio
                                                                      (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)               (5)
        State Corporate Tax Rate τ                                   -9.5        16.7       -9.4          11.9              23.1
                                                                    (13.5)      (18.8)     (13.5)        (18.5)           (14.7)
        State Corporate Tax Rate2 (τ )2                             132.5        -70.3     133.6          -59.3           -126.0
                                                                   (108.1)     (130.0)    (107.2)       (128.0)          (101.1)
        Base Index × 100                                                                     7.9         21.8∗∗            -20.6
                                                                                           (10.8)         (9.0)           (26.8)
        State Corporate Tax Rate τ × Base Index                                                                              8.8
                                                                                                                           (7.9)
        State Corporate Tax Rate2 (τ )2 × Base Index                                                                       -38.4
                                                                                                                          (54.3)
        Observations                                                 1,550      1,550       1,550        1,550             1,550
        Year Fixed Effects                                            Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes               Yes
        State Fixed Effects                                                      Yes                      Yes               Yes
        Sales and Personal Income Tax                                Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes               Yes
        Revenue-Maximizing Rate                                                                          0.101            0.092
Notes: This table reports the results of regressions that estimate the effects of changes in tax rates and tax bases on tax revenue.
Panel A and B replicate those in Table 7, and additionally control for state sales tax rates and top personal income tax rates.
Each specification weights observations by the mean state GDP in our sample and includes state and year fixed effects. The
revenue-to-GDP ratio is measured in basis points. Standard errors are clustered by state (∗ p < .1,   ∗∗ p   < .05,   ∗∗∗ p   < .01). The 15
base controls included in the base index are described in Section 1.




                                                               104
              Table A13: Summary of State Characteristics Used in Constructing Similarity Scores
                                                                                    Share of GDP
                        Log Pop          Skill Share         Agric           Constr&Mine        Manuf                 Services
  State               1980 2010         1980 2010         1980 2010          1980 2010        1980 2010             1980 2010
  Alabama             15.2    15.4      10.2    19.7       1.9       1.3      1.9     1.3        24.4    15.8       14.8    27.1
  Alaska              12.9    13.5      19.9    23.7       1.8       1.0     1.8      1.0         3.7     2.1        8.6    17.6
  Arizona             14.8    15.7      16.6    27.3       3.0       0.7      3.0     0.7        13.7     8.6       20.0    34.7
  Arkansas            14.6    14.9      11.1    16.8       4.9       2.5     4.9      2.5        24.2    14.6       16.3    27.5
  California          17.0    17.4      19.2    29.8       2.9       1.6      2.9     1.6        17.5    11.3       23.8    41.3
  Colorado            14.9    15.4      24.8    37.7        2.7      0.9     2.7      0.9        13.4     7.8       21.2    40.4
  Connecticut         15.0    15.1      19.6    36.1       0.6       0.1     0.6      0.1        28.3    12.0       25.7    46.0
  Delaware            13.3    13.7      16.1    26.3       0.8       0.7      0.8     0.7        33.6     7.5       19.5    55.5
  Florida             16.1    16.7      12.9    27.2       3.1       1.0      3.1     1.0        11.0     5.0       22.5    37.9
  Georgia             15.5    16.1      15.5    27.4       1.5       0.9      1.5     0.9        21.9    11.1       17.4    37.9
  Hawaii              13.8    14.1      18.0    26.6       3.2       0.6     3.2      0.6         5.1     1.9       23.4    35.0
  Idaho               13.8    14.3      13.9    23.9       9.8       5.5     9.8      5.5        16.2    11.4       19.6    30.0
  Illinois            16.3    16.4      14.9    30.0       2.0       0.8     2.0      0.8        24.9    13.0       22.1    38.9
  Indiana             15.5    15.7       9.8    20.8       3.0       1.3      3.0     1.3        32.5    29.6       17.7    24.4
  Iowa                14.9    14.9      13.5    23.1       9.9       5.2     9.9      5.2        24.8    18.9       19.9    29.6
  Kansas              14.7    14.9      15.1    29.2       4.7       3.9     4.7      3.9        18.5    15.3       17.8    28.7
  Kentucky            15.1    15.3       8.4    21.0        3.7      1.1     3.7      1.1        26.0    17.2       15.6    25.2
  Louisiana           15.3    15.3      11.8    22.8       1.2       0.8     1.2      0.8        13.4    22.7       11.3    22.6
  Maine               13.9    14.1      12.5    27.0       2.8       1.6      2.8     1.6        24.2    10.7       17.7    31.5
  Maryland            15.3    15.6      18.5    35.2       0.9       0.3     0.9      0.3        14.1     6.3       24.6    40.1
  Massachusetts       15.6    15.7      17.3    37.1       0.7       0.3     0.7      0.3        24.7    10.8       27.3    44.0
  Michigan            16.0    16.1      13.7    25.7       1.5       0.8     1.5      0.8        30.1    17.6       19.2    32.2
  Minnesota           15.2    15.5      14.5    29.9       5.5       2.3      5.5     2.3        21.0    13.7       20.8    36.1
  Mississippi         14.7    14.9      11.8    16.7       3.7       2.4      3.7     2.4        22.8    15.1       13.9    24.2
  Missouri            15.4    15.6      14.8    20.6       2.9       1.4      2.9     1.4        22.6    12.6       17.9    36.0
  Montana             13.6    13.8      14.8    26.5       7.1       4.1     7.1      4.1         8.4     5.2       14.3    27.3
  Nebraska            14.3    14.4      14.0    27.3       9.0       6.8     9.0      6.8        14.2    12.1       20.1    28.7
  Nevada              13.6    14.8      13.4    21.1       1.3       0.2     1.3      0.2         5.1     4.1       17.3    31.9
  New Hampshire       13.7    14.1      19.6    34.5       0.7       0.2      0.7     0.2        30.7    11.3       20.2    35.8
  New Jersey          15.8    16.0      16.0    32.4       0.5       0.2     0.5      0.2        25.5     9.4       21.5    42.6
  New Mexico          14.1    14.5      16.0    24.6       2.4       1.5      2.4     1.5         5.3     5.3       14.7    29.4
  New York            16.7    16.8      15.5    31.5       0.7       0.2     0.7      0.2        18.4     5.9       30.7    50.4
  North Carolina      15.6    16.1      15.7    25.5        2.6      1.1     2.6      1.1        32.7    21.1       14.5    31.5
  North Dakota        13.4    13.4      13.7    26.6       6.9       8.8     6.9      8.8         5.1     7.1       14.5    23.1
  Ohio                16.2    16.3      12.0    20.9       1.6       0.7     1.6      0.7        32.6    16.4       16.4    34.5
  Oklahoma            14.9    15.1      13.2    23.1        2.9      1.6      2.9     1.6        14.5     9.5       14.6    24.5
  Oregon              14.8    15.2      17.0    27.5       3.8       1.7      3.8     1.7        23.0    29.5       18.6    27.8
  Pennsylvania        16.3    16.4      13.2    24.8       1.1       0.5      1.1     0.5        28.2    12.3       19.1    37.3
  Rhode Island        13.8    13.9      16.0    28.5       0.9       0.2     0.9      0.2        28.3     8.1       21.3    38.8
  South Carolina      15.0    15.3      11.8    23.5       1.5       0.8     1.5      0.8        30.2    16.3       14.0    29.9
  South Dakota        13.4    13.6      11.3    24.3       13.4      8.2     13.4     8.2         9.5     8.8       17.6    32.9
  Tennessee           15.3    15.7      12.1    22.4       2.0       0.6     2.0      0.6        25.9    15.6       16.4    29.9
  Texas               16.5    17.0      14.7    24.1       1.5       0.8     1.5      0.8        16.6    14.5       16.0    27.5
  Utah                14.2    14.8      18.8    26.4       1.6       0.5      1.6     0.5        15.0    14.9       17.6    32.7
  Vermont             13.1    13.3      16.9    32.0       4.0       1.3     4.0      1.3        26.9    11.4       18.3    31.0
  Virginia            15.5    15.9      18.2    34.2       1.1       0.3      1.1     0.3        19.0     9.7       17.8    40.9
  Washington          15.2    15.7      20.1    31.3       3.6       1.8      3.6     1.8        20.6    13.9       17.6    37.2
  West Virginia       14.5    14.4       6.7    19.4       0.7       0.4     0.7      0.4        19.4     9.8       13.1    21.7
  Wisconsin           15.4    15.6      13.8    26.5       5.3       1.6     5.3      1.6        31.0    18.9       17.9    32.0
  Wyoming             13.1    13.2      16.6    21.8        2.6      1.3     2.6      1.3         4.1     4.7        8.5    16.0
  United States                         15.1    27.4       2.3       1.1     2.3      1.1        21.3    12.3       20.2    36.4

Notes: This table summarizes log population, state skill share, agriculture share of GDP, construction and mining share of GDP,
manufacturing share of GDP and services industries’ share of GDP for all 50 states in the first and last years of the sample. The
table also includes the national average. Skill share is the share of the population 18 or older with a Bachelor’s Degree or above.




                                                               105
                        Table A14: States Considered “Similar” in the year before an event
                              State Similar States
                              AK     NM, WY
                              AL     AR, KY, MS, TX, WV
                              AR     DE, ID, KY, ND, TN, WY
                              AZ     CA, GA, HI, IL, NM, OH, TX, WY
                              CO     AK, HI, IA, MA, ND, WY
                              CT     IN, MA, MI, WY
                              DE     NH
                              FL     AL, CA, HI, NE, TX
                              GA     CA, DE, NC, NJ, PA, SC, TN, TX, VA, WA
                              HI     NV, SD
                              IA     CA, CO, NC, ND, OR, WI, WY
                              ID     AR, CT, KY, NE, NY, SD, VT, WV, WY
                              IL     CA, MA, MI, NJ, NY, PA, TX
                              IN     AR
                              KS     CA, IA, IN, KY, UT, VT, WI
                              KY     AK, AR, IA, IN, LA, MS, NC, ND
                              LA     IN, KY, ND, OH, TX, WY
                              MA     NJ, NY, WI
                              MD     AK, CA, MA, NY, VA
                              ME     AR, HI, ID, MS, NH, NV, RI, SD, WV
                              MI     CT, DE, IL, IN, NH, NY, OH, WI
                              MN     CA, CO, CT, IN, NJ, WI, WY
                              MO     AL, CT, FL, GA, MI, NE, NV, NY, PA, WA
                              MS     AK, AR, HI, KY, SC, TN, TX, WY
                              MT     AK, HI, MD, ND, NV
                              NC     AR, CA, DE, IN, KS, NE, OH, WA, WI
                              ND     AK, IA, MT, NC, SD
                              NE     CA, HI, ID, MA, NY, SD, TN, WA
                              NH     CT, IN, MA, MD, RI, SC, VA, VT
                              NJ     MA, NY, WV
                              NM     AK, HI, MS, NE, NY, TX, WY
                              NV     HI
                              NY     NJ
                              OH     IN, NC, NJ, NV, NY, PA, SC, TN, VA
                              OK     AK, FL, LA, MS, NC, NM, TN, VA, WV
                              OR     CT, DE, HI, IN, NE, NH, TN, WI
                              PA     CA, FL, HI, IA, NV, NY, OH, TN, VA, WV
                              RI     NH, NV, TN
                              SC     NC, NM, OH, WV
                              TN     AL, AR, FL, ID, NE, OH, VA, WA
                              TX     AK, CA
                              UT     AK, DE, HI, LA, NH, NM, NV, SC, VA, WV
                              VA     AK, CA, CO, MA, MI, NJ, OH, SC
                              VT     DE, ID, KS, MT, ND, NH, SD
                              WI     CT, IA, MI, NC, OR, TN
                              WV     HI, IN, WY
Notes: This table lists all states for whom there is a similar state match in the year before a corporate tax rate or a tax base
change. See Section B.2 for a description of how similar states were defined.




                                                              106
