                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  MONETARY POLICY IN THE CAPITALS OF CAPITAL

                                          Elena Gerko
                                          Hélène Rey

                                      Working Paper 23651
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23651


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2017




This paper is based on Rey’s BBVA lecture delivered at the 2016 Annual AEA Meeting held in
San Francisco and at the Foundation BBVA in Madrid. We are grateful to the BBVA foundation.
We thank a referee and an editor for excellent suggestions. We also thank seminar participants at
the 2016 ASSA Meetings in San Francisco and at the BBVA Foundation in Madrid, Silvia
Miranda-Agrippino and Paolo Surico for comments as well as Thomas Ryland, James Cloyne,
Peter Karadi and Refet Gurkaynack for help with the data. All errors are ours. Hélène Rey thanks
the ERC for financial support (ERC Advanced Grant 695722). The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Elena Gerko and Hélène Rey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital
Elena Gerko and Hélène Rey
NBER Working Paper No. 23651
August 2017
JEL No. E4,E52,E58,F41,F6,G15

                                          ABSTRACT

The importance of financial markets and international capital flows have increased greatly since
the 1990s. How does this affect the effectiveness of monetary policy? We analyse the
transmission of monetary policy in two important financial centres, the United States and the
United Kingdom. Studying the responses of mortgage and corporate spreads we find evidence in
favour of an important financial channel in both countries. Our identification strategy allows us to
study movements in the policy rates and the effect of forward guidance, broadly defined. We also
analyse international financial spillovers, which we find to be asymmetric.


Elena Gerko
London Business School
Regents Park
London NW1 4SA UK
egerko@london.edu

Hélène Rey
London Business School
Regents Park
London NW1 4SA
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
hrey@london.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23651
Gerko and Rey      Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                            2

1. Introduction

How does monetary policy work in the “capitals of capital”1 ? Monetary policy
affects the real economy via different channels. Do these channels depend on
financial development and international financial linkages? On being a hegemon
or not in the international monetary system? In a keynesian or neo-keynesian
world featuring nominal stickiness, output is demand determined in the short
run and monetary policy stimulates aggregate consumption and investment.
There is no first order responses of spreads or risk premia (see Woodford (2003)
and Gali (2008) for classic discussions). But when there are frictions in capital
markets, they amplify shocks and affect monetary policy transmission. In such
models, (for example Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010)), expansionary monetary
policy leads to an increase in the net worth of borrowers, whether they be
financial intermediaries or firms. This leads to an increase in lending and an
increase in aggregate demand. This is the credit channel of monetary policy
(Bernanke and Gertler (1995)). Another stream of research has emphasized the
risk-taking channel of monetary policy (Borio and Zhu (2012), Bruno and Shin
(2015) and Coimbra and Rey (2017)) where financial intermediation plays a
key role and a monetary policy loosening relaxes leverage constraints. These
views of the transmission channel are complementary to one another.
    In this paper we start from the observation that the importance of financial
markets and international capital flows have increased greatly since the 1990s
(see Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007) and Gourinchas and Rey (2014)). We focus
on the transmission channels of monetary policy that occur through financial
intermediation and asset prices (credit channel or risk-taking channel ) that
we subsume in a broadly defined financial channel of monetary policy. We
also note that the recent financial crisis underlines the importance of capital
market frictions in macroeconomic modelling. We analyse the effectiveness of
monetary policy in two important financial centres, the United States and
the United Kingdom, the “capitals of capital”. Our aim is not only to study
the transmission of US and UK monetary policies via the financial channel
domestically but also to look at potential international spillovers of these
monetary policies2 .


1. Cassis and Collier (2010) in a book entitled “Capitals of Capital” provide a description
of the rise and fall of international financial centres between 1780 and 2009.
2.   See also Passari and Rey (2015) and Rey (2016).
Gerko and Rey   Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                    3

    The United States has been at the centre of the International Monetary
System at least since Bretton Woods, playing major roles in goods and financial
markets. The Dollar is the main currency in banking and a large share of foreign
exchange turnover is in Dollars: according to the April 2016 BIS survey 87.6 %
of the share of currency turnover (out of 200% since a transaction involves two
currencies) was in Dollars. Approximately 60% of disclosed official reserves are
held in US Dollars. The United Kingdom was the previous currency hegemon.
The internationalization of the pound began early in the 1800s and continued
for more than a century. The industrial revolution transformed Britain into
the world’s richest economy and leading trading nation. The years after the
First World War saw the decline of Britain as an international power, but
sterling kept a lot of its functions. Only after the Second World War did
the decline of sterling accelerate, with a sharp rise in the use of the dollar
as an international currency (see Rey (2001)). Chiţu et al. (2014) finds that
the share of international reserves held in Sterling went from about 80% in
1950 to less than 10% in 2013. London is still however a major financial centre
receiving and sending large amounts of financial flows. Both countries are home
to deep and sophisticated financial markets and have important international
linkages. They are the “capitals of capital”. Recent work has drawn attention
to the importance of the US Federal Reserve in setting the tone in international
financial markets worldwide with important effects on capital flows, risk-taking
of financial intermediaries and on risky asset prices. Comovements in those
variables across the planet is what Rey (2013) called the global financial
cycle (see also Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015), Bernanke (2016)). But just
how sensitive is a country like the United Kingdom to the global financial
cycle? As the former centre country of the international monetary system how
independent is its monetary policy from the current hegemon? And how potent
is UK domestic monetary policy in the current environment of large capital
mobility across borders?

    The empirical analysis of monetary policy effectiveness has a long and
distinguished tradition making it one of the most studied empirical questions in
macroeconomics (for a recent excellent survey see Ramey (2016)). We identify
monetary policy shocks using high frequency asset price movements around
monetary policy events (such as FOMC announcements) following Bagliano
and Favero (1999), Kuttner (2001), Gürkaynak et al. (2005), Gertler and
Karadi (2015), Nakamura and Steinsson (2013) and others. The idea behind
Gerko and Rey     Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                            4

the identification scheme is that only monetary policy or monetary policy
announcements move asset prices in tight windows around monetary policy
events. As in Gertler and Karadi (2015) we use these high frequency price
movements as external instruments in a proxy SVAR (see Stock and Watson
(2008), Stock and Watson (2012) and Mertens and Ravn (2013)). While this
methodology has been used in the context of the United States, it has been
very rarely used elsewhere, due to data availability and differences in monetary
policy frameworks. More generally, there are surprisingly few papers focusing on
the effect of UK monetary policy on the economy.3 Cloyne and Hürtgen (2016)
construct a new measure of monetary policy innovations for the UK based
on the Romer and Romer (2004) methodology. They estimate peak responses
of about -0.6% for industrial production for a 100 bp tightening of the Bank
of England and an inflation rate decrease of about 100 bp but they do not
investigate the financial channels of monetary policy. Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2016)
is a contemporaneous paper to ours who uses local projection methods and high
frequency instruments (with a different methodology and different variables
from ours) to study UK monetary policy. It finds in particular evidence that a
tightening raises forward real rates and lowers break-even inflation.

    One of our paper’s contribution is to take seriously the importance of the
different institutional set ups of the UK and the US in terms of monetary policy
framework when performing the estimations. We show that the methodology
used by Gertler and Karadi (2015) in the US context where they exploit
surprises in specific Fed Funds Futures market cannot be straightforwardly
applied to the UK. Instead, we use a set of high frequency instruments (Short
Sterling Futures) which, unlike Fed Funds Futures, do not aggregate only
information about the policy rate. Thanks to different timings of monetary
policy events in the UK, we allow for a separate identification of monetary
policy rate shocks and forward guidance shocks, broadly defined as shocks
affecting the price of Short Sterling Futures during tight windows around
minutes and inflation reports. In our sample, most of the information about
monetary policy in the UK is communicated around minutes and inflation
reports while policy rate announcements are largely void of information content


3. For an early study using international data including the UK see Sims (1992). For a
study of UK monetary policy using a VAR with sign restrictions see Mountford (2005). Ellis
et al. (2014) estimate a FAVAR model.
Gerko and Rey   Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                    5

once the zero lower bound is hit in March 2009. In the US, monetary
policy announcements about the policy rate are accompanied by a statement
containing some information about future policy and the state of the economy.
For the US we confirm the importance of a financial channel of monetary
policy as described by Gertler and Karadi (2015). We also find evidence of
important spillovers of US monetary policy on the UK, despite the flexible
sterling exchange rate. Indeed in terms of the financial variables we study, the
Fed monetary policy is almost as potent in the UK as it is at home.
    We also have new results on the domestic effects of UK monetary policy. We
find evidence of a financial channel, measured by the responses of mortgage and
corporate spreads to the Bank of England monetary policy shocks. The financial
channel is roughly as important for the UK as it is in the US. Furthermore, we
cannot find any evidence of spillovers going from the UK to the US, validating
the view that the United States is the current hegemon of the International
Monetary System.

    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we review
briefly the theoretical literature on the credit and risk-taking channels of
monetary policy. In Section 3 we describe the monetary policy frameworks of
the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England, pointing out the differences
in the timing of the announcements and in their communication strategies.
Section 4 presents our identification schemes for the US and the UK making
use of different financial instruments while Section 5 describes the empirical
model used. Finally, Section 6 analyses our results in both countries as well as
the international spillovers.


2. The financial channel of monetary policy

The literature has long ago recognized agency problems as an important source
of business cycle amplification (Bernanke and Gertler (1989)). When agency
costs between borrowers and lenders are important, there is a wedge between
the opportunity cost of internal finance and the cost of external finance: the
external finance premium. The financial accelerator mechanism (Bernanke et al.
(1999)) has been mostly studied in the context of non-financial corporations
Gerko and Rey      Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                             6

and households (Kiyotaki and Moore (1997)).4 Part of the recent literature has
focused on the role of these frictions in affecting monetary policy transmission.
In such models, expansionary monetary policy leads to an increase in the net
worth of borrowers, whether they be financial intermediaries or firms. This
mitigates adverse selection and moral hazard problems, decreasing the size of
the external finance premium. Hence, there is an increase in lending. This is the
credit channel of monetary policy.5 Another stream of research has emphasized
the risk-taking channel of monetary policy (Borio and Zhu (2012), Bruno and
Shin (2015)), of which Coimbra and Rey (2017) provides a general equilibrium
model. Coimbra and Rey (2017) features heterogeneous intermediaries with
limited liability. Monetary loosening induces more risk-taking due to increased
risk-shifting by the less risk averse intermediaries which end up dominating
the market in good times. These intermediaries price assets marginally and
compress risk premia during booms. Both the credit channel (or net worth
channel) and the risk-taking channels are part of what we call the financial
channel of monetary policy transmission. From an empirical point of view,
both lead to a loosening of financial constraints and a decrease in risk premium
when there is a monetary policy expansion. They are hard to disentangle using
only macroeconomic data but analysing the dynamics of the cross section of
leverage of intermediaries helps. A distinctive feature of Coimbra and Rey
(2017) is that a monetary expansion when the interest rate level is already
low increases risk concentration and leads to skewness in the distribution of
leverage across banks. Analysing thoroughly the financial channel of monetary
policy will in general require studying the responses to monetary policy shocks
of asset prices (credit spreads, risk premia, exchange rates) and, where possible,
leverage of intermediaries or capital flows in conjunction with the responses of
the standard variables of a monetary VAR (output, inflation)6 .


4. There is a rapidly growing literature modeling some type of balance sheet constraints:
Lorenzoni (2008); Fostel and Geanakoplos (2012), Christiano et al. (2010).
5. Recently, there has been a flurry of models featuring explicitly financial intermediaries
(Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), He and Krishnamurthy (2013), Adrian and
Boyarchenko (2015), Coimbra (2016). Some aim at analysing specifically monetary policy
transmission, e.g. Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010), Gertler and Karadi (2011), Cúrdia and
Woodford (2010).
6. For empirical analyses of the risk taking channel using very granular balance sheet
data see Jimenez et al. (2014) and Morais et al. (2015). For a large Bayesian VAR analysis
Gerko and Rey       Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                              7

    Most movements in the policy rates (whether the Fed Funds rate or the
Bank rate in the UK) are due to the systematic component of monetary
policy, which reacts endogenously to developments in the economy and to
changes in expectations of the policy makers regarding future conditions. It
is therefore famously difficult to estimate causal effects of monetary policy
on macroeconomic variables. Estimating causal effects of monetary policy on
financial variables may be even more of a challenge given how quickly asset
prices respond to monetary policy. In a standard Cholesky ordering7 it is
assumed that no variables can respond to the policy rate within the period,
which is hardly a tenable proposition for asset prices. It becomes therefore
paramount to look for alternative identification schemes to analyse the financial
channel of monetary policy transmission. One possibility is to use the Romer
and Romer (2004) narrative approach, a road pursued by Miranda-Agrippino
and Rey (2015) for the US and Cloyne and Hürtgen (2016) for the UK (though
this latter paper does not investigate the financial channel of monetary policy).
Another possibility, which we pursue in this paper is to use a high frequency
approach to identification8 . The advantage of this method is that it will allow
us to discuss not only the causal effect of movements in the policy rates on
asset prices but also the effect of forward guidance. This is where an intimate
knowledge of monetary policy frameworks is required.


3. Monetary policy frameworks

3.1. Federal Reserve

The monetary policy framework of the United States is well known. The
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) sets monetary policy. It consists
of the members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
and five Reserve Bank presidents. The FOMC holds eight regularly scheduled
meetings during the year, and other meetings as needed. After each meeting
the committee releases the statement which contains the decisions regarding


combining real economy and international financial variables includig capital flows and credit
aggregates see Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015)
7.   See Christiano et al. (1999).
8.   Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2016) also use a high frequency approach for part of their analyses.
Gerko and Rey     Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                 8

monetary policy implementations (including the Fed Funds rate target) as well
as a short summary of the current and prospective state of the economy. So for
our purposes this means that at the time of FOMC meetings we have not only a
statement about the policy rate but also a statement which we define broadly as
forward guidance and which reveals information about future policy and future
state of the economy as seen by the FOMC. The minutes of regularly scheduled
meetings are released three weeks after the date of the policy decision.9

3.2. Bank of England

The Bank of England follows an inflation target since 1992. Since 1997 the Bank
of England has had operational independence. Starting in January 2000 the
UK Monetary Policy Committee meets monthly to decide on monetary policy.
After every meeting the decisions regarding the policy rate are announced by
publishing a news release on the website of the Bank of England at 12:00pm
the first or the second Thursday of each month. From the 5th of March 2009
the Monetary Policy Committee in addition to setting the Bank rate also
sets a target for the level of assets to be financed by central bank reserves.
The Bank of England provides information about the current and expected
state of the economy in separate news releases. The Bank of England Inflation
report is published 4 times a year and becomes available at 10:30am on the
second Wednesday in November, August, May and February. Minutes of each
Monetary Policy Committee meeting are published at 9:30am on Wednesday
two weeks after the meeting has taken place. The important difference between
the way the monetary policy is conducted in the UK compared to the US is that
the policy rate decision at the time of the announcement is not accompanied by
any statement about the economy or about future policy. Information about
the economy or future policy come at distinct times when minutes and the
inflation reports are released. Therefore this setting allows us to disentangle
two separate effects of monetary policy: the direct effect of the policy rate
change from the effect of forward guidance defined broadly as news on the
future path of interest rates or on the Bank view on the future state of the
economy. For the UK, the announcement dates and times are those of releases
of Monetary Policy Committee decisions, minutes and inflation reports releases.
The current dataset contains 180 policy rates decisions, 179 minutes releases


9.   https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
Gerko and Rey     Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                           9

and 60 inflation reports from January 2000 to January 2015 (between 1997 and
2000 announcement times were not scheduled and before 1999 minutes were
released with a different timing)10 .


4. Identification of monetary policy shocks

The definition of a monetary policy shock is not an easy one to formulate. Most
movements in the policy rates are due to the systematic component of monetary
policy rather than to deviations from it. We define a monetary policy shock
as an unanticipated movement in monetary policy or a piece of news about
future monetary policy, exogenous to other current and lagged endogenous
variables in the model and uncorrelated with other exogenous shocks. This can
be interpreted as a shift in central bank preferences, a change in the relative
standing of people in the monetary committee, a change in the judgement about
future policy or in the expectations about future economic developments11 .
This shock may be about the current policy stance or about forward guidance,
broadly defined. Identifying shocks allows us to estimate the causal effect of
monetary policy on macroeconomic and financial variables.

4.1. High Frequency Identification

We use a high frequency identification strategy for the UK and the US. The
general idea behind that identification strategy is that in the short window
around monetary policy announcements (15 or 30 minute windows), it is very
likely that the most important shock hitting the economy is the monetary
policy shock. For such a strategy, we need to discuss in detail not only the
timing of monetary policy announcements and what they reveal (pure policy
rate decision versus news about forward guidance and the economy) but also
which market instruments are used to measure surprises (futures of the policy
rate or other market prices) and what information these instruments price.


10. The schedule of communications changed in august 2015. More details can be found
at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/news/2016/070.aspx
11. For a discussion on the informational content of high-frequency monetary surprises
in the context of monetary policy shock identification see Miranda-Agrippino (2016). For
an extensive and thorough discussion on identification and propagation of monetary policy
shocks in the domestic context see Miranda-Agrippino and Ricco (2017).
Gerko and Rey      Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                           10

4.1.1. Federal Funds Futures (FF). For the United States, several papers use a
high frequency identification of monetary policy shocks by analysing movements
in Federal Funds Futures (FF) prices around Federal Open Market Committee
announcements.12 The Fed Fund futures contract gives an insight into market
opinion of the average daily Fed Funds effective rate for a given calendar month.
It is traded on the Chicago Board of Trade exchange and is quoted as 100 less
the interest rate. On every trading day the contract is available for the first 36
calendar months into the future. This instrument is used in the market to hedge
against or speculate on changes in short term interest rates given innovations
to the monetary policy in the US.13
    Gertler and Karadi (2015) combines this high frequency identification
method with a proxy SVAR to study the effect of monetary policy on financial
variables. Specifically, they use the movement of the fourth Fed Funds futures
contract (FF4) around the times when the FOMC press release is published to
identify monetary policy shocks. This particular future contract measures how
the market revises its expectations about the Fed Funds rate 3 months from the
current date given the new information released by the FOMC. The movements
of futures prices are not necessarily expected to be positively correlated with
movements of the spot prices as they measure changes in the expectations
of market participants. For example, markets might have been pricing in a
larger move of the Fed Funds rate and might have to re-adjust the price of
the future contract in a direction opposite to the actual move of the rate. Or,
if the rate was not changed at the current meeting, market participants may
increase the probability of the target rate being readjusted in the next meeting.
The target rate change itself is an important component in anchoring market
expectations but it is not the only part of the press release that affects the
market’s views of the Fed Funds rate 3 months ahead. The short statement
which FOMC releases together with the rate decision is a crucial new piece of
information which becomes available to the market participants at the time of
the announcement. As a result market expectations about rates movements
in the next quarter are being revised also according to the content of the
statement. Hence surprises in the Fed Funds futures do not reflect a pure shock


12. See Bagliano and Favero (1999), Kuttner (2001), Gürkaynak et al. (2005), Gertler and
Karadi (2015), Nakamura and Steinsson (2013).
13.   Please refer to the CME group website for the full description of the contract.
Gerko and Rey     Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                         11

of the policy rate but also a forward guidance shock, broadly defined as some
information about future policy or judgement about the future of the economy.
Gertler and Karadi (2015) uses the shocks in the FF4 to instrument the one
year government bond rate as the policy rate in their VAR. Their justification
for using the shocks to instrument the one year rate is precisely to capture
the effect of forward guidance on financial and macroeconomic variables in the
VAR. They find that a monetary policy tightening of 20 bp in the one year
rate leads to an increase in mortgage rates of about 7 bp and of 15 bp in the
corporate bond rate. In each case the increase is due to the excess premium,
defined as the sum of the credit spread and the term premium.

    In this paper, we follow the literature as far as the US data are concerned
and use the change in the price of the Fed Funds Future contract (FF4)
measured in a tight window around each policy announcement to instrument
the US monetary policy shock. US data are special in the sense that the Fed
Funds futures directly represent market opinion about the policy rate for a
given month. No such instruments are traded in the UK. However, short-term
interest rate futures are available and can potentially play a similar role as the
Fed Funds future contract in identifying monetary policy shocks.



4.1.2. Short-Sterling Future (SS). For the UK, there is no equivalent to the
Fed Funds Future contract stricto sensu. Short Sterling Futures (SS) is a three-
month sterling future which is traded at ICE Futures Europe (part of the
Intercontinental Exchange). The futures quotation is defined as 100 less an
interest rate on three month deposit of £500, 000 on the contract settlement
date.14 This contract is an analogue of the Eurodollar future contract in the
US, and given that this is the only future contract on short-term interest rates
available for the UK economy with a reasonable time series we use it in our
analysis.
    It is important to keep in mind that even though short term interest rates
are closely linked to the policy rate there is not a one-to-one mapping. By
measuring the difference in prices of SS around the announcements we are


14. For more details regarding the ICE Futures Europe FSS contract specifications please
refer to https://www.theice.com/api/productguide/spec/37650330/pdf.
Gerko and Rey      Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                   12

capturing changes in expectations of the market regarding the costs of short
term credit.
    Tick-by-tick data for trading activities on all SS contracts available on each
date of monetary policy announcements were acquired from the Thompson
Reuters Tick history dataset. We apply the same methodology as Gürkaynak
et al. (2005) to construct surprises. We measure the difference in the price of the
future contract in a tight window before (10 minutes) and after (20 minutes)
every monetary policy event.15

4.2. Differences between the US and the UK

Because of the differences in traded instruments that we highlighted and
because of the different timing of announcements between the US and the UK
we cannot replicate existing studies on the effect of US monetary policy on UK
data. SS price movements around announcements are not capturing only the
market surprises about current and future path of the policy instrument. What
we can do however is to measure how the market expectations of the cost of
short-term bank credit changes given innovations to monetary policy. Changes
in the cost of short-term bank credit reflects a combination of expectations
regarding the future path of policy rates, the risk premium of the LIBOR −
including possible counterparty risk − and demand for cash in the banking
sector. Furthermore we can study how this shock propagates through other
interest rates to the economy.
    Another important difference of our analysis compared to the existing
literature on monetary policy VARs is that we can obtain a new “clean”
measure of forward guidance, broadly defined. The reason is that, unlike
the Fed, the Bank of England communicates pure policy rate decisions at
a time which is distinct from the releases of minutes and of the inflation
report. Minutes and reports provide a lot of information to market participants
regarding the future monetary policy and the judgement of the Bank about the
future state of the economy. This allows us to separate the market reactions
to the policy rate announcements from the effect of the information about the
state of the economy and on the course of future policy. In the case of the
US these two effects are partially mixed together because the rate decision is
accompanied by a short statement in the press release published by FOMC.


15.   More details about construction of surprises are in Appendix B.
Gerko and Rey   Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                    13

In the UK, it is possible to measure the first effect by taking the difference of
SS prices around the MPC decisions. Market reaction to Bank of England’s
forward guidance can be directly estimated by focusing on the movement of
SS prices around releases of the minutes of MPC meetings and releases of the
inflation reports.


5. Proxy SVAR

Like Gertler and Karadi (2015) we combine High Frequency Identification of
shocks, which we use as external instruments for the monetary policy variable
and a VAR approach to analyse the dynamic responses of real and financial
variables, building on Stock and Watson (2012) and Mertens and Ravn (2013).

   Let our general structural form of the VAR be:


                                     m
                                     X
                            AYt =          Ck Yt−k + εt
                                    k=1

The following reduced form representation can be obtained with the reduced
form shock ut expressed as a function of the structural shocks ut = P εt and
where Dk = A−1 Ck and P = A−1 :


                                    m
                                    X
                             Yt =         Dk Yt−k + ut
                                    k=1

    We define Σ the variance-covariance matrix of the reduced form model. We
                 0
have Σ = E[ut ut ] = E[P P 0 ]. We assume im  t ∈ Yt , to be the monetary policy
indicator which in our case will be either the US one-year government bond rate
or the UK five year-rate. The exogenous variation of the policy indicator stems
from the policy shock εmt . Finally, p stands for the column in P corresponding
to the impact of the policy shock εm t on each element of the vector of reduced
form residuals ut . For the impulse responses of our economic and financial
variables to a policy shock we run:


                                   m
                                   X
                            Yt =         Dk Yt−k + pεm
                                                     t
                                   k=1
Gerko and Rey      Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                            14

Our instruments Zt for the monetary policy variables are the surprises to
the price of Fed Funds futures or Short Sterling futures in windows around
monetary policy announcements. In order for the vector of instrumental
variables Zt to be a valid set of instruments for the monetary policy shock εm t
               m0                d0             d
we need E[zt εt = ϕ] and E[zt εt = 0] where εt stands for any structural shock
but the monetary policy shock (which could be a rate or a forward guidance
shock). We follow Mertens and Ravn (2013) to estimate the variation in the
reduced form residual for the policy indicator due to the structural monetary
policy shock. To compute the estimates of vector p, as a first step we compute
the estimates of the reduced form residuals vector ut from the least squares
regression of the reduced form representation. We denote udt the reduced form
residual for variable d which is different from the policy indicator and um
                                                                          t the
                                                              d
reduced form residual for the policy indicator. Denote by p ∈ p the response
of udt to a unit increase of one standard deviation in the policy shock εm t . A
few simple steps allow to identify pd .16


6. Results

6.1. United States: A hegemonic monetary policy?

We run the US VAR on monthly data for the period July 1979 to June 2012
and we use Feds Funds Futures surprises (FF4) around FOMC announcements
as instruments for the period January 1999 to June 2012. We report the F-
stats for each of our VARs. Following the literature, F-stats above 10 validate
the strength of our instruments. In all our monthly VARS we use 12 lags as
is customary. We are not the first ones to analyse the financial channel of
monetary policy for the United States. We confirm the results of Gertler and
Karadi (2015) in a VAR in which we added the dollar sterling exchange rate.
Figure (1) shows that a 20 bp tightening in the US one-year rate leads to
increases in mortgage spreads (point estimate increase of about 5 bp). This


16. From the two stage least squares regression of udt on um    t and using the vector of
instrumental variables Zt , one can compute an estimate of the ratio pd /pm . It is obtained
by first regressing um                                         m
                     t on the vector of instruments yielding ut . As the variation in ut
                                                              d                          dm
                 m                                d     m
is only due to εt , a second stage regression of ut on ut provides a consistent estimate of
                                                       d
pd /pm . The estimated reduced form variance-covariance matrix is then used to obtain an
estimate of pm using the second stage regression, allowing to identify pd .
Gerko and Rey      Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                              15

is evidence that some form of capital market friction is playing a role in the
transmission of monetary policy in the United States. The tightening leads to
an appreciation of the US dollar-sterling on impact (by about 1 bp on impact
to 1.5 bp), an increase in the five year yield on impact, a delayed decrease in
industrial production and a delayed decrease in the CPI.17



                   One−Year Yield, US                                CPI, US
                                                    0.5
       0.4

       0.2
  %




                                               %
                                                     0
        0

      −0.2
                                                   −0.5
              10      20            30   40                10      20       30        40

                           IP, US                               Mortgage Spread, US
                                                    0.1
       0.5
                                                   0.05
        0
  %




                                              %




                                                     0

                                                  −0.05
      −0.5
                                                   −0.1
              10      20            30   40                10      20       30        40

                   Five−Year yield, US                            Exchange Rate
       0.3                                         0.01

       0.2                                           0
  %




                                              %




       0.1                                        −0.01

        0                                         −0.02

      −0.1                                        −0.03
              10      20            30   40                10      20       30        40



Figure 1. Responses of US variables to a 20bp increase in the US one-year rate.
Instruments (FF4) from Gertler and Karadi (2015), 90% confidence intervals. F-stat:
30.


    We now turn to potential international spillover effects of US monetary
policy. The traditional international transmission channels of monetary policy
via aggregate demand and via the exchange rate may not be the only ones.


17. We tried numerous specifications including replacing the five year yield with the VIX or
with corporate spreads. In both cases these variables increase on impact significantly. The
results are robust. For further discussion of robustness of the Gertler and Karadi (2015)
results see Miranda-Agrippino (2016) and Miranda-Agrippino and Ricco (2017).
Gerko and Rey   Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                     16

Because of the increased importance of international financial flows, global
intermediaries (banks, asset managers) may transmit liquidity conditions
crossborders (see for example Cetorelli and Goldberg (2012)). Hence, it is
plausible that the capital market frictions studied in the context of the credit
channel (or net worth channel) or the risk taking channel of monetary policy in
a domestic context play also a role internationally. The literature on financial
crises has emphasized for a long time the role of capital flows in fuelling
domestic credit booms and the latter have been found to be one of the most
reliable early warning indicators of crises (see for example Gourinchas and
Obstfeld (2012)). Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015) discusses the importance
of the US Federal Reserve as a driver of the global financial cycle and analyses
in a large Bayesian VAR the effect of a Fed loosening on the rest of the world
using quarterly data. They find that a positive monetary policy shock increases
the leverage of banks and cross border capital flows and increases asset prices.
Here, we estimate specifically the effect of international financial spillovers of
the US on the United Kingdom. We use the same instruments (FF4) as before
and a similar specification of the VAR to estimate the effect of a US monetary
policy shock on the economy but this time on UK variables. Figure (2) shows
the effect of a 20 bp tightening in the one year US rate on the United Kingdom.
We use the RPIX which is the retail price index excluding mortgage payments,
industrial production, mortgage spread defined as UK mortgage rate minus 3
month bill, the dollar per sterling exchange rate and the UK five year rate as
it is an important interest rate in the UK. A US monetary policy tightening
leads to an increase on impact of about 8 bp in the mortgage spread and to an
appreciation of sterling vis-a-vis the dollar of about 1.1 bp. This is of the same
order as the one previously estimated when analysing the impulse responses
of US variables, though less precisely estimated. We see no significant impact
on UK industrial production or on the UK five year rate. We tend to find
a slight increase on the UK RPIX index in the short run. These results are
robust to a number of specifications (inclusion of the VIX for example, which
increases on impact) but estimates are less precise than the ones for the US
VAR. The F-stats are lower, though they still indicate very strong instruments:
they stand at about 20 compared to 30 for the US case. In Figure (A.1) in the
Appendix we present another specification with UK corporate spreads and the
3 month UK T-Bill. Unlike the five-year rate, the 3 month T bill tends to go
up with a US tightening, indicating some effect of US policy rates at the short
end of the yield curve in the UK. The UK corporate spread goes down with a
Gerko and Rey     Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                            17

Fed tightening. The only available data for UK corporate spreads correspond
to very long maturity bonds (about 20 years). This is unlike the corporate
spreads in the US which are short maturity and go up as the Fed tightens. We
conjecture that this asymmetry in reaction for corporate spreads is due to the
short end of the yield curve in the UK reacting to a US tightening more than
the long end. Therefore we find some evidence that the monetary policy of
the hegemon spills over into the UK via financial variables (mortgage spreads
and corporate spreads). This happens despite the Sterling Dollar exchange rate
being fully flexible.


                  One−Year Yield, US                             RPIX, UK
                                                  0.5
       0.4

       0.2
  %




                                            %


                                                   0
        0

      −0.2
                                                 −0.5
             10      20        30      40               10       20      30        40

                          IP, UK                             Mortgage Spread, UK
                                                  0.2
       0.5
                                                  0.1
        0
  %




                                            %




                                                   0

                                                 −0.1
      −0.5
                                                 −0.2
             10      20        30      40               10       20      30        40

                  Five−Year Rate, UK                            Exchange Rate
       0.1                                       0.01

      0.05                                         0
 %




                                            %




        0                                       −0.01

     −0.05                                      −0.02

      −0.1                                      −0.03
             10      20        30      40               10       20      30        40



Figure 2. Responses of UK variables to a 20bp increase in the US one year rate.
Instruments (FF4) from Gertler and Karadi (2015), 90% confidence intervals. F-stat:
19.93.
Gerko and Rey     Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                     18

6.2. United Kingdom: How does the Old Lady of Threadneedle
     Street fare?

We run the UK VAR on monthly data for the January 1982 to January 2015
period, using 12 lags. We first run a VAR using a recursive identification scheme
(Cholesky). Our results, presented in Appendix in Figure (A.2) confirm the
inability of identifying responses of asset prices with such timing assumptions:
the asset prices do not react significantly (not even the exchange rate) and
we have a significant price puzzle. Hence we switch to our proxy SVAR
framework and use Short Sterling Futures around monetary policy events (rate
decisions, minutes, inflation reports) as instruments for the period January
2000 to January 2015. As we discussed in previous sections, surprises based
on movements of Short Sterling Futures are not the direct analogue of the
shocks measured by the Fed Funds futures. They reflect changes in the cost
of short-term bank credit aggregating a combination of expectations regarding
the future path of policy rates, the risk premium of the LIBOR − including
possible counterparty risk − and demand for cash in the banking sector. Hence,
movements in the LIBOR reflect both monetary policy conditions and market
turmoil. For example, during the financial crisis of 2008 LIBOR spiked due to
counter-party risk while Central Banks around the world were actively cutting
their policy rates. Figure (A.3) in the Appendix shows a clustering of points
around the zero-rate change with a range of changes in the SS. It also shows
some outliers in SS changes at the time of market stress due to the financial
crisis coinciding with monetary policy rate announcements in 2008. During
a large part of the relevant period announcements of monetary policy rates
are invariably the same (a typical statement would be “the Bank of England
maintains Bank Rate at 0.5% and the size of the Asset Purchase Programme
at 375 billion”18 ) and there is no other information communicated to market
participants at those times. Almost all policy decisions on rate and purchases
are therefore perfectly anticipated by the market as shown by the Bloomberg
Survey. Hence we believe that using surprises in SS around rate announcement
times tend to pick up market disturbances rather than monetary policy in our
sample. We verify our conjecture by running a VAR using surprises around
policy rate announcement times as instruments. As expected, this VAR shows


18.   from http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Pages/decisions.aspx.
Gerko and Rey      Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                           19

signs of spurious identification with in particular a jump in UK Industrial
Production on impact and a significant price puzzle.19
    On the other hand, surprises around minutes and inflation reports are more
meaningful as there is new information about the future policy stance which is
generally communicated to market participants at those occasions. Figure (4)
shows the surprises in SS around the inflation reports and minutes, which is the
series of surprises we will be using as our instruments as they are informative
about future monetary policy. Results are very different from the recursive VAR
in Figure (A.2) and are robust across specifications. We instrument the five-
year rate because of data availability and because it is an important rate for the
UK. Furthermore, our instruments are strong with a F-stat of 15.22 and largely
above 10 in all the specifications we ran for the 5 year rate. Sterling appreciates
on impact against the dollar, the corporate spread (long maturities) goes up
on impact and mortgage spreads tend go up on impact, Industrial Production
does not move on impact but decreases with a delay in some specifications,
RPIX is not significantly affected.


    Results are similar when we include other asset prices such as the VIX
as in Figure (6). The VIX goes up on impact as the Sterling exchange rate
appreciates and the corporate spreads goes up on impact. IP declines with a
delay and RPIX is not affected20 .

    In contrast, when we try to estimate the effect of UK monetary policy shocks
on US variables, we do not find any significant responses. Hence there is an
asymmetry in international spillovers: US monetary policy as one of the factors
driving the global financial cycle has spillovers on UK financial variables. But
the reverse is not true: UK policy does not affect US financial variables. This
asymmetry may reflect the very important role of the US Dollar in international
banking.
    These results taken together tend to suggest that, as discussed in Ramey
(2016), extreme care has to be taken regarding the identification strategy and


19.   Results available upon request.
20. In the Appendix (see Figure (A.3)) we present similar sets of results with the mortgage
spread and when using the FTSE instead of the VIX (see Figure (A.4). The FTSE goes
down on impact
Gerko and Rey    Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                             20


                                      Policy Surprises
         0.1
                                                                  Minutes
                                                                  Inflation report
        0.08


        0.06


        0.04


        0.02


          0


       −0.02


       −0.04


       −0.06


       −0.08


        −0.1
          2000      2002       2005         2007         2010   2012             2015




Figure 4. Monetary policy surprises, derived from SS data around inflation reports and
minutes.



the specification of the VAR. The robustness of the results has to be checked
by adding enough lags in the VAR. Cholesky identification is inadequate
for small VARs with asset prices. When using high frequency instruments
in proxy SVAR, it is very important to understand which information is
aggregated in the price of the instrument and which type of information is
being revealed at the time of the monetary policy announcements. In the
US case, Fed Fund Futures do aggregate information about future monetary
policy. Around FOMC meetings, information revealed is about rate changes
and forward guidance because of the statement released at the same time as
the rate change. Instrumenting the one year rate allows to study the effect
of monetary policy shocks on rates and forward guidance on the financial
channel of monetary policy. In the UK, SS Futures are not futures of the
policy rate. They aggregate information on future monetary policy but also on
bank funding conditions including counterparty risk and liquidity conditions.
Around rate announcement, information is revealed purely about rate changes
or purchases of assets. Around minutes and inflation reports, information is
revealed about the future stance of monetary policy and about the judgement
Gerko and Rey     Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                         21

                   Five−Year Rate                                   RPIX

       0.4
                                                  0.4
       0.2
                                                  0.2
  %




                                             %
        0                                          0
      −0.2                                       −0.2
             10     20        30    40                  10     20          30   40

                         IP                                  Mortgage Spread
                                                  0.3
       0.5
                                                  0.2
        0
  %




                                             %
                                                  0.1

                                                   0
      −0.5
                                                 −0.1
             10     20        30    40                  10     20          30   40

                   Exchange Rate                             Corporate Spread
      0.04                                       0.15

                                                  0.1
      0.02
 %




                                            %




                                                 0.05
        0
                                                   0

     −0.02                                      −0.05
             10     20        30    40                  10     20          30   40



Figure 5. Responses of UK variables to a 20bp increase in the UK five-year rate.
Instruments SS around inflation reports and minutes, 90% confidence intervals. F-stat:
15.22.


of the Bank about future state of the economy. In the recent period pure
rate announcements have brought in very little information on monetary
policy. Surprises have reflected more market conditions; hence using surprises
around rate adjustments would not capture monetary policy shocks but rather
market stress. In contrast, surprises around minutes and inflation report have
brought in information about medium to long term guidance prospects. Hence
instrumenting the 5 year UK rate by surprises of SS Futures around minutes
and inflation reports make sense and provide information around the financial
channel of monetary policy in the UK in the medium run.


7. Conclusion

The recent financial crisis has highlighted the need to model more fully the
process of financial intermediation in the macroeconomy. Recent models show
Gerko and Rey      Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                          22

                    Five−Year Rate                                    RPIX

       0.4
                                                   0.4
       0.2
                                                   0.2
  %




                                              %
        0                                           0
      −0.2                                        −0.2
              10     20         30   40                  10      20          30   40

                          IP                                   Corporate Spread
                                                  0.15
       0.5
                                                   0.1
        0
  %




                                             %
                                                  0.05

                                                    0
      −0.5
                                                 −0.05
              10     20         30   40                  10      20          30   40

                          VIX                                   Exchange Rate
      0.15                                        0.04

       0.1
                                                  0.02
 %




                                             %




      0.05
                                                    0
        0

     −0.05                                       −0.02
              10     20         30   40                  10      20          30   40



Figure 6. Responses of UK variables and VIX to a 20bp increase in the UK five year rate.
Instruments SS around inflation reports and minutes, 90% confidence intervals. F-stat:
15.01


the importance of the financial channels of monetary policy which operate via
different capital market imperfections due to moral hazard or risk shifting.
The net worth channel of monetary policy (as in Bernanke and Gertler (1995))
and the risk taking channel of monetary policy (as in Coimbra and Rey (2017))
both imply an increase in credit and a decline in spreads when monetary policy
is loosened. In Coimbra and Rey (2017) fluctuations in funding costs have
additional effects: lower costs of funds due to an expansionary monetary policy
lead heterogeneous intermediaries to leverage differentially due to different
abilities to shift risk. This leads to a concentration of risk in the largest players
and to a sharper decline in risk premia when the interest rate is low as the most
risk loving intermediaries are the ones who price risk at the margin. Empirical
tests looking at these more specific predictions could help disentangle the risk-
taking channel from the net worth channel. This is an important endeavour as
policy implications differ.
Gerko and Rey   Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                    23

    Capital market imperfections play potentially an even bigger role in an
environment of large capital flows. We investigate empirically these financial
channels in the US and the UK economies as well as their international
spillovers. Using an instrumental proxy VAR approach we find evidence of
monetary policy transmission via the financial channel measured by corporate
spreads and mortgage spreads. For the US, the methodology captures monetary
policy shocks encompassing movements to the target rate and forward guidance
and uses their effects on financial instruments reflecting market expectations
about the future policy rate (Fed Funds futures). For the UK, the methodology
captures monetary policy shocks distinguishing between movements to the
target rate and forward guidance. It uses the effects of these different monetary
policy shocks on financial instruments reflecting market expectations about
the future policy rates but reflecting also the risk premium of the LIBOR and
demand for cash in the banking sector (Short Sterling Futures).
    In both economies, a tightening of monetary policy leads to an increase
in spreads. We also find that US monetary policy induces financial spillovers
into the UK financial markets, despite the flexible sterling dollar exchange
rate while the reverse is not true. This supports further the view of a global
financial cycle (Rey (2013)) partly driven by the US Central Bank. Because
of the very different institutional frameworks for monetary policy in the US
and the UK and the different financial instruments traded, our study is able
to show separately the importance of policy rate moves in the US and of
forward guidance, broadly defined, in the UK. In this latter case, surprises
in Short Sterling Futures around minutes and inflation reports are shown to
have significant effects on UK financial spreads.
    Further robustness work is undoubtedly needed however and our results
suggest that, as discussed in Ramey (2016), extreme care has to be taken
regarding the identification strategy and the specification of the VAR. In that
respect, increasing the information set by including a larger number of variables
as in Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015) while using Bayesian estimation is an
important robustness check.
Gerko and Rey    Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                             24

Appendix A



                 One−Year Yield, US                              RPIX, UK
                                                 0.5
      0.4

      0.2
 %




                                           %
                                                  0
       0

     −0.2
                                                −0.5
            10      20        30      40               10       20       30        40

                         IP, UK                             Corporate Spread, UK
                                                0.05
      0.5
                                                  0
       0
 %




                                           %
                                               −0.05

                                                −0.1
     −0.5
                                               −0.15
            10      20        30      40               10       20       30        40

                  3m T−BILL, UK                                Exchange Rate
      0.6                                       0.02

      0.4
                                                  0
 %




                                           %




      0.2
                                               −0.02
       0

     −0.2                                      −0.04
            10      20        30      40               10       20       30        40



Figure A.1. Responses of UK variables to a 20bp increase in the US one-year rate.
Instruments (FF4) from Gertler and Karadi (2015), 90% confidence intervals. F-stat:
18.31.
Gerko and Rey     Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                         25

                   Five−Year Rate                                   RPIX
                                                 0.5
       0.4

       0.2
  %




                                            %
                                                  0
        0

      −0.2
                                                −0.5
             10     20        30    40                 10      20          30   40

                         IP                                 Mortgage Spread
       0.5
                                                 0.1
        0
  %




                                            %
                                                  0

      −0.5                                      −0.1

             10     20        30    40                 10      20          30   40

                   Exchange Rate                            Corporate Spread
      0.04                                       0.1

                                                0.05
      0.02
 %




                                           %




                                                  0
        0
                                               −0.05

     −0.02                                      −0.1
             10     20        30    40                 10      20          30   40



Figure A.2. Responses of UK variables to a 20bp increase in the UK Five-year rate.
Recursive identification, 90% confidence intervals.
Gerko and Rey               Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital          26


                                Policy Surprises and Policy Rate Changes
                    0.4



                    0.3



                    0.2



                    0.1
 policy surprise




                     0



                   −0.1



                   −0.2



                   −0.3



                   −0.4
                     −1.5         −1                −0.5                 0    0.5
                                                  policy rate


Figure A.3. Policy rate changes and monetary policy surprises, derived from SS data
around rate changes.
Gerko and Rey      Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                          27

                    Five−Year Rate                                    RPIX

       0.4
                                                   0.4
       0.2
                                                   0.2
  %




                                              %
        0                                           0
      −0.2                                        −0.2
              10     20         30   40                   10     20          30   40

                          IP                                   Mortgage Spread
                                                   0.3
       0.5
                                                   0.2
        0
  %




                                              %
                                                   0.1

                                                    0
      −0.5
                                                  −0.1
              10     20         30   40                   10     20          30   40

                          VIX                                  Corporate Spread
      0.15                                         0.3

       0.1                                         0.2
 %




                                              %




      0.05                                         0.1

        0                                           0

     −0.05                                        −0.1
              10     20         30   40                   10     20          30   40



Figure A.4. Responses of UK variables and VIX to a 20bp increase in the UK Five-
year rate. Instruments SS around inflation reports and minutes, 90% confidence intervals.
F-stat: 12.8.
Gerko and Rey     Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                         28

                   Five−Year Rate                                   RPIX

       0.4
                                                 0.4
       0.2
                                                 0.2
  %




                                            %
        0                                         0
      −0.2                                      −0.2
             10     20          30   40                10      20          30   40

                          IP                                Corporate Spread
                                                0.15
       0.5
                                                 0.1
        0
  %




                                           %
                                                0.05

                                                  0
      −0.5
                                               −0.05
             10     20          30   40                10      20          30   40

                         FTSE                                  Exchange Rate
      0.01                                      0.03

        0                                       0.02
 %




                                           %




     −0.01                                      0.01

     −0.02                                        0

     −0.03                                     −0.01
             10     20          30   40                10      20          30   40



Figure A.5. Responses of UK variables including FTSE to a 20bp increase in the UK
Five-year rate. Instruments SS around inflation reports and minutes, 90% confidence
intervals. F-stat: 15.5.
Gerko and Rey      Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                           29

Appendix B


                                 Table B.1. Data Sources



 Variable              Description                                    Source
                       Retail Price Index excluding mortgage
 RPIX                  interest payments, extended back using         ONS
                       Retail Prices Index (SA)
 IP                    Index of Production (SA)                       ONS
                       End month level of yield from British
 5 year rate           Government Securities, 5 year Nominal          Bank of England
                       Zero Coupon
                       End month level of yield from British
 10 year rate          Government Securities, 10 year Nominal         Bank of England
                       Zero Coupon
                       U.S. Dollars to One British Pound, spot,
 Exchange Rate                                                        Bank of England
                       End month level
                       Interest rate (Fixed rate type) on Loans for
                                                                      Global     Financial
 Mortgage rate         house purchasing, Over 1 and up to 5 years
                                                                      Database
                       maturity
 Treasury bills (3     End month level of discount rate, 3 month
                                                                      Bank of England
 month)                Treasury bills, Sterling
                                                                      Three centuries of
 Corporate      bond
                       Monthly Corporate bond yields                  macroeconomic data,
 yields
                                                                      Bank of England
                                                                      Three centuries of
                       Redemption yields on British government
 20 year rate                                                         macroeconomic data,
                       securities, 20 years
                                                                      Bank of England
 United      States
 data and policy       Gertler and Karadi (2015) dataset
 surprises 21




   UK Spreads
   Mortgage spread is the difference between Mortgage rate and the 3 months
T-Bill rate. Corporate spread is the difference between Corporate Bond Yields
and 20 year rate before January 1992 and 10 year rate after January 1992.




21.   We drop the assumption that each policy surprise persists for 30 days.
Gerko and Rey   Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                    30

   US Spreads
   The Mortgage spread is the 30-year conventional mortgage rate minus the
10 year constant maturity Treasury rate. The commercial paper spread is the
3-month AA non-financial rate minus the 3-month Treasury rate.

    Construction of policy surprises for the UK
    The surprises were constructed using Short Sterling future prices from
Thomson Reuters Tick history database. For each policy event we are using a
future contract with the closest available delivery month given that a reasonable
amount of trading was happening in this instrument around the time of the
announcement. Following the literature we are measuring the surprises in a
tight window around each policy event. To measure a policy surprise we take a
difference of the implied average LIBOR rate 10 minutes before and 20 minutes
after each announcement. To convert the surprises to monthly variable we sum
all the surprises within the same month.


References

Adrian, Tobias and Nina Boyarchenko (2015). “Intermediary leverage cycles
  and financial stability.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Reports
  567.
Bagliano, Fabio C and Carlo A Favero (1999). “Information from financial
  markets and VAR measures of monetary policy.” European Economic Review,
  43(4), 825–837.
Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler (1989). “Agency costs, net worth, and
  business fluctuations.” The American Economic Review, 79(1), 14–31.
Bernanke, Ben S (2016). “Federal reserve policy in an international context.”
  IMF Economic Review, 65, 5–36.
Bernanke, Ben S and Mark Gertler (1995). “Inside the Black Box: The Credit
  Channel of Monetary Policy.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9(4),
  27–48.
Bernanke, Ben S, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999). “The financial
  accelerator in a quantitative business cycle framework.” Handbook of
  macroeconomics, 1, 1341–1393.
Borio, Claudio and Haibin Zhu (2012). “Capital regulation, risk-taking and
  monetary policy: a missing link in the transmission mechanism?” Journal of
  Financial Stability, 8(4), 236–251.
Gerko and Rey   Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                  31

Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Yuliy Sannikov (2014). “A Macroeconomic
  Model with a Financial Sector.” American Economic Review, 104(2), 379–
  421.
Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin (2015). “Capital flows and the risk-
  taking channel of monetary policy.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 71,
  119–132.
Cassis, Youssef and Jacqueline Collier (2010). Capitals of Capital: The Rise
  and Fall of International Financial Centres 1780-2009. Cambridge University
  Press.
Cesa-Bianchi, Ambrogio, Gregory Thwaites, and Alejandro Vicondoa (2016).
  “Monetary policy transmission in an open economy: new data and evidence
  from the United Kingdom.” Working paper no. 615, Bank of England.
Cetorelli, Nicola and Linda S Goldberg (2012). “Banking globalization and
  monetary transmission.” The Journal of Finance, 67(5), 1811–1843.
Chiţu, Livia, Barry Eichengreen, and Arnaud Mehl (2014). “When did the
  dollar overtake sterling as the leading international currency? Evidence from
  the bond markets.” Journal of Development Economics, 111, 225–245.
Christiano, Lawrence J, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L Evans (1999).
  “Monetary policy shocks: What have we learned and to what end?” Handbook
  of macroeconomics, 1, 65–148.
Christiano, Lawrence J, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno (2010).
  “Financial factors in economic fluctuations.” Working paper no 1192,
  European Central Bank.
Cloyne, James and Patrick Hürtgen (2016). “The macroeconomic effects of
  monetary policy: a new measure for the United Kingdom.” American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 8(4), 75–102.
Coimbra, Nuno (2016). “Sovereigns at Risk: a dynamic model of sovereign debt
  and banking leverage.” mimeo, Paris School of Economics.
Coimbra, Nuno and Hélène Rey (2017). “Financial Cycles with Heterogeneous
  Intermediaries.” Working paper no. 23245, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Cúrdia, Vasco and Michael Woodford (2010). “Conventional and Unconven-
  tional Monetary Policy.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 92(4),
  229–64.
Ellis, Colin, Haroon Mumtaz, and Pawel Zabczyk (2014). “What Lies Beneath?
  A Time-varying FAVAR Model for the UK Transmission Mechanism.” The
  Economic Journal, 124(576), 668–699.
Gerko and Rey   Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                  32

Fostel, Ana and John Geanakoplos (2012). “Why does bad news increase
  volatility and decrease leverage?” Journal of Economic Theory, 147(2), 501–
  525.
Gali, Jordi (2008). Monetary policy, inflation, and the business cycle: An
  introduction to the new keynesian framework. Princeton University Press.
Gertler, Mark and Peter Karadi (2011). “A model of unconventional monetary
  policy.” Journal of monetary Economics, 58(1), 17–34.
Gertler, Mark and Peter Karadi (2015). “Monetary policy surprises, credit
  costs, and economic activity.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
  7(1), 44–76.
Gertler, Mark and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki (2010). “Financial intermediation and
  credit policy in business cycle analysis.” Handbook of monetary economics,
  3(3), 547–599.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Maurice Obstfeld (2012). “Stories of the
  twentieth century for the twenty-first.” American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics, 4(1), 226–265.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Hélène Rey (2014). “External Adjustment,
  Global Imbalances, Valuation Effects.” Handbook of International Eco-
  nomics, 4, 585–645.
Gürkaynak, Refet S, Brian P Sack, and Eric T Swanson (2005). “Do actions
  speak louder than words? The response of asset prices to monetary policy
  actions and statements.” International Journal of Central Banking, 1(1), 55–
  93.
He, Zhiguo and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2013). “Intermediary Asset Pricing.”
  American Economic Review, 103(2), 732–70.
Jimenez, Gabriel, Steven Ongena, Jose-Luis Peydro, and Jesus Saurina (2014).
  “Hazardous Times for Monetary Policy: What Do Twenty-Three Million
  Bank Loans Say About the Effects of Monetary Policy on Credit Risk-
  Taking?” Econometrica, 82(2), 463–505.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore (1997). “Credit cycles.” Journal of political
  economy, 105(2), 211–248.
Kuttner, Kenneth N (2001). “Monetary policy surprises and interest rates:
  Evidence from the Fed funds futures market.” Journal of monetary
  economics, 47(3), 523–544.
Lane, Philip R and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2007). “A global perspective
  on external positions.” In G7 current account imbalances: sustainability and
  adjustment, pp. 67–102. University of Chicago Press.
Gerko and Rey   Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                   33

Lorenzoni, Guido (2008). “Inefficient credit booms.” The Review of Economic
  Studies, 75(3), 809–833.
Mertens, Karel and Morten O Ravn (2013). “The dynamic effects of personal
  and corporate income tax changes in the United States.” The American
  Economic Review, 103(4), 1212–1247.
Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia (2016). “Unsurprising shocks: information, premia,
  and the monetary transmission.” Working papers 626, Bank of England.
Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia and Hélène Rey (2015). “World asset markets and
  the global financial cycle.” Working papers 21722, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.
Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia and Giovanni Ricco (2017). “The Transmission of
  Monetary Policy Shocks.” , The Warwick Economics Research Paper Series
  (TWERPS) 1136, University of Warwick, Department of Economics.
Morais, Bernardo, José-Luis Peydro, and Claudia Ruiz Ortega (2015). “The
  international bank lending channel of monetary policy rates and quantitative
  easing : credit supply, reach-for-yield, and real effects.” The World Bank
  Policy Research Working Paper Series, (7216).
Mountford, Andrew (2005). “Leaning into the wind: a structural VAR
  investigation of UK monetary policy.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
  Statistics, 67(5), 597–621.
Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson (2013). “High frequency identification of
  monetary non-neutrality: The information effect.” Working papers 19260,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
Passari, Evgenia and Hélène Rey (2015). “Financial flows and the international
  monetary system.” The Economic Journal, 125(584), 675–698.
Ramey, Valerie A (2016). “Macroeconomic shocks and their propagation.”
  Handbook of Macroeconomics, 2, 71–162.
Rey, Hélène (2001). “International trade and currency exchange.” The Review
  of Economic Studies, 68(2), 443–464.
Rey, Hélène (2013). “Dilemma not trilemma: the global cycle and monetary
  policy independence.” In Proceedings-Economic Policy Symposium-Jackson
  Hole, pp. 285–333, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Rey, Hélène (2016). “International Channels of Transmission of Monetary
  Policy and the Mundellian Trilemma.” IMF Economic Policy Review, 64(1),
  6–35.
Romer, Christina D and David H Romer (2004). “A new measure of monetary
  shocks: Derivation and implications.” The American Economic Review,
Gerko and Rey   Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital                 34

  94(4), 1055–1084.
Sims, Christopher A (1992). “Interpreting the macroeconomic time series facts:
  The effects of monetary policy.” European Economic Review, 36(5), 975–
  1000.
Stock, James H and Mark W Watson (2008). “Econometrics course.”
  Tech. rep., NBER Summer Institute mini-course(July),available at: http :
  //www.nber.org/minicourse2 008.html.
Stock, James H and Mark W Watson (2012). “Disentangling the Channels of
  the 2007-2009 Recession.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Spring
  2012, pp. 81–156.
Woodford, Michael (2003). Interest and prices: Foundations of a theory of
  monetary policy. Princeton University Press.
