                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE UPTICK IN INCOME SEGREGATION:
                   REAL TREND OR RANDOM SAMPLING VARIANCE

                                         John R. Logan
                                         Andrew Foster
                                            Jun Ke
                                            Fan Li

                                      Working Paper 23656
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23656


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           August 2017, Revised January 2018




This research was supported by a research grant from National Institutes of Health
(1R21HD078762-01A1), the Sociology Program of the National Science Foundation, and by the
staff of the research initiative on Spatial Structures in the Social Sciences at Brown University.
Cici Bauer provided helpful suggestions for calculation of segregation measures. The Population
Studies and Training Center at Brown University (R24 HD041020) provided general support. The
authors have full responsibility for the findings and interpretations reported here. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by John R. Logan, Andrew Foster, Jun Ke, and Fan Li. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Uptick in Income Segregation: Real Trend or Random Sampling Variance
John R. Logan, Andrew Foster, Jun Ke, and Fan Li
NBER Working Paper No. 23656
August 2017, Revised January 2018
JEL No. R23

                                          ABSTRACT

Recent studies have reported a reversal of an earlier trend in income segregation in metropolitan
regions, from a decline in the 1990s to an increase in the 2000-2010 decade. This finding
reinforces concerns about the growing overall income inequality in the U.S. since the 1970s. Yet
the evidence may be systematically biased to show an upward trend because the effective sample
for the American Community Survey (ACS) is much smaller than it was for Census 2000, to
which it is being compared. There is a possibility that the apparent changes in disparities across
census tracts result partly from a higher level of sampling variation and bias due to the smaller
sample. This study uses 100% microdata from the 1940 census to simulate the impact of different
sampling rates on estimates of several measures of segregation and to propose and test the
effectiveness of approaches to correcting the bias. It then applies those approaches to publicly
available data for 2000 and 2007-2011. The reduction in sample sizes associated with the ACS
results in exaggeration of evidence for increasing income segregation for all measures tested here,
especially for subgroups (African Americans are studied here as an example). The methods of
correction applied here will yield more conclusive and unbiased results when applied to the
original sample data that is held internally by the Census Bureau.

John R. Logan                                    Jun Ke
Department of Sociology                          Department of Biostatistics
Brown University                                 Brown University
Providence, RI 02912                             Providence, RI 02912
 john_logan@brown.edu                            jun_ke@brown.edu

Andrew Foster                              Fan Li
Department of Economics and Community Health
                                           Department of Biostatistics
Brown University                             and Bioinformatics
64 Waterman Street                         Duke University
Providence, RI 02912                       2424 Erwin Rd
and NBER                                   Durham, NC 27710
afoster@brown.edu                          frank.li@duke.edu
       The Uptick in Income Segregation: Real Trend or Random Sampling Variation?



       Because neighborhoods are so consequential in people’s lives and futures (Sampson

2012), urban social scientists have long been interested in neighborhood-level segregation.

Although most of this literature focuses on separation by race and ethnicity, attention has also

been given to segregation by social class or income. An early version of this research was

devoted specifically to “underclass” neighborhoods, areas with high levels of poverty,

unemployment, or other signs of distress (Rickets and Sawhill 1988). Subsequent studies

analyzed trends in income segregation across all income levels, with particular attention to

income segregation within racial/ethnic groups.

       The most recent research has been conducted in a period when social scientists,

policymakers, and the public have become more acutely aware of issues associated with rising

income inequality (Picketty 2013). Several recent reports have found that income segregation,

too, is on the rise, increasing the estrangement of rich from poor and possibly leading to a

decline in support for meeting the needs of less affluent Americans (Florida and Mellander 2015,

Fry and Taylor 2012, Bischoff and Reardon 2014). Two patterns stand out in recent studies.

First, past changes in overall income segregation have been unsteady, declining in one decade

and rising in another, but segregation has been found to rise substantially after 2000. Second,

income segregation is described as higher and rising more quickly within minority populations.

These findings are widely enough accepted that they are referenced in public statements by

political leaders: “What used to be racial segregation now mirrors itself in class segregation. This

great sorting (has) taken place. It creates its own politics. There are some communities where …

I don't even know people who have trouble paying the bills at the end of the month. I just don't



                                                                                                   1
know those people. And so there's less sense of investment in those children.” (President Barack

Obama at a 2015 Poverty Summit, quoted by Liptak 2015).

       There have been many studies of income segregation in recent decades, and these reach

different conclusions depending on the time period, the measure of income segregation, and the

segment of the population being studied (Abramson et al 1995, Mayer 2001, Watson 2009,

Jargowsky 1996, 2003, Reardon and Bischoff 2011). Several studies distinguish between

income segregation among whites and blacks (Jargowsky 1996, Massey and Fischer 2003,

Watson 2009, Yang and Jargowsky 2006, Reardon and Bischoff 2011, Reardon, Fox and

Townsend 2015). Representative of the most recent research is a widely cited study by Bischoff

and Reardon (2014), using the ACS from 2007-2011. Some of their results are reproduced in

Table 1, including an overall summary measure of family income segregation (H), a measure of

the separation of families in the bottom decile of the income distribution from all others (H10),

and a measure of the separation of families in the top decile (H90). Table 1 reports their

measures for the total population and the black population for 2000 and 2007-2011 for several

large metropolitan areas along with the mean and standard deviation of all the large metros in

their sample.

                                        Table 1 about here

       The observed patterns of change vary depending on the measure and population segment

that is studied. For the total population H and H90 increased in all 6 example metros and rose on

average in large metros by 0.013 and .015, respectively. H10 increased in 4 of the 6 example

metros and rose by 0.017 in the average large metro (these increases are all equivalent to about

0.5 standard deviations). These results support reports of increasing income segregation.

Results for the black population show even higher values of segregation and larger increases



                                                                                                    2
over time. H, H10 and H90 increased for all 6 example metros and the average value across

metros with large black populations rose by .082, .099, and .110, respectively (more than one

standard deviation).

       We cast doubt on these findings. Our main insight is that all of these studies rely on

sample data collected by the Census Bureau. Yet it is well known that the effective samples to

estimate income distributions within census tracts were substantially downsized with the

introduction of the American Community Survey (ACS) after 2000, while sample sizes within

census tracts for minority populations have always been smaller than for the non-Hispanic white

or total population. This recognition raises the general problem of small area estimation (Rao

2003). Estimates from random samples are known to be unbiased, but the variance of estimates

can be quite large when samples are small. Social scientists in the past have treated the census’s

income tabulation in census tracts as though it were not based on a sample, presuming that the

one-in-six long form data were sufficiently reliable for their analyses. But as Voss (2012)

observes, in the ACS “standard errors of most estimates are so large that even substantial

differences in numbers lack statistical significance” (see also U.S. Census Bureau 2009). For

example, the most recent estimate of the median household income in relatively affluent tract

107.01 in Boston’s Back Bay neighborhood in the 2013 ACS (with a typical population size of

1562 households) is $99,234. The Census Bureau calculates a standard error of plus or minus

$13,552. So, staying within that confidence interval, the tract’s median income may well have

been as low as $86,000, or it may have been as high as $112,000. We suspect that the less

reliable the income estimate is for every census tract, the larger will be the estimated variation

across tracts – a value that is at the heart of all measures of income segregation.




                                                                                                     3
       If so, it is possible that in the full population – not in the samples enumerated by the

Census Bureau – there actually was no change or even a decline in income segregation. Further,

because the calculations for the black population in Table 1 were drawn from original samples

that were typically less than half as large as those for the total population, and often only 10-20%

as large, the apparently stronger pattern of increases in black income segregation may also be

illusory. Reardon and Bischoff (2011, p.1143) were aware of the problem that “When the

number of households in a unit is small (either because of a small population or because of

sampling), estimates of within-unit variation will be biased downward, meaning that estimates of

segregation will be biased upward.” They proposed to equalize sample sizes across metropolitan

areas by a second stage of sampling, arguing that the resulting estimates would be “comparable

across race groups, metropolitan areas, and years, regardless of population size” (2011, p. 1144).

We show in Appendix I that procedures of this type do not compensate for differences in sample

sizes in the original census samples.

Pitfalls and solutions in measuring income segregation

       We are aware of two sources of error in the observed measures of income segregation

based on publicly available data. The one that we focus on in this study is bias associated with

limited sample size. The other is the Census Bureau’s withholding of data in public tabulations

of income at the census tract level. The latter can only be overcome by gaining access to the

original sample data in a Federal Statistical Research Data Center (RDC), but we mention it here

to underline the fact that even the bias-corrected measures that we will present below – while an

improvement over past results – are not definitive.




                                                                                                    4
Data suppression in the census

       The Census Bureau’s concern with disclosure of information about individual persons

has led to a specific pattern of data suppression: race-specific income data in tracts with few

residents of a given subgroup are not published. This practice has consequences for measures of

group-specific income segregation, and it may also have affected studies showing that affluent

blacks and Hispanics are under-represented in higher income neighborhoods (Reardon, Fox, and

Townsend 2015, Lichter, Parisi and Taquino 2012, Sharkey 2014). To illustrate the nature of the

problem, we have analyzed suppression of income data for black households in the 2007-2011

ACS. We found that nationally there were over 17,000 census tracts with black residents for

which no income distribution for black-headed households is reported. These tracts have a total

black population over 1.2 million. The median income of the suppressed tracts (for the total

population) is over $70,000, and in most tracts members of all racial groups have similar income

levels. This compares to the median income for families with a black householder in non-

suppressed tracts of under $45,000. The implication is that small, affluent minority populations

in affluent (predominantly white and Asian) neighborhoods have not been taken into account in

past research. The same issue arises for poor whites whose data will be suppressed in

predominantly minority neighborhoods. In both cases, suppression could lead to an

underestimate of income segregation.

       Another disclosure practice is that in published tables at the tract level (in both Census

2000 and the ACS), the highest category of income is $200,000 and above. This top-coding is of

concern to studies of income inequality because it obstructs estimation of the income levels of

households/families in the highest income category (Armour, Burkhauser and Larrimore 2016).

It is also an issue in studies of income segregation where assumptions must be made about the



                                                                                                    5
distribution of values in each category of income to calculate the variation of income within

tracts (Reardon 2011). The top category is the most obvious problem because it has no

necessary upper bound and the upper limit could vary greatly across tracts. It is especially

problematic for measures calculated from the actual incomes rather than rank-ordered

percentiles. Jargowsky (1996) uses such a measure and deals with the problem by assuming that

the top category has a Pareto distribution.

Sampling strategies and weighting

       We set these concerns aside now to focus on the issue of sample size that the approaches

described below can ameliorate. Despite very large national samples, the decennial census (for

what researchers refer to as sample-count variables) and the ACS have relatively small samples

for individual census tracts. This is a problem shared with large-scale health surveys, which

despite impressive national sample size have insufficient samples for reliable estimates of

characteristics of smaller geographical areas. Statisticians define a “small area” as one where

“the domain-specific sample is not large enough to support direct estimates of adequate

precision” (Rao 2003, p. 1). Hence, depending on the data source a county or even a state may

be “small.”

       Demographers and public officials have become more aware of concerns about the nature

of estimates of small area characteristics because of the substitution of the decennial long-form

census (a one in six sample) by the annual American Community Survey (ACS). At the level of

census tracts (for which the ACS pools data from five consecutive years) and even counties

(which, depending on their size, are reported annually or with pooled three-year counts), ACS

data are “noisier” than comparable data from 2000 and before (Navarro 2010). This is largely

because the ACS samples are smaller. Tract estimates in the ACS are also affected by the use of



                                                                                                    6
population controls from estimates made at the state and county level rather than at the tract

level. Starsinic (2005) estimated that the standard errors from the five-year pooled ACS at the

tract level would be about 50% higher than in Census 2000 long form data (see also National

Research Council 2015, p. 24-40). The Census Bureau has attempted to deal with ACS’s large

confidence intervals through changes in the sampling design and through weighting techniques

to account for probability of selection, nonresponse, and coverage adjustments (Asiala 2012).

The National Research Council (2015) report on these efforts concludes that changes in sampling

rates have tended to equalize the precision of estimates across tracts of different population sizes,

but at the cost of decreasing the reliability of estimates for larger areas, resulting in minimal net

improvement.

       Complex weighting has another cost: while reducing bias, it increases the variance in

sample weights, which in turn increase the margin of error of the final estimates. Hence the

weighting procedures can be seen as “an implicit policy statement that unbiased (accurate)

estimates are more important than precise (low-variance) estimates” (Spielman, Folch and Nagle

2014, p. 151). When applied to measuring the income distribution within tracts, this general

problem is exacerbated by the fact that – aside from sample size – some kinds of places have less

precise sample data than others. Specifically, Spielman, Folch and Nagle (2014, p. 151-154)

show that in the 2007-2011 ACS the tracts with the lowest and highest median incomes have

larger margins of error than tracts closer to the average income.

Correcting the bias

       We now discuss in detail two standard types of measures of income segregation that are

susceptible to bias related to sample size and derive potential approaches to correcting them. In

a subsequent section we will use 100% microdata from the 1940 census to quantify the



                                                                                                        7
relationship between sampling rate and bias and test the efficacy of our proposed corrections.

We will then apply the corrections to the publicly available income data from the 2000 Census

and 2007-2011 ACS to show how bias has affected conclusions about levels and changes in

income segregation.

       Researchers have employed several different measures of income segregation. The

simplest is to divide the income distribution into a small number of categories, perhaps three, and

to compute a standard segregation index (the Index of Dissimilarity) between the bottom and top

categories, the rich and poor. This is the approach taken by Massey and Eggers (1993) and

Massey and Fischer (2003). The simplicity is also a weakness, because such measures do not

make use of the full income distribution provided by the census. We focus on two types of

measures that do exploit the multiple and ordered category nature of the data. The first is the

rank-order information theory index (H) used by Bischoff and Reardon (2014) and reported in

Table 1.2 It “compares the variation in family incomes within census tracts to the variation in

family incomes in the metropolitan area” (2014, p. 212), having first recoded incomes into

percentile ranks. Two other measures are based on variance. One version is the rank-order

variance ratio index R, which like H relies on a rank ordering of incomes and has percentile

specific variants such as R10 and R90. The rank-order variance ratio index “can be interpreted

as a measure of the average variance of the neighborhood cumulative percentile density

function” (Reardon 2011 p. 26).3 Another is the correlation ratio, which Jargowsky (1996) refers

to as the Neighborhood Sorting Index (NSI). The NSI is simply the square root of the between-

tract variance in income divided by the total variance of income, a familiar measure in analysis

of variance. Like H, it “implicitly controls for the overall income level because it is based on




                                                                                                   8
deviations from mean household income and also controls for income inequality because it is

expressed as a percentage of total income variance” (Jargowsky 1996, p. 998).

         We now present alternative approaches to reduce bias for each type of measure. First, we

propose a method to estimate (and therefore to correct for) the upward bias in entropy-based

measures (e.g., H, H10, H90) that draws solely on knowledge of the tract-level sample sizes and

tract population counts. Then we propose an approach to estimate the variances within tracts

using either the original interval-scale measure of family income or a rank-order measure, which

can be summed to the city or metro level and used to estimate NSI or R.

         Neither of these approaches solves the problem of variation in segregation estimates

across samples, which is inherently greater when samples are smaller (e.g., in 2007-2011

compared to 2000 or for minority subgroups compared to the whole population). We will show,

however, that they minimize the systematic bias that is found in uncorrected measures.

1. Correcting the bias in H

         We have derived a convenient and feasible approximation of the bias in entropy based

measures such as H and H90 related to sample size. The idea is to construct a quadratic Taylor

expansion of the entropy function and apply this function to the sample income distributions and

actual population counts by tract. This procedure builds on insights by Miller (1955). It yields an

estimate of the bias that can be then subtracted from the sample estimate to get an approximate

true estimate. It is most useful when sample sizes are not so large that the bias is trivial and not

so small that the quadratic function is a poor fit to the entropy distribution over the relevant

range.

         We first note that with independent sampling without replacement the proportion of

sampled households, sj, in a tract with income above some percentile of the population has a



                                                                                                       9
                                                                            p j (1  p j ) M j  N j
hypergeometric distribution with mean pj and variance                                                   where pj is the
                                                                                 Nj         M j 1

proportion in the tract population above this percentile, Mj is the tract population, and Nj is the

number in the sample. The population entropy of this tract (using the natural log form for

notational convenience) is

        E( p j )  p j ln( p j )  (1 p j )ln(1 p j ) .

A second order approximation to the sample entropy is

                                                                                 1
        E( s j )  E( p j )  (ln( p j )  ln(1  p j ))( s j  p j )                     ( s j  p j )2  O(( s j  p j )3 ).
                                                                          2 p j (1  p j )

Taking expectations with respect to si yields

                                        1 1 M j  Nj
         (E( s j ))  E( p j )                      Oj
                                        2 N j M j 1

where Oj is the integral over the order statistic. Interestingly the population variable pj does not

appear in this expression except through Oj and thus the approximate bias can be calculated

without knowing the true tract population income distribution. For example, the formal

expression for the expected approximate bias for H 90 adds up the tract-specific terms:

                                            M j (M j  N j )               M jO j
         ( H 90)  H 90                                          
                                    j    2 M E(.1) N j ( M j  1)    j    M E(.1)

where M   M j and E (.1)  .1ln(.1)  .9 ln(.9) .
               j



       In order to assess the accuracy of the approximation we need to be able to compute

bounds on Oj. For any given M j and N j the expected (over possible samples) difference

between the actual and approximate entropy as a function of the (unknown) number K of

households in the population below the specified threshold is


                                                                                                                                  10
                K  M j  K 
                            
           K
                k   n j  k   k  k       k             k    K  K   K        K         
Oj (K )  
 *
                                   ln    1       ln 1        ln      1 ln      1
                    M j                                                           M         
          k 0
                               nj  nj   nj       nj           Mj Mj  Mj           j    
                      nj 
                                                                                                  
                                                                                   2              1
                   K                 K      k   K        N k     K            K
                 ln          ln     1        1/ 2                         1 
                  Mj
                                     Mj
                                                nj M j 
                                                             K  n j M j          M j
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  

Note that while K is not known in practice it can take on only one of M j  1 possible values,

each of which may be checked given M j and N j . The bounds of the set of O*j ( K ) for

K  [0,1,..., M j  1] provide bounds for O j .

       For Mj = 1000 and Nj = 50, for example, the maximum of the absolute value of Oj is

.0065, which applies when there is only one household in the tract population above (or below)

the percentile cutoff. This is a rare scenario, and the average bias across tracts (which is relevant

for the calculation of entropy statistics) is likely to be much smaller. Thus our approximation

provides a useful basis for estimating bias. It is also worth noting that the adjustment for

sampling without replacement will be small if the sample is small relative to the population. For

                                                    M j  Nj
example, for M j= 1000 and Nj = 50 the term                     .95 . If we drop this term (thus assuming
                                                     M j 1

sampling with replacement) our approximate bias expression depends only on tract sample size:

                                   1 1
        (E( s j ))  E( p j )          Oj * .
                                   2 Nj

Computation of bias for H is a straightforward extension of the above because the bias term does

not depend on the percentile under consideration. In particular,

                              Mj Mj Nj
        ( H )  H  
                          j   M N j ( M j  1)



                                                                                                       11
As before, if the sample is small relative to the population this expression reduced to

                           Mj 1
        ( H )  H  
                       j   M Nj

So the approximate bias in H is just the average inverted tract population size.

2. Sparse-Sampling Variance Decomposition (SSVD)

       In contrast to the entropy-based measures the level of bias for variance-based measures of

income segregation depends not just on sample and population sizes, but also on the distribution

of incomes within and across tracts. Unfortunately these distributions are only imperfectly

observed through the sample, and the bias correction must account for this fact as well. It was

therefore necessary to develop a different approach to bias-correction for these measures than

was used for the entropy measures, which we refer to as Sparse-Sampling Variance

Decomposition (SSVD).

       The idea of this approach is as follows. The variance-based measures decompose total

variation into variation within and across census tracts. We presume that the total variance in

income can be reliably estimated from the sample data in large cities and metropolitan areas. We

then estimate the total within variance, from which the between variance can be deduced. We

take advantage of being able to leverage results from a large number of census tracts to average-

out errors in the estimation of the distribution within each tract. Although to our knowledge this

has not been done before in this context, it is parallel to the use of “small t, large n” panel data

methods (Mundlak 1978).

       We begin by applying SSVD to estimating NSI. The expected total variation of income

within tracts for the city is the average of the tract-specific variances weighted by the number of

households in the tract. Tract populations are of course known and the variance based on the

sample in each tract (using the standard N-1 bias correction) is an unbiased but noisy estimate of

                                                                                                       12
the underlying population variance, even with samples as small as two. But the population

weights are uncorrelated with the noise (which just arises from sampling). Hence the populated-

weighted average of the variance estimates for each tract from the sample converges to the

within variation for the population as the number of tracts gets large. In addition, because the

total variance for the population only involves the calculation of a single mean for the city (rather

than a mean for each tract), the per-household population-weighted total variance estimated from

the sample is consistent for the corresponding population measure as the number of tracts gets

large. The population across-tract variation is just the total minus the within-tract variation in the

population. Thus NSI can be estimated as the square root of 1 minus the ratio of the within to the

total variation calculated from the sample using population weights.

       The bias in the SSVD estimate of the NSI can be shown to approach 0 as the number of

tracts increases. Assume there are J tracts and that the income yij of household i in tract j is a

random variable drawn from a distribution Fj with mean  j and variance                2
                                                                                        j   . Further let the

means be drawn from a distribution with mean  and let the variance V be drawn from a


distribution with mean     2       and variance V . Let  M   M j  j /  M j , Pj denote the set of
                                                                              j   j



households in tract j , and S j the set of households in tract j that are in the sample.

       The NSI for the full population is NSI  A / T  (T  W ) / T  1  W / T

where A is the across, W the within and T the total variation. Then
                                    1
                  ( y
                  j iPj
                           ij   
                                    Mj
                                         y
                                         kPj
                                                kj   )2       M     j
                                                                          2
                                                                          j

        W                                                 j
                                                                                      (1)
                                M                                 M




                                                                                                            13
                                                         1
                             (y                                             y                   )2
                                                                                                                 M
                               j kPj
                                              ij
                                                         Ml                      l    kPj
                                                                                                kl
                                                                                                                          j   (( j  M )2   2j )
           T                                                                                                                                                       (2)
                                                            l                                                    j

                                                                M                                                                  M
Denote the sample analogs of W and T as

                                 Mj                                          1
                           N         1
                                         (y
                                          iS j
                                                                ij   
                                                                             Nj
                                                                                      y
                                                                                      kS j
                                                                                              kj   )2
           W                                                                                                                                                        (3)
                           j      j

                                                        M
                                                        j


                           Mj                           1                     Mj
                    N (y                    ij   
                                                        M
                                                                     N y                         kj   )2
                               j iS j                                                j kS j
           T 
                       j                                                 j
                                                                                                                                                                   (4)
                                                                     Mj
                                          (                                )
                                                   j iS j           Nj

The expected values for the mean in tract j, the overall mean, and the overall variance are

provided from sample values corrected for degrees of freedom:

     1                                    1             Mj                                                             1                   1
 
     Nj
          y
          iS j
                  ij    j , 
                                          M
                                               N y                                   kj     , and                       
                                                                                                                     N j  1 iS j
                                                                                                                                   ( yij 
                                                                                                                                           Nj
                                                                                                                                                y
                                                                                                                                                kS j
                                                                                                                                                        kj   )2   2j .
                                                    j                j kS j



                 W W                  
Consequently plim    0 and plimNSI
                                    NSI  0 .
                 T T
          A critique of the NSI is that it is affected by changes in the distribution of income even

when the ranking is preserved. Fortunately the SSVD can be applied to variance-based measures

calculated from rank-order data such as R – simply transform the income data for the sample into

cumulative percentiles and then do a variance decomposition of the resulting percentiles. In

particular, for each percentile p one can calculate the fraction of households in each tract below

that p and compute the tract-population weighted variance of this measure across tracts relative

to the total variance in the sample. This measure for p=90, say R90 then, like H90 indicates the
                                                                 R



extent to which the top 10 percent of the population is segregated from other 90 percent. To

compute RR we average the across and total variation across all percentiles and then divide.

                                                                                                                                                                             14
Because both RR and R90 are based on across-variance estimates the SSVD decomposition
                     R



follows exactly. Moreover, the approach is computationally efficient because the integration

over p needed for RR has an analytic solution and thus no numerical integration is needed.10

        The integration in the SSVD estimate of the rank order estimate conveniently has a

closed form solution:

                                 1  Mj 1                                1                             
                             p0  j M N j  1 i
                  R R  1  6                                                 ik                2
                                                         (( fijs  p)               ( f  p ))   dp 
                                                                         Nj                            
                                                  S *j                      kS *j                   
                                   M j Nj               2i  1 
                       1  6                   fijs            1
                               j M N j  1 iS *j
                                                        N           
                                                            j       

where fijs is the cumulative percentile of a household in the sampled city population, accounting

                                                               *
for any differential sampling weights by tract, and S j indexes the sample S j from tract j

ordered such that if i  i * then f s  f s ∀ i , i *  S *j . The number 6 comes from fact that
                                     ij     i* j




1

 p(1  p)dp  1/ 6
0
                      The second expression, which is obtained by bringing the integral inside of


the summations, indicates that the SSVD estimate of the rank order variance ratio is simply a

weighted average of the cumulative percentiles. Note that since the sample households are

ordered within a tract, the track-specific weights are antisymmetric w ( i )   w ( N  i  1) around

the median ranked household in the tract.

Validating the bias correction procedures

        Because the Census and ACS have collected income information only for samples of the

population, there is no “true value” for income segregation using contemporary data against

which we can compare bias-corrected measures. But using full-count historical microdata from

1940 we can carry out an exercise that is impossible with contemporary data: to draw samples of

                                                                                                           15
varying proportions, then to calculate measures of income segregation across census tracts from

those samples. Because the “real” level of segregation is known from the 100% data, we can

determine how the “observed” level is affected by sampling proportion.

       In carrying out this test we are mindful of the difference in sampling rates for income

between the 2000 Census and the ACS. The 2000 Census long-form data were from a one-in-six

sample of the population. The NRC (2015, p. 9) calculates a generalized design effect for the

2000 Census of 1.12, representing the degree to which the effective sample size from the

Census’s design differs from a simple random sample. This reflects, for example, how the

Census dealt with overall non-response and the use of population controls in developing weights.

Hence we treat Census 2000 as approximately a 15% sample. The actual sampling rate for

income may be lower than this, because income is among the variables for which non-response is

especially high.

       What sample proportion does the ACS represent for this purpose? The ACS is not

conducted as part of a full census enumeration as the long form surveys in decennial censuses

used to be. It utilizes a complex system of sampling and weighting, and it has changed in

important ways over time. The sample size increased in 2011. At that time also the Census

Bureau increased the differential in sampling proportions between smaller and larger census

tracts in order to improve estimates for smaller tracts. One estimate for the 2007-2011 sample

(National Research Council 2015, p. 24) is that the median tract sample size was 296 households

(compared to 605 households in Census 2000). After taking into account the generalized design

effect of 1.41, the effective sample size for the median tract was only 209 households (compared

to 533 in Census 2000). These calculations convey the order of magnitude in the ACS’s

reduction of sample size compared to Census 2000.



                                                                                                 16
       A more precise calculation can be made from the 2007-2011 ACS summary files for

census tracts, which report the sample size in every tract. Across all tracts in the United States,

the average final sample proportion was 8.2%. This is reduced to an effective sampling rate of

5.8% after taking into account the design effect but again not considering special concerns of

non-response on income data. In the following analyses, we will treat sample proportions of

around 5% as representative of the ACS. Spielman, Folch and Nagle (2014, p. 152) cite Census

Bureau estimates that imputation rates for income variables approach 20%, suggesting that the

actual ACS sampling rate for income data may be less than 5%.

Results from sample draws from the 1940 census

       The 1940 census was the first to collect data on income. For each employed household

member the enumerator listed the person’s wage and salary income. Our analysis is for total

household wage and salary income, combining the figures for the household head and all other

household members. We did not measure family income because family relationships are not

clearly defined in the 1940 data. In addition to income segregation for the total population we

compute indices for a subgroup whose population share in 1940 was comparable to the share of

black residents in the contemporary data: foreign-born whites (based on the country of birth of

the household head). Results for foreign-born white households reveal how observed trends in

segregation for specific subgroups may be affected by their smaller numbers.

       We use data for all households enumerated in the 1940 census in Chicago (not presented

here, we also compared Chicago results with five other large Northern and Midwestern cities,

showing the same pattern of results). We drew samples of 5%, 10%, 15%, and 20%, repeating

the procedure 100 times for every level of the sampling proportion and calculating every

segregation measure for every draw.4 Non-residential tracts (10 households or less) are omitted;



                                                                                                  17
a minimum of one household was sampled in every tract. This procedure yields a sampling

distribution of estimated income segregation at each sampling rate. Because all of these values

are from the same population in a single year, any differences between sampling distributions for

lower or higher sampling proportions are due solely to varying sample size.

       Figures 1 and 2 display the results of these sample draws for all Chicago households in

1940. Figure 1 reports values for the entropy-based measures H, H10, and H90; Figure 2 reports

values for the variance-based measures R and NSI. On each plot one set of values represents the

bias-corrected measures, and the other represents the uncorrected measures. At each of four

selected sampling rates the plot displays the distribution of values from the 100 samples that

were drawn: the maximum and minimum values, the median value, and the values at the 25th

percentile and the 75th percentile (in addition, the median estimates for all the analyses of

Chicago data are listed in Appendix Table 1). A straight line across the graph shows the true

value of the measure as calculated from the original 100% microdata. The figures are useful as a

visualization of the differences across measures, and they are especially helpful in displaying the

bias in the uncorrected estimates.

                                       Figures 1-2 about here

       An important feature of the values in both figures is the sampling variation. For example,

even the best performing estimate for H in Figure 1 (the corrected estimate with a 20% sampling

rate) has a risk of yielding either too high or too low a value, even though on average – with

many samples – it is within .01 of the correct figure of .062. In this exercise we are able to draw

many samples and compare them, but in actual research there is typically only one sample.

Consequently, researchers should be aware of not only the potential bias in estimates but also

their sampling variation, which (as shown in the figures) diminishes with larger samples. We



                                                                                                 18
draw attention to this statistical principle because although we show here that it is possible to

correct for bias, sampling variation remains a concern with the lower sampling rate of the ACS

compared to the decennial census long form that it replaced. Correcting for bias does not reduce

the risk of drawing wrong conclusions due to sampling variation.

       Figure 1 applies the correction calculated from average tract sample size to H, H10, and

H90. Note that the median values of the corrected estimates fall within .03 of the actual values

even at a 5% sampling rate for each of the three entropy measures. Bias in the uncorrected

values, in contrast, is very high (.19) with a 5% sampling rate, falling substantially (.09) at 10%,

and then continuing to improve but still present even at a sampling rate of 20%. The bias

correction thus works well, but not perfectly, reflecting the fact that a second order

approximation was employed in the derivation of that correction.

       Figure 2 applies the SSVD to NSI and R. Again there is a spread in all sample estimates

that is reduced at higher sampling rates. The uncorrected estimates for R and NSI are high at a

5% or 10% sampling rate, and some bias remains even at 20%. In contrast, there is no bias in the

corrected estimates of R at any sampling rate. The correction of NSI greatly reduces the bias in

the uncorrected estimate, though at a 5% sampling rate the median estimate of .246 is somewhat

above the true value of .237.

       These results support our initial concern about the upward bias in measures of income

segregation. A clear implication is that if income segregation in the population has not changed

between time 1 and time 2, but the data by which we measure segregation changes from a higher

to a lower sampling rate, we will observe an apparent – but false – increase in segregation. We

now turn to estimates for population subgroups where we expect greater impacts of variation in

the sampling rate. For this purpose we select households with a foreign-born white head of



                                                                                                    19
household (about 15% of households, similar to the share of a minority group in many

contemporary metropolitan areas). Results are displayed in Figures 3-4.

                                      Figures 3-4 about here

       There is a similar pattern with all five segregation measures. Here we describe results for

H in detail to point out the key findings. The actual population value of H for foreign-born white

households in Chicago in 1940 was .045, lower than the level of income segregation of the whole

population (.062). Yet the uncorrected estimate of H at a 5% sampling rate (comparable to

today’s ACS) was .093 for foreign born, higher than the estimated .081 for the total population at

the same sampling rate. The greater bias for the foreign-born population at this sampling rate

might have led researchers to conclude incorrectly that this minority population was especially

highly segregated. Based on the corrected estimates, however, at every sampling rate the

foreign-born population is shown to be less segregated.

       Our proposed sample-size correction methods for entropy measures and SSVD for

variance-based measures are shown here to be successful in reducing the bias from varying

sampling rates. If we compare the corrected estimates to the true values (from the 100%

sample), we find that it is more effective in some instances than in others. For the total

population, the corrections yield median estimates that are close to the true values even at a 5%

sampling rate for H, H10, H90, and R, but there is a slight upward bias on the median value of

the NSI. For foreign born whites, who represent a smaller population segment and therefore

smaller sample sizes, the corrected estimates (in relation to the true values) are excellent for H90

and R, slightly high for H10, and somewhat higher for NSI. Still, the corrected 5% median

estimate of NSI is closer to the true value than the uncorrected 20% estimate.

Applying corrections to contemporary data



                                                                                                  20
       How does bias from the reduced sampling rate of the ACS affect estimates of change in

income segregation? Related to this, how does the smaller sample size for subgroups of the

population affect estimates of their segregation in comparison to the whole population (or to

larger groups such as whites)? The techniques demonstrated here can be applied to

contemporary data, but with several provisos. Most important, without access to internal census

files it is impossible to take into account subgroups living in census tracts where their income

distribution is not reported in the public data. As noted above, possibly many affluent blacks or

Hispanics live in high-income, predominantly white census tracts but in too small numbers in

any given tract to be reported. Possibly also many poor white or Asians live in low-income,

predominantly minority census tracts but do not reach the threshold to be reported. To the extent

that this occurs – and this cannot be estimated with public data – the observed income

segregation of blacks and Hispanics may be skewed downward and that of whites and Asians

upward. We cannot deal with this issue here.

       We can, nevertheless, shed light on the potential of bias due to lower sampling rates in

the ACS and smaller samples for population subgroups such as African Americans. For this

purpose, the key step is to simulate samples of individual families from the grouped data

published by the Census Bureau. The grouped data (counts of the number of families within

each of many categories of income) conceal the exact distribution of incomes of families within

each category, and (as other researchers have done) we estimate those distributions by making

reasonable assumptions. We describe that procedure and examine its efficacy by reference to the

1940 results, concluding that estimates are robust for H, H10, H90, and R, but not for NSI. We

then apply the same procedures to contemporary data for each of the rank-order measures to




                                                                                                   21
determine how the bias that we have investigated here affects estimates of trends in income

segregation.

Estimating income segregation from grouped data

       The challenge in estimating measures of segregation using grouped data is that

segregation measures may be sensitive to the distribution of incomes within categories and

within tracts. Arbitrarily assigning the mean of the interval to each category may be reasonable

for some purposes; however, initial explorations using the 1940 data suggested this approach did

not work well for the measurement of income segregation. The problem is especially acute for

the top category for which there is in principle no upper bound.

       The limitations of group-level data have been addressed in previous work using

assumptions about the smoothness of income distributions within tracts. Reardon (2011)

proposes calculating a percentile-specific H for each category’s lower or upper bound using the

fraction of households in each tract above and below the bound in each tract. He then uses a

fourth-order polynomial to interpolate values of H10 and H90 and to integrate over the full

distribution of percentiles to obtain H. In constructing estimates of the NSI, Jargowsky (1996)

makes use of published tract means, which the Census Bureau constructs from the unit-level

data, but has to interpolate to estimate the metropolitan area variance. In particular, he assumes a

linear distribution of households in lower income categories and a Pareto distribution for income

categories above the metropolitan area mean.5 Integration over these category-wise distributions

within tracts can then yield the desired measures.

       Unfortunately, these methods do not apply in a straightforward way to the construction of

bias-corrected methods. There are two issues. First, for the variance-based measures the SSVD

requires information on the within-tract variation. While measures of variation by tract are



                                                                                                   22
reported in some published tables, and indeed could be provided in most cases without violating

confidentiality, we were unable to find consistent measures across the two censuses by race.

Second, preliminary explorations suggested that simply subtracting a bias-correction from a

standard entropy-based measure that integrates over the estimated distributions or interpolates

quantiles may over-correct for sampling bias for relatively small samples. The reason is that the

bias corrections assume that the data are sampled but smoothing itself removes some of the

sampling variability.

       To address these problems, we developed an approach based on Jargowsky’s procedure.

Instead of estimating the distribution only for the overall metropolitan area, we applied the

procedure to each tract. Then, to preserve the sampling variability inherent in the original

individual data, we sampled incomes from each distribution, with the number of sampled cases

per category and tract being equal to the actual number of households. This procedure in effect

recreates a unit-level data set from a grouped data set.6

       We expect that estimating tract-specific distributions from grouped data will work if the

noise in the estimation process averages out across tracts. Because we cannot demonstrate

theoretically that it will, we turned once again to experimenting with the 1940 Chicago case.

Starting with the 100% household level income data, we sampled from these data by tract using a

specified sampling rate without replacement. We grouped the data into 10 pre-specified

categories, keeping only the numbers of households by tract and category and the category

boundaries. We then used the Jargowsky procedure to estimate the full tract and category-

specific distributions based on the grouped data. Finally, we sampled from these estimated

distributions with the number of households in each category and tract equal to the number

retained in the simulated grouped data. The relevant algorithms were then applied to construct



                                                                                                  23
biased and bias-corrected estimates of the relevant measures. The second-stage sampling was

repeated 100 times and the results were averaged. The whole procedure, starting with the 100%

household level income, was then repeated 100 times for each specified sampling rate.

       Figures 5 and 6 plot the estimates of income segregation parallel to results in Figures 1-2

but now calculated from the grouped data (median estimates are reported in Appendix Table 1).

True values (the horizontal line in the figures and the values in Appendix Table 1) are from the

100% individual data. Results of the correction are excellent for the entropy measures H, H10

(with some remaining upward bias at the lower sampling rates) and for R. H90 is a bit off but

the corrected measures are still a substantial improvement over the uncorrected estimates even at

a 20% sample.

        It is noteworthy that in Figures 5 and 6, even when (for H90 and H-R) the intervals of

the estimates do not overlap the true value they tend to be equal across sampling values. This

relationship is a useful feature as it suggests that our correction procedure does succeed in

removing differences that are attributed to changing sample sizes even when the grouping

procedure results in some loss of information. Indeed, the process of grouping the data can yield

bias even with a 100% sample as a consequence of the interpolation process. This pattern is

especially evident with respect to H-R, for which the corrected estimates are identical at .060

across all sampling rates (even 100%, not shown in the table) for the grouped data. The

comparable figure for the individual-level data, however, is .062. Analogously the gap between

the group-based estimates of H90 and the true value in Figure 6 is attributable to the fact that

even with a 100% sample, the grouped data yield an estimate of 0.063 as opposed to 0.059 for

the individual data.




                                                                                                   24
       Further, the procedures using grouped data yield uncorrected and corrected estimates of

NSI that are very different from and further from the true value than those calculated directly

from the individual household data. At a 20% sampling rate, the corrected NSI virtually

matched the true value when estimated from individual data for both the total population and the

foreign born whites. But at this sampling rate, the corrected NSI from grouped data is too low

for the total population and too high for foreign born whites. While even with grouped data the

estimates are relatively invariant with respect to the sample size when SSVD is applied, we are

not satisfied with the level of precision. The difficulty with the NSI may not be correctable,

because it is due to the combination of the great sensitivity of NSI to the highest income values

and our inability to reproduce the original distribution of these values from the grouped data.

Consequently, we will not offer estimates of contemporary changes in NSI here, deferring to a

future time when the internal census files may be available.

                                      Figures 5-6 about here

Correcting measures of contemporary income segregation

       We now turn to an effort to estimate income segregation in 2000 and 2007-2011. As

already noted, these estimates are not “true” because they are distorted by working with grouped

data and they do not compensate for suppression of income data for blacks in census tracts with

small black populations. However they do remove the bias due to smaller sample sizes in 2007-

2011 and for blacks compared to the total population. To maximize comparability with results

previously reported by Bischoff and Reardon (2014) we use family income data at the tract level

from Census 2000 (SF3) and ACS 2007-2011. Income segregation for the total population is for

118 metropolitan divisions or statistical areas with population above 500,000 in the 2007-2011

data; segregation for black families is measured for a subset of 66 metros with more than 30,000



                                                                                                    25
black families. Metropolitan area boundaries are fixed by the definitions used in Census 2010.

We applied the method described above with the 1940 data and summarize results in two tables,

Table 2 for the total population and Table 3 for families with black household heads.

       Table 2 lists values for the whole population for the same six metropolitan regions that

were presented in Table 1 as well as the mean and standard deviation for large metropolitan

regions. Our uncorrected figures differ from those reported by Bischoff and Reardon (2014);

theirs are generally larger because they imposed a cap on sample size whose effect was greater

for larger regions (see Appendix 1). For every measure and at both time points the mean is

lower for uncorrected measures than for those that have been adjusted. The adjustments also

result in changes in the trend over time. Averaging across cities, an increase of H of .017 (more

than half a standard deviation) becomes an increase of .011; the corrections reduce the apparent

gain in H in all six metros listed in the table. The increase in the mean H10 of .02 reduces to

increase only .011 (in the case of Chicago it converts a decline of .005 to a decline of .015). The

average increase of H90 for all cities was .026 without the correction but only .017 after

correction. Similarly, R rose by .019 before correction, and by .014 after correction.

                                         Table 2 about here

       Did income segregation increase for the total population? Pending a more

comprehensive analysis that may be completed in the future with internal census files and

acknowledging variability in patterns across metropolitan regions, we conclude that it did

increase, but that about a third of the previously reported increase is attributable to the lower

sampling rate in the 2007-2011 ACS.

       We turn now to income segregation among black families. We have emphasized that the

upward bias from sample data is more pronounced for estimates of segregation within subgroups,



                                                                                                    26
so we expect corrections to be greater for black families. This bias predates the ACS, because

the tract-level sample sizes for the black income distribution have always necessarily been

smaller than for the total population. Hence several studies over the years have reported that

segregation among blacks is greater than in the general population. Bischoff and Reardon (2014,

p. 215) draw particularly strong conclusions: “The trends in income segregation among black

and Hispanic families are much more striking than those among white families… By 2009,

income segregation among black families was 65 percent greater than among white families.

Although income segregation among blacks grew substantially in the 1970s and 1980s, it grew at

an even faster rate from 2000 to 2009, after declining slightly in the 1990s. Indeed, in the nine

years from 2000 to 2009, income segregation among black families grew by almost two standard

deviations.”

       These conclusions are clearly contradicted by the corrected estimates for black families in

Table 3. First, is segregation higher among black families? Comparing the mean values for

2007-2011 in Table 2 (total families) and Table 3 (black families) the differences are smaller

after correction, and while two show blacks to be more segregated by income, two show them to

be less segregated. In 2007-2011 H was higher for blacks by .011 (before correction it was

higher by .033), and H10 was higher by .005 (higher by .036 before correction). On the other

hand, H90 was lower by .011 (higher by .023 before correction), and R was lower by .009 (but

higher by .013 before correction). These comparisons illustrate how attention to sampling can

lead to very different conclusions.

                                        Table 3 about here

       Did black income segregation increase and did it increase more than in the total

population? Uncorrected measures show that H increased by .017 in the total population and by



                                                                                                    27
much more – .056 – for black families. The difference is substantially reduced after correction:

H for blacks increased by .027 as compared to .011 for total population). After correction, H90

for black families increased by .034 (compared to .017 for total), and R by .032 (compared to

.014 for total). H10, however, declined by the much larger margin of .078 (while increasing by

.011 for total). Bischoff and Reardon (2014, p. 226) had drawn special attention to changes in

H10, concluding that “[L]ow-income black and Hispanic families are much more isolated from

middle-class black and Hispanic families than are low-income white families from middle-and

high-income white families. The rapid growth of income segregation among black families has

exacerbated the clustering of poor black families in neighborhoods with very high poverty rates.”

Results from uncorrected measures fit readily into a common narrative about race and

concentrated poverty. Corrected estimates for black families point in the opposite direction.

There are also important differences in the comparisons across the six specific large cities

reported in Table 3. For example, the uncorrected estimates for R show increases in income

segregation among blacks in every city but Detroit. However, the corrected estimates show

declines in three of the cities (Chicago, Detroit, and Pittsburgh) but increases in the other three

(Cleveland, Los Angeles and Philadelphia). What seemed a simple set of results from the

uncorrected measures is actually more nuanced and demands more explication.



Conclusion

       It is plausible that income segregation has increased since 2000 along with the rising

level of overall income inequality in the United States. Income segregation may also be higher

and increasing faster for minorities than for the general population. We will not know for sure

until corrected measures of income segregation are estimated from the original individual-level



                                                                                                      28
sample data without suppression, but certainly past research based on the 2000 Census and 2007-

2011 ACS was systematically biased to show an upward trend. Estimates using methods of

correction for this bias suggest that income segregation did increase for the total population but

not by as much as has been previously reported. Estimates for black families suggest that

income segregation may not be higher and may actually have fallen for the lowest tenth of black

families.

       This research is immediately consequential our understanding of patterns and trends in

income segregation. More generally these findings add to a growing awareness of the relevance

of sampling issues to research based on the population census and ACS. Statisticians have

always been aware of these issues, but in the past most researchers took the reliability and

precision of census data for granted. The one-in-six long form data from 2000 and earlier were

routinely treated as though they fully captured population characteristics. We are now in a better

position to evaluate how this approach can lead researchers to wrong conclusions, thanks to the

100% census samples that are now being made available by the Minnesota Population Center.

The 1940 data are especially useful because they include a more complete set of socioeconomic

indicators (not only income, but also education, home value, rent, and recent unemployment

experience). By drawing repeated samples from these full population data, researchers can now

readily study the sampling variability of any parameter of interest. We have exploited this

opportunity to examine the behavior of measures of income segregation. We have shown that

there can be considerable bias even in a 15% similar to the long-form data collected in decennial

censuses up to 2000. Now the Bureau of the Census has shifted to smaller annual samples in the

American Community Survey that are no larger than 5% even when data are pooled over five

years, and measures of income segregation have greater upward bias. The problem is necessarily



                                                                                                 29
accentuated when dealing with subgroups of the population. We have given attention here to the

foreign-born white population in 1940 and black families in the last decade. The same issues

may be relevant for other subgroups, such as families with children (as studied by Owens 2016).

       Fortunately sampling bias in these measures can be corrected. Results from repeated

sample draws from the 100% data in 1940 give a high level of confidence in the efficacy of a

simple population- and sample size-correction for entropy-based measures, and the SSVD

estimation of variance-based measures. The remaining obstacles can be overcome by access to

confidential census data centers, where researchers can study the original individual-level sample

data without suppression. Despite the reduced sample size of the ACS, it will be possible in this

way to draw clear conclusions about changes in income segregation in the country as a whole, in

different regions, different parts of the income distribution, and different categories of people by

race, family composition, or age.

       A closely related question for further research is whether other measures of spatial

inequality, such as traditional measures of racial/ethnic segregation, are affected by sampling in

the same way. Fortunately some data are collected from full population samples, including even

the counts of Asians and Hispanics of different national origins. Studies of segregation of some

other potentially important categories of people, though, rely on sample data. These include

distinctions within the black population between people of recent African origin, Afro-

Caribbeans, and African Americans with a longer history in the U.S. Immigration researchers

typically wish to distinguish people not only by race/ethnicity but also by nativity, and the

Census Bureau provides the necessary tabulations by census tract from sample data. As noted

above, some researchers wish to distinguish between family households with and without

children. Studies of this type are being conducted, and it is important to know whether the usual



                                                                                                  30
indices of segregation are subject to the same kind of bias as the income segregation measures

evaluated here.




                                                                                                 31
Footnotes

1. The 2000 measures are calculated from tract data from SF3 (the sample count data) of Census

2000, and 2007-2011 measures are calculated from the 2007-2011 five-year pooled American

Community Survey tract data. Reardon and Bischoff (2014) included metropolitan areas with

population greater than 500,000 in 2007 (n=117); for black income segregation they included a

subset of these areas where the number of black families was greater than 10,000 in every census

year since 1970 and in 2009 (n=65). Measures of H, H10, and H90 in Table 1 are based on data

provided by them. The means and standard deviations in Table 1 are unweighted.



2. Bischoff and Reardon (2014, pp. 227-228) describe HR as follows (citations omitted). “For

any given value of , we can dichotomize the income distribution at             and compute the

residential (pairwise) segregation between those with income ranks less than          and those with

income ranks greater than or equal to . Let             denote the value of the traditional information

theory index of segregation computed between the two groups so defined. Likewise, let

denote the entropy of the population when divided into these two groups. That is,

                                            1                              1
                                      log           1        log
                                                                       1

and


                                                1                  ,


where   is the population of the metropolitan area and         is the population of neighborhood .

Then the rank-order information theory index (          ) can be written as


                                       2 ln 2           E



                                                                                                       32
Thus, if we computed the segregation between those families above and below each point in the

income distribution and averaged these segregation values, weighting the segregation between

families with above-median income and below-median income the most, we get the rank-order

information theory index.”

3. The percentile-p specific variance-ratio index may be defined as

                                    Mj            1
                         R pR               (         ( f           p)  p) 2 / ( p (1  p))
                                    M
                                                                  ij
                                j        k        Mj   iPj
                                    k



where () is the indicator function, fij is the cumulative percentile of income of household i in

tract j relative to the city, Pj indexes the population of households in tract j, M j | Pj | is the

number of households in tract j and J is the number of tracts. Note that the total variation, and

thus the denominator in this expression is p (1  p ) because the fraction of households with

income less than p in the population is exactly p.

        Similarly, the rank-order variance ratio index is defined as
                                         1
                                                  Mj                   1
                               RR  6      M  ( M  ( f
                                        p0             j     j            j iPj
                                                                                    ij    p )  p ) 2 dp .
                                                  j



4. As reviewers pointed out, the reliability of samples depends directly not on the sampling

proportion but on the number of sampled cases, particularly the number of cases in each census

tract from which the tract’s income distribution is estimated. We repeated our analyses for

average sample sizes per tract of 50, 100, 150, 200, and 250. Tracts averaged about 1300

households, so a sample of 50 would be just under 4%, while a sample of 200 be around 15%.

Results of these analyses showed the same patterns as did the analyses where we varied sampling

rate.



                                                                                                              33
                                             
5. The Pareto Distribution { F(Y ) 1  Y } describes the distribution of a population with

incomes of Y or greater. One way to estimate        and    is by using Quantile Method proposed

by Quandt (1964). Choose two probability levels P1 and P2 and determine the corresponding

quantiles Y1 and Y2 from the income category:

                                                                 
                                   P1  1  Y1 , P2  1  Y2 ,

                                  log(1 P1)  log   logY1 ,

                                  log(1 P2 )  log   logY2 ,

Then:

                                             log N1  log N 2
                                                            ,
                                              logY1  logY2

                                             1  P1 N1 / N
                                                        .
                                              Y1    Y1

Where N1 and N2 are the number of household whose income is at least greater than     Y1 , Y2 ,

respectively. N is the total number of households among all the tracts. Following Jargowsky

(1996) we use the Pareto Distribution to estimate the variance in each category:

                                  nb

                                  2   ( y  y)2 f ( y)dy
                                              y2

                                             y1
                                 i 1


6. We also implemented Reardon’s approach of estimating H using a fourth order polynomial to

the metro-level entropy function, which was explicitly designed for group level data and thus

does not require second-stage sampling. In Figures 5-6, Tables 2-3, and Appendix Table 1 this



                                                                                                  34
estimate of H from grouped data is identified as H-R. We include these results to show that our

correction procedure improves the estimates for either approach. The uncorrected H-R estimates

are better than the uncorrected H estimates, and we attribute this to its having smoothed out some

sampling fluctuations of values within categories. Because we cannot use Reardon’s approach

for the variance-based measures, we focus here on results using our modification of Jargowsky’s

method.




                                                                                                  35
References

Abramson, Alan J., Mitchell S. Tobin & Matthew R. VanderGoot, 1995. The changing

       geography of metropolitan opportunity: The segregation of the poor in U.S. metropolitan

       areas, 1970 to 1990. Housing Policy Debate, 6:1, 45-72, DOI:

       10.1080/10511482.1995.9521181

Asiala, Mark E. 2012. “American Community Survey Sampling and Weighting” Conference

       on Measuring People in Place, Boulder CO, October 5. Accessed February 8, 2013 at

       http://www.colorado.edu/ibs/cupc/workshops/measuring_people_in_place/

Bischoff, Kendra and Sean F. Reardon. 2014. Residential Segregation by Income, 1970–2009.

       Pp. 208-233 in John R. Logan (editor), Diversity and Disparities: America Enters a New

       Century. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Bureau of the Census. 2006. “Design and Methodology: Current Population Survey. Technical

       Paper 66.” http://www.census.gov/prod/2006pubs/tp-66.pdf [accessed 3/22/15].

Card, David, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline. 2012. “Workplace heterogeneity and the rise of

       West German wage inequality” . No. w18522. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Florida, Richard and Charlotta Mellander. 2015. “Segregated City: The Geography of

       Economic Segregation in America’s Metros” Report by the Martin Prosperity Institute,

       University of Toronto. Accessed 11/24/15 at

       http://martinprosperity.org/media/Segregated%20City.pdf.

Firebaugh, Glenn. 1999. “Empirics of World Income Inequality” American Journal of

       Sociology 104: 1597-1630.

Fry, Richard and Paul Taylor. 2012. “The Rise of Residential Segregation by Income” Report by

       the Pew Research Center. Accessed 11/24/15 at



                                                                                               36
       http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/files/2012/08/Rise-of-Residential-Income-Segregation-

       2012.2.pdf.

Harville, D. A. 1977. "Maximum Likelihood Approaches to Variance Component Estimation

       and to Related Problems".Journal of the American Statistical Association 72 (358): 320–

       338. doi:10.2307/2286796.

Jargowsky, Paul A. 1996. “Take the Money and Run: Economic Segregation in U.S.

       Metropolitan Areas.” American Sociological Review 61(6): 984–98.

Jargowsky, Paul A. 2003. “Stunning Progress, Hidden Problems: The Dramatic Decline of

       Concentrated Poverty in the 1990s.” In Redefining Urban and Suburban America:

       Evidence from Census 2000, vol. 2, ed. Bruce Katz, Alan Berube, and Robert Lang.

       Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

Liptak, Kevin. 2015. “Obama draws line between racial segregation of the past and class

       segregation today” CNN Politics, 5/12/15. Accessed 11/24/15 at

       http://www.cnn.com/2015/05/12/politics/obama-combat-poverty-baltimore/

Massey, Douglas S and Mitchell L. Eggers . 1993. "The Spatial Concentration of Affluence and

       Poverty During the 1970s." Urban Affairs Quarterly 29:299-315.

Massey, Douglas S. and Mitchell L. Eggers. 1990. "The Ecology of Inequality: Minorities and

       the Concentration of Poverty, 1970-1980." American Journal of Sociology 95:1153-88.

Massey, Douglas S., Andrew B. Gross, and Kumiko Shibuya. 1994. "Migration, Segregation,

       and the Geographic Concentration of Poverty." American Sociological Review 59:425-45.

Massey, Douglas S., and Mary J. Fischer. 2003. “The Geography of Inequality in the United

       States, 1950–2000.” Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs, 1–40.




                                                                                              37
Mayer, Susan E. 2001. “How Growth in Income Inequality Increased Economic Segregation,”

       Joint Center For Poverty Research Working Paper 230.

Miller, George. 1955. “Note on the Bias of Information Estimates” Information Theory in

       Psychology: Problems and Methods. II-B: 95-100.

Mundlak, Yair. 1978. “On the Pooling of Time Series and Cross Section Data” Econometrica 46:

       69-85.

National Research Council. 2015. Realizing the Potential of the American Community Survey:

       Challenges, Tradeoffs, and Opportunities. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.

Owens, Ann. 2016. “Inequality in Children’s Contexts: Income Segregation of Households with

       and without Children” American Sociological Review 81: 549-574.

Petersen, Trond, Andrew M. Penner, and Geir Høgsnes. 2014. "From Motherhood Penalties to

       Husband Premia: The New Challenge for Gender Equality and Family Policy, Lessons

       from Norway1" American Journal of Sociology 119: 1434-1472.

Picketty, Thomas. 2013. Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Cambridge, MA: Harvard

       University Press.

Quandt, Richard E. 1964. “Old and New Methods of Estimation and the Pareto Distribution”

       Econometric Research Program, Research Memorandum No. 70. Princeton NJ:

       Princeton University. Accessed 3/29/16 at

       https://www.princeton.edu/~erp/ERParchives/archivepdfs/M70.pdf.

Rao, J.N.K. 2003. Small Area Estimation. New York: Wiley-Interscience.

Reardon, Sean F. 2011. “Measures of Income Segregation.” Working paper. Stanford, Calif.:

       Stanford University, Center for Education Policy Analysis. Available at:




                                                                                             38
       http://inequality.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/reardon_measures-income-seg.pdf

       (accessed September 1, 2017).

Reardon, Sean F. and Kendra Bischoff. 2011. “Income Inequality and Income Segregation

       Source” American Journal of Sociology, 116:1092-1153.

Reardon, Sean F., Lindsay Fox and Joseph Townsend. 2015. “Neighborhood Income

       Composition by Household Race and Income, 1990-2009” Annals of the American

       Academy of Political and Social Science 660: 78-97.

Ricketts, Erol R. and Isabel V. Sawhill. 1988. "Defining and Measuring the Underclass." Journal

       of Policy Analysis and Management 7:316-25.

Sampson, Robert. 2012. Great American City: Chicago and the Enduring Neighborhood Effect.

       Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Schnabel, R. B., Koontz, J. E. and Weiss, B. E. 1985. “A modular system of algorithms for

       unconstrained minimization” ACM Trans. Math. Software, 11, 419–440.

Spielman, Seth E. , David Folch, and Nicholas Nagle. 2014. “Patterns and causes of uncertainty

       in the American Community Survey” Applied Geography 46: 147-157.

Starsinic, Michael. 2005. "American Community Survey: Improving Reliability for Small Area

       Estimates" Proceedings of the 2005 Joint Statistical Meetings, Pp. 3592-3599.

Voss, Paul. 2012. “Usability of the ACS” Conference on Measuring People in Place, Boulder

       CO, October 5.

       http://www.colorado.edu/ibs/cupc/workshops/measuring_people_in_place/

Watson, Tara. 2009. “Inequality and the Measurement of Residential Segregation by Income.”

       Review of Income and Wealth 55(3): 820–44.




                                                                                             39
Yang, Rebecca, and Paul A. Jargowsky. 2006. “Suburban Development and Economic

      Segregation in the 1990s.” Journal of Urban Affairs 28:253–73.




                                                                                 40
Appendix I: Two-stage resampling as a possible solution to bias

       We use 1940 census data here to test a resampling procedure developed by Bischoff and

Reardon to correct for differences in sampling rates of H in the 2000 and 2010 census using

aggregate tract level data. The idea of the resampling approach is that if similarly sized small

samples are drawn based on observed distributions for the two censuses then small-sample

biases, while present, will be comparable across time and thus trends will be correctly estimated.

The procedure, as explained in a private communication from its authors and similar in concept

to their handling of data from 2000 in a previous study (Reardon and Bischoff 2011), is that a

simulated micro data set is created with the number of households in each category of income by

tract equal to the number implied by the published distributions. Then 100 samples of 50*N,

where N is the number of tracts, are drawn from the simulated micro data for each year. H is

calculated for each sample using grouped data procedure for which Bischoff and Reardon

provided Stata code. The procedure involves fitting 4-th order polynomials to the cumulative

distributions and then integrating over this distribution to H. The 100 sample Hs are then

averaged to get a final H estimate for each year.

       We carried out a two stage procedure to mimic the data generating process underlying

this procedure, and we applied it to H, H90, and NSI with similar results for each measure. Here

we display the results for H. In the first stage we constructed 100 5% and 15% samples and one

100% sample of the 1940 micro data and then categorized the data by tract to create the

equivalent of the published tables for each sample. In a second stage we carried out the proposed

resampling procedure for each first-stage sample. We then plotted the difference between the

estimate and a “true” estimate based on the 100% sample without any second stage sampling. A

                                                                                                   41
box plot of the resulting differences by original sampling rate is presented in Appendix Figure 1

and labeled “N*50 Cen”. We also carried out a variant in which the microdata consisted of the

number of households implied by the census tract sample sizes rather than the census tract

population counts (“N*50 Samp”). A third variant (All) was constructed in which there was no

second-stage sampling.

       It is evident from Appendix Figure 1 that despite the fact that the second stage sample is

of the same size for the 5 and 15 percent samples, the Bischoff and Reardon procedure (“N*50

Cen”) does not yield similar biases for them. The average difference is .009 or 16% of the true

value of .056. This difference is roughly equal to the difference of .01 when no second stage is

sampled at all (“All”). In short, the “N*50 Cen” approach increases the bias by roughly the same

amount for the 5 and 15 percent samples and thus does not undo the difference in bias that is

created from the different sampling rates used in the first stage.

       The bias estimates for “N*50 Samp” are more comparable across samples. This suggests

that the Bischoff and Reardon procedure would work better if it were based on the counts of the

sample rather than the counts of the population that are estimated from the sample. In effect this

works because it approximates what you would get by randomly discarding 2/3 of the 15%

sample so that sampling rates are in fact the same. There are two drawbacks with this approach.

First, in contrast to the “N*50 Cen” procedure, the “N*50 Samp” procedure will not work to

compute segregation among subgroup populations for which 5% of the population per tract on

average is less than 50. Second, bias depends on the within tract distributions (and thus

segregation) as well as on sampling size, so there is no guarantee that bias will be the same in

different cities with different levels of segregation. Simulations available from the authors on




                                                                                                   42
request suggest that this latter source of bias (due to differing within tract variation) is not large

for H, but it can be important for other measures such as H10 and H90.




                            Appendix Figure 1: Bias from resampling procedures
                                   based on 1940 Chicago Census Data
              .04
              .03
           Bias
           .02.01
              0




                      .05         .15            .05        .15             .05        .15
                            All                    N*50 Cen                   N*50 Sam




                                                                                                     43
       Table 1. Observed income segregation in
       metropolitan regions, 2000 and 2007‐2011
                                 Total            Black
                                     2007‐            2007‐
                             2000     2011    2000     2011
H
    Chicago                          0.164      0.168      0.147      0.186
    Cleveland                        0.158      0.172      0.160      0.202
    Detroit                          0.162      0.194      0.094      0.141
    Los Angeles                      0.174      0.179      0.177      0.268
    Philadelphia                     0.189      0.207      0.127      0.175
    Pittsburgh                       0.114      0.130      0.184      0.254
                            1
   Mean large metros                 0.134      0.147      0.169      0.251
   SD                                0.027      0.027      0.055      0.082
H(10)
   Chicago                           0.200      0.186      0.153      0.197
   Cleveland                         0.221      0.219      0.156      0.221
   Detroit                           0.178      0.195      0.087      0.166
   Los Angeles                       0.132      0.149      0.155      0.269
   Philadelphia                      0.217      0.230      0.128      0.174
   Pittsburgh                        0.130      0.154      0.175      0.303
                            1
   Mean large metros                 0.146      0.163      0.171      0.270
   Standard deviation                0.031      0.029      0.054      0.093
H(90)
   Chicago                           0.211      0.233      0.168      0.253
   Cleveland                         0.203      0.224      0.194      0.272
   Detroit                           0.203      0.261      0.135      0.212
   Los Angeles                       0.257      0.274      0.253      0.358
   Philadelphia                      0.240      0.245      0.188      0.284
   Pittsburgh                        0.189      0.203      0.253      0.361
                            1
    Mean large metros                0.185      0.200      0.231      0.341
    SD                               0.036      0.036      0.079      0.096
1
 See footnote 1 for s el ecti on of l a rge metros a nd metros wi th l a rge
bl a ck popul a ti ons . Source: Downl oa da bl e from
https ://s 4.a d.brown.edu/Projects /Di vers i ty/Da ta /Da ta .htm.




                                                                               44
                Table 2. Estimates of income segregation before and after correction for selected metropolitan regions
                              and for the average of 118 large metropolitan regions, 2000 and 2007‐2011
                                                                                                        Mean
                                                                   Los                                  large     Change    Standard
                              Chicago    Cleveland   Detroit     Angeles    Philadelphia   Pittsburgh   metros    in mean   deviation
H     Uncorrected      2000    0.140       0.140      0.143       0.155         0.163         0.088     0.112                 0.028
                    2007‐11    0.153       0.153      0.185       0.167        0.178          0.106     0.129       0.018     0.029
        Corrected      2000    0.136       0.135      0.137       0.151        0.158          0.085     0.108                 0.028
                    2007‐11    0.143       0.143      0.172       0.155        0.168          0.098     0.119       0.012     0.029
H‐R   Uncorrected      2000    0.138       0.137      0.141       0.153        0.160          0.087     0.110                 0.027
                    2007‐11    0.148       0.148      0.179       0.162        0.172          0.102     0.125       0.015     0.028
        Corrected      2000    0.133       0.132      0.135       0.149        0.155          0.083     0.106                 0.027
                    2007‐11    0.138       0.138      0.166       0.150        0.162          0.095     0.115       0.009     0.028
H10   Uncorrected      2000    0.158       0.181      0.147       0.097        0.181          0.081     0.106                 0.031
                    2007‐11    0.153       0.186      0.170       0.117        0.193          0.107     0.126       0.020     0.030
        Corrected      2000    0.152       0.174      0.138       0.091        0.173          0.076     0.100                 0.030
                    2007‐11    0.137       0.170      0.150       0.098        0.177          0.095     0.111       0.011     0.029
H90   Uncorrected      2000    0.178       0.173      0.164       0.216        0.201          0.152     0.152                 0.049
                    2007‐11    0.204       0.195      0.231       0.246        0.212          0.170     0.178       0.026     0.056
        Corrected      2000    0.171       0.166      0.155       0.210        0.193          0.146     0.146                 0.049
                    2007‐11    0.188       0.179      0.211       0.227        0.197          0.159     0.163       0.017     0.055
R     Uncorrected      2000    0.240       0.239      0.246       0.546        0.280          0.154     0.194                 0.047
                    2007‐11    0.249       0.250      0.301       0.269        0.292          0.176     0.213       0.019     0.048
        Corrected      2000    0.235       0.233      0.240       0.275        0.275          0.149     0.189                 0.047
                    2007‐11    0.237       0.239      0.288       0.265        0.283          0.166     0.203       0.013     0.048




                                                                                                                                   1
                        Table 3. Estimates of income segregation for black families before and after correction,
             for selected metropolitan regions and for the average of 116 large metropolitan regions, 2000 and 2007‐2011
                                                                                                        Mean      Change
                                                                                                        large       in     Standard
                              Chicago Cleveland Detroit       Los Angeles   Philadelphia   Pittsburgh   metros     mean    deviation
H     Uncorrected      2000    0.120    0.134    0.076           0.130         0.094          0.114     0.116                0.032
                    2007‐11    0.134    0.171    0.113           0.165         0.127          0.142     0.162      0.046     0.041
        Corrected      2000    0.110    0.123    0.067           0.119         0.084          0.098     0.103                0.029
                    2007‐11    0.112    0.142    0.087           0.132         0.100          0.103     0.130      0.027     0.036
H‐R   Uncorrected      2000    0.117    0.132    0.074           0.127         0.092          0.112     0.113                0.031
                    2007‐11    0.130    0.164    0.108           0.155         0.122          0.134     0.154      0.041     0.039
        Corrected      2000    0.107    0.121    0.065           0.115         0.083          0.095     0.100                0.028
                    2007‐11    0.107    0.136    0.082           0.122         0.095          0.094     0.180      0.080     0.047
H10 Uncorrected        2000    0.108    0.107    0.055           0.094         0.079          0.091     0.226                0.059
                    2007‐11    0.128    0.166    0.105           0.154         0.123          0.162     0.162     ‐0.065     0.044
        Corrected      2000    0.093    0.090    0.042           0.077         0.063          0.065     0.194                0.058
                    2007‐11    0.093    0.122    0.065           0.104         0.082          0.101     0.116     ‐0.078     0.034
H90 Uncorrected        2000    0.124    0.144    0.098           0.176         0.110          0.144     0.138                0.047
                    2007‐11    0.176    0.189    0.153           0.208         0.176          0.181     0.201      0.063     0.048
        Corrected      2000    0.109    0.127    0.085           0.159         0.094          0.119     0.118                0.042
                    2007‐11    0.142    0.145    0.113           0.157         0.135          0.121     0.152      0.034     0.041
R     Uncorrected      2000    0.195    0.218    0.290           0.200         0.153          0.179     0.180                0.047
                    2007‐11    0.202    0.248    0.124           0.230         0.180          0.181     0.226      0.046     0.059
        Corrected      2000    0.181    0.203    0.161           0.181         0.139          0.155     0.162                0.044
                    2007‐11    0.178    0.219    0.113           0.195         0.152          0.140     0.194      0.032     0.058




                                                                                                                                       2
                   Appendix Table 1. Estimates of various measures of income segregation,
                 with samples of different sizes, and true 100% population value, Chicago 1940

                      Uncorrected estimates                         Corrected estimates              True
               5%         10%        15%        20%         5%         10%        15%        20%     Value
Estimates from individual data
Total population
     H         0.081      0.071     0.067       0.066      0.065      0.063      0.063       0.063   0.062
     H10       0.053      0.038     0.033       0.031      0.028      0.026      0.026       0.026   0.026
     H90       0.085      0.071     0.066       0.064      0.059      0.059      0.059       0.059   0.059
     NSI       0.277       0.26     0.253       0.244      0.246      0.241       0.24       0.236   0.237
     R         0.114      0.107     0.104       0.103      0.099      0.099      0.099       0.099   0.099
Foreign‐born whites
     H         0.093      0.067     0.059       0.054      0.053      0.048      0.047       0.046   0.045
     H10       0.087      0.054     0.042       0.036      0.026      0.024      0.023       0.023   0.023
     H90       0.107      0.076     0.065       0.059      0.046      0.046      0.046       0.046   0.046
     NSI       0.288      0.242     0.22        0.209      0.199      0.183      0.174       0.177   0.177
     R         0.107      0.089     0.082       0.079       0.07      0.069      0.069       0.069   0.069

Estimates from grouped data
Total population
     H        0.082     0.071       0.068      0.066       0.065      0.064      0.063      0.063    0.062
     H‐R      0.076     0.068       0.065      0.063        0.06       0.06       0.06       0.06    0.062
     H10      0.053     0.038       0.034      0.031       0.027      0.026      0.026      0.026    0.026
     H90      0.089     0.075       0.071      0.068       0.063      0.063      0.063      0.063    0.059
     NSI       0.33     0.278       0.233      0.217       0.129      0.142      0.145      0.158    0.237
     R        0.116     0.108       0.105      0.104       0.101      0.101       0.1        0.1     0.099
Foreign‐born whites
     H        0.094     0.068       0.059      0.055       0.054      0.048      0.047      0.046    0.045
     H‐R      0.084     0.063       0.056      0.052       0.044      0.044      0.043      0.043    0.045
     H10      0.088     0.054       0.042      0.037       0.028      0.025      0.024      0.023    0.023
     H90      0.108     0.077       0.067      0.062       0.047      0.048      0.048      0.048    0.046
     NSI      0.481     0.429       0.364      0.347       0.239       0.24      0.205      0.189    0.177
     R        0.108      0.09       0.083       0.08       0.072       0.07       0.07       0.07    0.069




                                                                                                       1
Figure 1. Estimated income segregation in Chicago 1940: true value (horizontal line), and
distribution of estimates from samples of varying size, showing uncorrected and corrected values
of H, H10, and H90 based on data for individual households, total population.




                                                                                               2
Figure 2. Estimated income segregation in Chicago 1940: true value (horizontal line), and
distribution of estimates from samples of varying size, showing uncorrected values of R and NSI
and adjusted values using SSVD, based on data for individual households, total population.




                                                                                              3
Figure 3. Estimated income segregation in Chicago 1940: true value (horizontal line), and
distribution of estimates from samples of varying size, showing uncorrected and corrected values
of H, H10, and H90 based on individual data, foreign-born whites.




                                                                                               4
Figure 4. Estimated income segregation in Chicago 1940: true value (horizontal line), and
distribution of estimates from samples of varying size, showing uncorrected values of R and NSI
and adjusted values using SSVD, based on data for individual households, foreign-born whites.




                                                                                              5
Figure 5. Estimated income segregation in Chicago 1940: true value from 100% individual data
(horizontal line), and distribution of estimates from samples of varying size, showing
uncorrected and corrected values of H, H-R, H10, and H90 based on grouped data, total
population.




                                                                                               6
Figure 6. Estimated income segregation in Chicago 1940: true value from 100% individual data
(horizontal line), and distribution of estimates from samples of varying size, showing
uncorrected values of R and NSI and adjusted values using SSVD, based on grouped data, total
population.




                                                                                               7
