                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        SYMPATHY FOR THE DILIGENT AND THE DEMAND FOR WORKFARE

                                        Andres Drenik
                                     Ricardo Perez-Truglia

                                      Working Paper 23659
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23659


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          August 2017, Revised November 2017




We are particularly grateful to Florian Scheuer for his advice and support. We also want to thank
Alberto Alesina, Tim Bresnahan, Rafael Di Tella, Sebastian Galiani, Juan Carlos Hallak,
Matthew Jackson, Josh Mollner, Yiqing Xing and Federico Weinschelbaum for their valuable
comments, as well as seminar participants at Universidad de San Andres and Stanford University.
Funding for the survey was generously provided by Microsoft Research. The usual disclaimer
applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Andres Drenik and Ricardo Perez-Truglia. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sympathy for the Diligent and the Demand for Workfare
Andres Drenik and Ricardo Perez-Truglia
NBER Working Paper No. 23659
August 2017, Revised November 2017
JEL No. D64,H2,H5

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the role of fairness concerns in the demand for redistribution through workfare. In the
first part of the paper, we present new evidence from a survey. We show that individuals are more
generous towards poor people whom they perceive to be diligent workers relative to poor people
whom they perceive to be non-diligent, a social preference that we label sympathy for the
diligent. This preference is much stronger than preferences regarding other characteristics of the
poor, such as race, nationality, and disability. More important, we show that subjects with higher
sympathy for the diligent have a stronger preference for workfare programs. In the second part of
the paper, we incorporate our empirical findings into a model of income redistribution. We
consider the case of a benevolent government with fairness concerns that prioritizes the well-
being of individuals who exert the most effort. We characterize the optimal conditions under
which the government introduces work requirements. Even if wasteful, work requirements can be
optimal, because they allow for a better distinction between individuals who exert great effort and
individuals who do not. However, if the government lacks commitment power, the availability of
screening through work requirements leads to a lower equilibrium effort and, possibly, a Pareto-
dominated allocation.


Andres Drenik
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
ad3376@columbia.edu

Ricardo Perez-Truglia
Anderson School of Management
University of California, Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
ricardo.truglia@anderson.ucla.edu
1    Introduction
We study the role of fairness concerns in the demand for social assistance programs with work
requirements (hereafter, referred to as workfare) relative to unconditional assistance programs
(welfare). We argue that public support for work requirements responds to a type of social
preference that we refer to as sympathy for the diligent, according to which individuals are more
sympathetic towards poor people whom they perceive to exert high effort than they are towards
poor people whom they perceive to exert low effort. This social preference translates into a
higher demand for redistribution towards one group relative to the other. Consequently, this
social preference generates a demand for work requirements in social programs, because these
programs can act as screening devices that target social assistance towards the poor who exert
high effort.
    A large body of work argues that fairness concerns are important for understanding in-
come redistribution (Alesina and Angeletos [2005]). For example, survey data indicate that
the percentage of the population that believes that poor people are lazy has a strong negative
correlation with social spending across the set of OECD countries (Alesina and Glaeser [2004]).
Within a given country, individuals who believe that the poor are poor because of lack of effort,
rather than because of bad luck, tend to have a low demand for redistribution (Fong [2001];
Corneo and Grüner [2002]; Alesina and La Ferrara [2005]). Fairness concerns are also impor-
tant drivers in a variety of laboratory experiments, such as the dictator, ultimatum, and gift
exchange games (Fehr and Schmidt [1999]), and experiments that study the demand for redis-
tribution of income (Durante et al. [2014]). More precisely, the laboratory evidence supports
the idea that individuals believe it is fair to give more resources to those who exert a higher
effort. For example, Cappelen et al. [2013] studies fairness views in a game that consists of a
risk-taking phase followed by a redistribution phase. The results show that, when deciding how
to redistribute, most individuals distinguish between ex post inequality that reflects differences
in luck and ex post inequality that reflects differences in choices. A similar distinction between
differences in luck and differences in choices has been documented in a variety of other games,
such as double auction (Ball et al. [2001]), public good (Clark [1998]), and ultimatum games
(Hoffman and Spitzer [1985]). In this paper, we argue that fairness concerns have important
implications not only for the overall level of income redistribution, but also for the composition
of the spending in different social programs, such as welfare vs. workfare.
    In the first part of the paper, we present new evidence about the existence of sympathy
for the diligent and its relationship with the demand for workfare. We conducted surveys to
1,800 U.S. subjects recruited on Amazon Mechanical Turk. Subjects were asked to provide
policy recommendations for the government in a hypothetical scenario. This scenario contained


                                                1
a description about a poor household to whom the government was considering providing social
assistance. We randomly varied the characteristics of the household head who would benefit
from the social program. Later, subjects were asked to recommend the amount for a cash
transfer to be given to that specific household.
    Consistent with our definition of sympathy for the diligent, subjects’ recommendations were
more generous when the description of the beneficiary included an indication that the individual
was hard-working, less generous when this indication was omitted, and even less generous when
the description included an indication that the individual was lazy. The magnitudes of these
differences are large. For example, when the recipient was described as hard-working, subjects
recommended a cash transfer that was almost twice as large as when the recipient was de-
scribed as lazy. These differences are significant even within the sub-populations of Democrats,
Independents, and Republicans, although they are larger in magnitude among Republicans. To
obtain a benchmark for the quantitative importance of this social preference, we randomized
other characteristics of the hypothetical beneficiary. The estimates suggest that subjects are
more generous with African-American than White beneficiaries, more generous with U.S.-born
than Mexican-born beneficiaries, and more generous with disabled than non-disabled beneficia-
ries. However, the gap in generosity between hard-working and lazy beneficiaries is between 4.3
and 8.4 times the magnitude of the gaps in generosity between African-Americans and Whites,
U.S.-born and Mexican-born, and disabled and not disabled.
    Additionally, we provide evidence that more sympathy for the diligent creates more demand
for workfare. To do so, we conducted an additional survey that included a direct question about
the respondent’s degree of sympathy for the diligent, as well as multiple questions about the
respondent’s preferences regarding welfare and workfare policies. As expected, compared to
those with low sympathy for the diligent, subjects with high sympathy for the diligent have a
significantly stronger preference for workfare: they are more likely to demand work requirements
in social assistance programs, they prefer a higher share of social spending to be allocated to
the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), and they are more likely to agree with the statement
that work requirements are effective at preventing the lazy poor from benefiting from social
assistance programs. These differences are not only statistically significant but also large in
magnitude.
    In the second part of the paper, we incorporate the empirical findings into a model of
income redistribution. We characterize the conditions under which it is optimal for a benevolent
government to make income transfers that are contingent on effort requirements (i.e., workfare),
as opposed to unconditional transfers (i.e., welfare). We use a framework adapted from Netzer
and Scheuer [2010]. Ex ante, a risk-averse agent can affect the probability distribution over
output by choosing different levels of unobservable effort. For example, this effort choice can


                                               2
be interpreted as human capital investment, as in Boadway et al. [1996] and Konrad [2001].
Once outcomes have been realized, a benevolent government chooses the income-redistribution
policy. Following Netzer and Scheuer [2010] and others (Boadway et al. [1996]; Konrad [2001]),
we assume that the government cannot commit to a certain redistributive scheme before effort
choices are made.1
    We introduce a benevolent government with merit-based fairness concerns. The government
cares more about the utility of individuals who exert the most effort, because they are believed
to deserve higher utility. The government cannot directly verify who exerts effort and who does
not, but it can take advantage of the fact that, on average, individuals with lower disutility from
effort are more likely to have exerted great effort in the past. Because the work requirement is
less costly for individuals with low disutility from effort, the government can use workfare to
(imperfectly) screen for diligent individuals and direct more resources toward them. We first
analyze the partial-equilibrium problem, in which effort and output are determined and the
government must then choose a redistribution policy. The government has the option of offering
to the poor a choice between a workfare and a welfare program. For the sake of simplicity,
we focus on the case where the workfare effort produces no output. We show that, if the
government is not sympathetic towards the diligent, then the government does not use workfare
and redistributes only via welfare. However, under fairness concerns, then the government’s
optimal redistribution policy involves a combination of workfare and welfare, provided there is
a minimum share of the poor who exerted high effort.
    Additionally, we analyze the equilibrium implications of the availability of work require-
ments as an additional redistributive tool. When the government has commitment power, the
availability of an additional policy instrument, such as workfare, cannot be harmful (i.e., in the
worst case scenario, the government commits to not using the instrument and therefore achieves
the same social welfare as if the instrument is not available.) However, when the government
lacks commitment power, the availability of an additional policy instrument can be harmful if
it leads to a time-inconsistency problem. We compare the set of equilibria in which workfare
is available with the set of equilibria in which workfare is not available. The availability of
workfare can affect equilibrium effort through two channels, with opposite signs. On the one
hand, the availability of workfare allows the government to transfer resources away from agents
with high disutility of effort, so that agents with low disutility of effort anticipate that they will
not have to share their earnings as much with the agents with high disutility of effort. Con-
sequently, the agents with low disutility of effort face higher incentives to exert effort. On the
   1
    This assumption differs from other studies of income redistribution such as Meltzer and Richard [1981] and
Alesina and Angeletos [2005]. Note that it makes no difference whether the redistribution scheme is decided
before the uncertainty is resolved. What is truly important is whether the redistribution scheme can be modified
after the outcomes are realized.


                                                       3
other hand, agents with low disutility of effort anticipate access to generous workfare programs
in the future, which gives them lower incentives to work. We show that, under fairly general
conditions, the latter effect dominates, so that the availability of workfare reduces the aggregate
level of equilibrium effort. Furthermore, the equilibrium allocation obtained when workfare is
available can be Pareto-dominated by the allocation attained when workfare is not available.
That is, even when the government is benevolent and rational, the availability of workfare can
lead to a Pareto-dominated allocation.
    Our study relates to various strands of research. In their seminal contribution, Besley and
Coate [1992] introduced a model in which a government can use work requirements for screening
purposes. Poor individuals have a choice between receiving a transfer from the government or
working in the private market. From the perspective of efficiency, the government is interested
in directing its help toward low-ability individuals who would not be able to sustain themselves
without the government’s help. The government can screen low-ability individuals through work
requirements, because they have lower opportunity costs from working in the private sector.2
Contrary to Besley and Coate [1992], our suggests that work requirements are used target social
assistance towards individuals with low disutility of effort rather than towards individuals with
low-ability.3
    Similar to our paper, Cuff [2000] and Moffitt [2006] also stress the importance of a non-
utilitarian social welfare function to understand the demand for workfare. Moffitt [2006] assumes
that the government values the leisure time of families whose ability is low, but does not value
the leisure time of families whose ability is high. That is, the government directly desires that
high-ability individuals work and that low-ability individuals do not work. This assumption
makes work requirements optimal, even if they do not screen individuals. On the other hand,
Cuff [2000] assumes that the government cares more about individuals with certain ability. For
instance, the government may care more about low-ability individuals if their low ability is the
product of a disability. Even though Cuff [2000] and Moffitt [2006] show that work requirements
can be optimal when the government cares differently about individuals of different types, they
do not explain why such government preferences may arise in the first place. We show that
fairness concerns, which is a central concept of behavioral economics and political economy,
endogenously create a demand for workfare.4 In our model, fairness concerns create a demand
   2
     Several studies have elaborated on this screening principle (Besley and Coate [1995]; Cuff [2000]; Kreiner
and Tranæs [2005]; Moffitt [2006]). In particular, Kreiner and Tranæs [2005] shows that this principle applies
not only to poverty alleviation programs but also to unemployment insurance. In that case, unproductive
work requirements can be used to target unemployment insurance towards the involuntarily unemployed (which
happen to be low-income, low-disutility individuals).
   3
     Besides differences in fairness concerns, our setting also differs in that we assume that agents decide whether
to join a workfare or welfare program after their fates in the private market have been determined.
   4
     Consistent with our interpretation, Falk et al. [2006] present evidence from laboratory experiments about



                                                         4
for screening individuals based on their past efforts. Since workfare provides screening based on
the agent’s type (e.g., high or low disutility from effort), the government finds workfare useful
only to the extent that agents’ types are correlated to their effort choices. Furthermore, we
show that this endogeneity of government preferences has important equilibrium implications,
because the agents’ effort choices depend on their expectations about future government policies.
    We find that, when the government lacks commitment power, the availability of workfare
can lead to a Pareto-dominated equilibrium. In reality, commitment power is a degree issue
mediated by a myriad of factors, such as reputation and institutions (e.g., Fudenberg and Tirole
[1990]; Acemoglu et al. [2008]). Nonetheless, our model serves as a cautionary tale. Indeed, a
number of studies provide related examples of policies whose positive or normative implications
are sensitive to the government’s commitment power. For example, Konrad [2001] shows that,
because the government lacks commitment power, better information about the agents’ types can
lead to a Pareto-dominated equilibrium in a model of income redistribution. Netzer and Scheuer
[2010] shows that, because of the lack of commitment power, competitive insurance markets can
implement allocations that Pareto-dominate those achieved by a benevolent government. And
Farhi et al. [2012] shows that, even though a zero capital tax would be optimal under perfect
commitment, a government without commitment chooses a positive capital tax.
    Given the dramatic differences with respect to the predictions of Besley and Coate [1992],
our model illustrates how social preferences can lead to redistributive policies that differ from
those resulting from the prescriptions of a purely utilitarian government. In this sense, our
paper belongs to a recent but growing literature that emphasizes the need for incorporating so-
cial preferences into public finance models and for studying optimal tax theory from a positive
perspective. For instance, Auerbach and Hassett [2002] modifies the social welfare function to
accommodate social preferences about horizontal equity. Roemer et al. [2003] apply an equal
opportunity criterion to the social welfare function to study optimal income redistribution in
a setting in which income differences might arise because of individual merit or family back-
ground. Other examples include fairness concerns related to the principles of responsibility and
compensation (Fleurbaey and Maniquet [2006]) and to the principle of equal sacrifice (Weinzierl
[2014]).5 Our model suggests that fairness concerns can be useful not only to explain the overall
extent of redistribution (Alesina and Angeletos [2005]), but also to explain the composition of
redistributive programs (e.g., welfare vs. workfare).6
    In this paper, work requirements should be understood in a broader sense rather than the
the role of fairness concerns in creating demand for workfare.
   5
     For further discussion and a survey of the literature, see Saez and Stantcheva [2016] and Chapter 7 of Piketty
and Saez [2013].
   6
     Moreover, our model suggests that the government’s degree of commitment power can also affect the com-
position of redistributive programs.



                                                        5
specific social assistance programs that are often referred to as workfare. For example, some
studies argue that governments use some forms of public employment as a tool for income redis-
tribution, including evidence from the United States (Alesina et al. [2000]) and other developed
and developing countries (Mattos and França [2011]; Alesina et al. [2001]; Clark and Milcent
[2011]; among many others).7 Thus, our model can provide an explanation for the demand for
public employment as a redistributive tool. Additionally, as illustrated by our survey results,
sympathy for the diligent may be relevant for understanding the public support for earning
subsidy programs, such as the EITC in the United States. Indeed, even though the utilitarian
welfare framework provides good reasons for using a program like the EITC (Saez [2002]), it
is uncertain whether its growth can be attributed to those reasons (see Moffitt [2006] and the
references therein).8
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the empirical evidence. Section 3
presents the model. The last section concludes.


2       Empirical Evidence
2.1     Overview and Subject Pool
In this section, we present new survey results that show the existence of sympathy for the
diligent and its relationship with the demand for workfare. We conducted three surveys, labeled
Survey 1, Survey 2 and Survey 3 hereon. Surveys 1 and 2 were designed to quantify the degree
of sympathy for the diligent in the population. Survey 3 was designed to examine whether more
sympathy for the diligent creates more demand for workfare.
    We conducted the three surveys with U.S. subjects recruited on Amazon Mechanical Turk.
We followed the recommended practices for using Amazon Mechanical Turk for surveys to
ensure high-quality responses (e.g., see Crump et al. [2013]). Potential recruits were asked to
participate in a 5-minute “public opinion survey”.9 Responses to Surveys 1 and 3 were collected
in September 2014, and responses to Survey 2 were collected in October 2017. We restricted
the sample of participants to U.S. residents only, and we included attention checks to ensure
that participants read the instructions and the questions thoroughly.
    After excluding a small minority (about 1%) of participants who did not satisfy our attention
checks, the final sample comprised 1,778 respondents in Survey 1; 808 respondents in Survey
    7
     For example, Clark and Milcent [2011] shows that public hospitals in France employ significantly more
workers than similar non-public hospitals, that this gap correlates with the unemployment rate, and that the
correlation is stronger in left-wing areas.
   8
     In line with Fleurbaey and Maniquet [2006], we emphasize the role of fairness concerns.
   9
     We used this vague description on purpose, to avoid conditioning the participants. Participants were paid
$0.50 for their participation, which was above-average for surveys of this length.


                                                      6
          Table 1: Characteristics of the Subject Pool by Survey vs. U.S. Averages

                                  Survey 1   Survey 2   Survey 3   U.S. Average
              By Gender:
              Female               47.5%      46.9%      43.8%       50.8 %
              Male                 52.5%      53.1%      56.2%       49.2 %
              By age:
              18-24 years old      22.3%       8.4%      21.7%        13.2%
              25-29 years old      27.3%      23.5%      26.3%         9%
              30-34 years old      18.7%      23.0%      17.3%        8.6%
              35+ years old        31.7%      45.1%      34.7%        69.2%
              By geography:
              West                 22.8%      17.7%      24.3%        16.3%
              Midwest              21.5%      22.5%      20.5%         21%
              South                37.7%      40.2%      37.1%        37.9%
              Northeast            17.7%      19.6%      17.7%        17.4%
              Other                 0.3%       0%         0.4%        7.4%
              By education:
              Less than HS         0.6%        0.6%       1.0%       5.9 %
              HS or equivalent     35.1%      29.7%      37.1%       36.1 %
              College degree       53.6%      56.3%      53.2%        47%
              Post-grad degree     10.7%      13.4%       8.7%        11%
              By annual income:
              < $10K                7.6%       5.1%      8.6%         7.3%
              $10K-$30K            24.1%      19.1%      19.9%       21.3%
              $30K- $60K           36.1%      37.8%      38.8%       26.8%
              $60K-$90K            20.5%      23.1%      21.3%       22.1 %
              >$90K                11.7%      14.9%      11.4%       22.5 %

Notes: Distribution of individuals by gender, age, geography, education and annual income in
the Survey 1, Survey 2, Survey 3 and U.S. adult population. Data for U.S. averages on gender,
age and geography were obtained from the 2015 Annual Estimates of the Residential Population
of the U.S. Census Bureau. U.S averages on education and annual income were obtained from
the 2015 Statistical Atlas of the U.S Census Bureau.




                                              7
2; and 502 respondents in Survey 3. The full questionnaire is available in the online appendix.
Subjects seemed confident that they understood the questions: when asked about how difficult it
was to understand the survey questions, about 90% of respondents chose “Easy to understand”,
only 1% chose “Difficult to understand,” and the remaining 9% chose “Neither easy nor difficult.”
    The first set of questions, which were identical across the three surveys, collected background
information about the respondent such as gender, age and income. Table 1 shows the distribution
of these characteristics across the three surveys as well as the corresponding distribution in the
U.S. adult population. As has been extensively noted in other surveys using Amazon Mechanical
Turk, the participants in our sample are not representative of the U.S. population. In summary,
our sample is more male, younger, more Western, more educated and poorer than the U.S.
average. Most of these differences in composition are modest in magnitude (e.g., our sample
is 53.9% male, while the U.S. adult population is 49.2% male), while other differences less so
(e.g., while 22.5% of the U.S. adult population has an yearly income over $90K, only 12.67%
of our respondents belong to that income bracket). In any case, and in line with other studies
(Kuziemko et al. [2015]), we find similar results if we re-weight the survey responses to match
the average U.S. demographics.


2.2     Survey 1: Measuring Sympathy for the Diligent
2.2.1    Survey Design

The existing evidence shows that individuals who believe that the poor are lazy also prefer lower
redistribution (Fong [2001]; Corneo and Grüner [2002]; Alesina and La Ferrara [2005]). However,
this evidence is subject to the usual concerns with omitted variable biases. For instance, it is
possible that individuals who believe that the poor are lazy may differ in other beliefs and
values that are relevant for redistribution, such as their political beliefs or inequity aversion.
These differences can create a spurious correlation between beliefs about laziness of the poor
and preferences for redistribution. In this subsection, we present results from Survey 1 that is
specifically designed to measure the degree of sympathy for the diligent while addressing these
identification challenges.10
    We ask respondents to imagine that they were appointed by the U.S. government to recom-
mend policies that would aid poor families. We provided the respondent with a description of
the household that would benefit from the social program. The beginning of the description
read: “Consider the case of a married individual with 2 small children. He has a part-time
job. He earns $20,000 per year (net after taxes), and this is the sole source of income for his
  10
    For other examples of survey experiments in the context of preferences for redistribution, see Fong and
Luttmer [2011], Cruces et al. [2013], and Kuziemko et al. [2015].


                                                    8
household.” We added one sentence to this description, which was randomly chosen from a list
of 9 possible messages discussed below. Immediately after the description, the respondent was
asked to recommend a cash transfer amount for the government to make to this beneficiary.11
The available options were cash amounts from $0 per week ($0 per year) to $200 per week
($10,400 per year), in increments of $20 per week ($1,040 per year). Given the net income
of the beneficiary of $20,000 per year, the options ranged from 0% to 50% of his disposable
income.12
    We randomized the information displayed immediately after that baseline description with
the goal of measuring the effect of that extra piece of information on the respondent’s generosity
towards the beneficiary. We used a between-subject design, in which each respondent was
randomly assigned to one of 9 possible sentences (with equal probability). Table 2 shows the
list of 9 messages.13
    The three main treatment arms were No-Info, Hard-Working and Lazy. The No-Info treat-
ment arm received no additional information (i.e., they were shown the baseline description
only). The Hard-Working treatment arm included the additional sentence: “He has worked
very hard his entire life. However, he cannot find a full-time job because his line of work has
been dramatically affected by the recent economic crisis.” The Lazy treatment arm included
the text: “He has been lazy for his entire life and as a result cannot find a full-time job.”14
The hypothesis of “sympathy for the diligent” implies that respondents should be the most
generous in the Hard-Working treatment group, less generous in the No-Info group, and even
less generous in the Lazy group.
    The remaining 6 treatment groups are intended to provide a benchmark for the effect of the
information about whether the individual was hard-working or lazy. These additional treatments
consisted of sentences indicating the race of the beneficiary (White or African-American), the
country of birth of the beneficiary (American-born or Mexican-born), or the disability status of
  11
      We specified that the respondent’s decision applied to that particular beneficiary only by stating “Please
remember that your choice applies to this individual only, because the government is making decisions on a
case-by-case basis”.
   12
      The scale was not restrictive for most respondents, since only 22% of the respondents chose the highest
option.
   13
      In terms of the different ways surveys can be conducted, one advantage of the between-subject design is that
it ameliorates the concerns with social desirability bias (Goffman [1963]). Subjects may have incentives to lie
when asked directly about some issues, because they do not want to reveal their true preferences and because
they may feel pressure to agree with the interviewer. If, for instance, a subject is asked whether a Mexican-born
deserves help more than an American-born, the respondent may want to lie to “hide” his or her preferences
towards the American-born. This survey design is less sensitive to this bias, because the respondent only reports
the desired redistribution to the Mexican-born or the American-born recipient, and thus does not reveal whether
she likes one group better than the other.
   14
      The mean (median) time spent on the description was about 46 (40) seconds, which suggests that the average
respondent paid significant attention to the task.



                                                        9
                          Table 2: Survey 1’s Treatment Assignment


 Treatment Group                                Message                               Probability
                                                                                           1
        No-Info                                                                            9
                                                                                           1
    Hard-Working       “He has worked very hard his entire life. However, he can-          9
                       not find a full-time job because his line of work has been
                       dramatically affected by the recent economic crisis.”
                                                                                           1
          Lazy         “He has been lazy for his entire life and as a result cannot        9
                       find a full-time job.”
                                                                                           1
  African-American     “He is African American.”                                           9
                                                                                           1
         White         “He is White.”                                                      9
                                                                                           1
        Mexican        “He was born in Mexico.”                                            9
                                                                                           1
        American       “He was born in the United States.”                                 9
                                                                                           1
        Disabled       “He has a disability.”                                              9
                                                                                           1
    Not-Disabled       “He does not have a disability.”                                    9


Notes: The beginning of the question read: “Consider the case of a married individual with 2
small children. He has a part-time job. He earns $20,000 per year (net after taxes), and this
is the sole source of income for his household.” The treatment groups refer to the information
displayed immediately after that baseline description.


the beneficiary (Disabled or Not-Disabled).
    It is important to note that previous literature (e.g., Sutter and Weck-Hannemann [2003],
Cappelen et al. [2010], Erkal et al. [2011]) has analyzed the role effort plays in shaping income
redistribution by conducting experiments in which subjects exert real effort. In this study,
we conduct online surveys, which has the disadvantage of not capturing fairness concerns via
revealed-preference. However, a survey design allows us to elicit objective views on the issues
of interest and focus on situations that provide broader external validity.

2.2.2    Results

Table 3 shows the effects of the additional messages on the generosity in cash transfers. The
first panel of Table 3 tests the main hypothesis, by comparing the recommended cash transfer
between Lazy, No-Info and Hard-working treatments. As expected, respondents recommended
a higher cash transfer the more hard-working the recipient: on average, subjects proposed a $66
cash transfer in the Lazy treatment, a $111 in the No-Info treatment and a $122 cash transfer in
the Hard-Working treatment. The difference between the Lazy and No-Info treatment is signif-
icant (p-value<0.01), as well as the difference between the Lazy and Hard-working treatments

                                                10
(p-value<0.01), although the difference between the Hard-working and No-Info treatments is
borderline statistically insignificant (p-value=0.12).
    It is worth noting that the recommended amounts from the No-Info and Hard-Working
treatments were closer in value than those from the No-Info and Lazy treatments. One possible
interpretation is that subjects in the No-Info group believed that the beneficiary was substan-
tially more likely to be hard-working than lazy.
    The fact that respondents were willing to redistribute an extra $56 (or equivalently, almost
twice as much) to individuals who were described as hard-working compared to individuals who
were described as lazy suggests that sympathy for the diligent is economically significant. The
last three panels from Table 3 provide a benchmark for the economic significance of these effects.
The second panel shows that subjects recommended a $8.6 higher transfer for African-Americans
relative to White recipients, with this difference being statistically insignificant15 (p-value=0.19)
and economically much smaller than the $56 gap between Hard-working and Lazy. The third
panel shows that subjects want to redistribute $6.69 more to American-born recipients than
to Mexican-born recipients – again, this difference is statistically insignificant (p-value=0.31)
and economically much smaller than the $56 gap between Hard-working and Lazy. The fourth
panel shows that the gap of $13.2 between Disabled and Non-Disabled, although statistically
significant (p-value=0.04), is less than 24% of the magnitude of the gap between Hard-Working
and Lazy.
    To check the robustness of sympathy towards the diligent across ideological groups, Table
4 lists the recommended transfers in the Hard-Working, No-Info, and Lazy treatment arms
by political identification, based on self-reported identification as Democrat, Independent, or
Republican.16 Table 4 allows for a comparison of the baseline transfers recommended in the
No-Info treatment group. As expected, Republicans are less generous than Democrats ($91 vs.
$118 of average redistribution), with the difference being statistically significant (p-value=0.04).
Interestingly, the magnitude of this partisan gap ($27) is smaller than the gap between Lazy
and Hard-Working ($56).
    Most important, in Table 4 we compare the sympathy for the diligent, measured as the dif-
ference between the Lazy and Hard-working treatments, within each of the partisan groups. The
results for the full sample (first panel) is qualitatively similar for the sample of Republicans (sec-
ond panel), Independents (third panel) and Democrats (fourth panel): in each of these groups,
the desired cash transfer is lower for Lazy than Hard-working individuals, with each of these
differences being statistically significant at the 1% level. In quantitative terms, nevertheless, the
  15
      Assuming that a majority of subjects are White, this insignificant difference is consistent with the finding
in Fong and Luttmer [2011] of no racial preferences in charitable giving.
   16
      The results are similar if, instead, we categorize the individuals based on their self-reported location in the
liberal-conservative spectrum.


                                                         11
            Table 3: Average Generosity in Cash Transfers across Treatment Arms


                   1. By Effort                                  2. By Race
    Hard-Working                121.95 (4.634)   African American              108.60 (4.819)
    No-Info                     111.76 (4.666)   No-Info                       111.76 (4.666)
    Lazy                        65.98 (4.753)    White                         100.00 (4.581)
    Difference p-values:                         Difference p-values:
    Hard-Working vs No-Info         0.12         African American vs No-Info       0.63
    Lazy vs No-Info                 <0.01        White vs No-Info                  0.07
    Hard-Working vs Lazy            <0.01        African American vs White         0.19
    Observations                     588         Observations                       605

                   3. By Origin                          4. By Disability Status
    American                    103.42 (4.717)   Disabled                      120.10 (4.467)
    No-Info                     111.76 (4.666)   No-Info                       111.76 (4.666)
    Mexican                     96.73 (4.760)    Not- Disabled                 106.91 (4.933)
    Difference p-values:                         Difference p-values:
    American vs No-Info             0.20         Disabled vs No-Info               0.19
    Mexican vs No-Info              0.02         Not-Disabled vs No-Info           0.47
    American vs Mexican             0.31         Disabled vs Not-Disabled          0.04
    Observations                     588         Observations                       594

Notes: Data from Survey 1 (N = 1, 778). Respondents were put in the hypothetical position
in which the United States government appoints them to choose policies that would aid poor
families. We provided the respondent with a description of the household that would benefit
from the social assistance, and we randomized some information in this description. The four
panels show the additional information that was included in the description of the hypothetical
scenario. No-Info corresponds to the baseline information (i.e., no further information added).
After the description, respondents were asked to recommend to the government a cash transfer
for this beneficiary. We present the mean of the amount of unconditional cash transfer that the
subjects recommended in the hypothetical scenario (standard errors in parenthesis). We present
the p-value for the standard two-sample, two-tailed t-tests for equality of the cash transfer means
across each possible combination of the information provided.




                                                 12
           Table 4: Average Generosity in Cash Transfers across Treatment Arms,
                        by Political Identification of the Respondent


                                  1. All Respondents           2. Republican Respondents
  Hard-Working                        121.95 (4.634)                    92.26 (12.570)
  No-Info                             111.76 (4.666)                    91.11 (11.225)
  Lazy                                65.98 (4.753)                     29.19 (6.372)
  Difference p-values
  Hard-Working vs No-Info                 0.12                               0.94
  Lazy vs No-Info                         <0.01                             <0.01
  Hard-Working vs Lazy                    <0.01                             <0.01
  Observations                            1,778                              104


                             3. Independent Respondents         4. Democrat Respondents
  Hard-Working                        126.06 (7.903)                    128.57 (6.195)
  No-Info                             114.88 (7.409)                    117.78 (6.974)
  Lazy                                60.24 (7.387)                     91.23 (7.704)
  Difference p-values
  Hard-Working vs No-Info                 0.30                               0.24
  Lazy vs No-Info                         <0.01                              0.01
  Hard-Working vs Lazy                    <0.01                             <0.01
  Observations                             232                               252

Notes: Data from Survey 1. Respondents were put in the hypothetical position in which the
United States government appoints them to choose policies that would aid poor families. We
provided the respondent with a description of the household that would benefit from the social
assistance, and we randomized some information in this description (Hard Working, No-Info and
Lazy). No-Info corresponds to the baseline information (i.e., no further information added). We
present the mean of the amount of unconditional cash transfer that the subjects recommended
in the hypothetical scenario (standard errors in parenthesis). We present the p-value for the
standard two-sample, two-tailed t-tests for equality of the cash transfer means across each possi-
ble combination of the information provided. The sample is grouped according to respondent’s
political identification, based on self-reported identification as Democrat, Independent or Re-
publican. For more details see the Questionnaire in the online appendix.




                                                  13
magnitude of the effect seem larger for Republicans than for Democrats. Among Republicans,
the desired cash transfer is $63.07 larger for the Hard-working relative to the Lazy treatment;
among Democrats, the desired cash transfer is $37.34 larger for the Hard-working relative to the
Lazy treatment. The difference between the $63.07 and $37.34 effects is statistically borderline
insignificant (p-value=0.14). This is at least suggestive evidence that even though sympathy
for the diligent is present among both Democrats and Republicans, it may be stronger among
Republicans.


2.3     Survey 2: Robustness Checks
2.3.1   Survey Design

This survey was designed to test some potential confounding factors: maybe respondents are
reacting to the information about the effort of the recipient not because of the information
about effort per se, but because that effort signals some unobserved attribute of the recipient.
For instance, it is possible that past effort signals differences in past income and/or taxes paid
in the past. In other words, individuals may want to redistribute less to the lazy individual
because this individual has produced less income in the past, and/or because this individual has
paid fewer taxes in the past.
    This survey is identical to Survey 1, in the sense that we randomized the information dis-
played immediately after the baseline description with the goal of measuring the effect of that
extra piece of information on the respondent’s generosity towards the beneficiary. However,
we departed from Survey 1 in the content of the information experiments, aimed at addressing
these potential confounding factors.
    As summarized in Table 5, each respondent was randomly assigned to one of 8 possible
treatments. In the main three treatment groups, we used a different recipient than in Survey 1:
a young College graduate, who is joining the labor force for the first time. Since this recipient
has not worked in the past, we created hard-working and lazy messages based on the job search
effort of the recipient. Since this individual is joining the labor force for the first time, there are
no differences in the income generated in the past and in the taxes paid in the past. Thus, if
the results from Survey 1 were driven by differences in past income and past taxes, we should
find no effect in this alternative experiment.
    Three of the remaining treatment groups simply replicate the main experiment from Survey
1, to serve as a benchmark. Additionally, to provide a more direct benchmark to the new
treatment groups, we also included two treatment groups with the original recipient (i.e., old
and married), but conveying the hard-working and lazy characteristics through the job search
messages, as we did for the college graduate recipient.


                                                  14
                           Table 5: Survey 2’s Treatment Assignment


    Treatment Group                                    Message                                Probability
 Married/old recipient:
                                                                                                   1
 No-Info                                                                                           8
                                                                                                   1
 Hard-Working (Baseline)      “He has worked very hard his entire life. However, he can-           8
                              not find a full-time job because his line of work has been
                              dramatically affected by the recent economic crisis.”
                                                                                                   1
 Lazy (Baseline)              “He has been lazy for his entire life and as a result cannot         8
                              find a full-time job..”
                                                                                                   1
 Hard Working (Job Search)    “He recently tried to find a full-time job. However, he could        8
                              not find it despite putting much effort in the job search
                              because his line of work has been dramatically affected by
                              the recent economic crisis.”
                                                                                                   1
 Lazy (Job Search)            “He recently tried to find a full-time job. However, he did          8
                              not find it because he did not put much effort in the job
                              search.”
 Single/young recipient:
                                                                                                   1
 No-Info                                                                                           8
                                                                                                   1
 Hard-Working (Job Search)    “He recently tried to find a full-time job. However, he could        8
                              not find it despite putting much effort in the job search
                              because his line of work has been dramatically affected by
                              the recent economic crisis.”
                                                                                                   1
 Lazy (Job Search)            “He recently tried to find a full-time job. However, he did          8
                              not find it because he did not put much effort in the job
                              search.”


Notes: The beginning of the question for the Married/old recipient always reads: “The gov-
ernment is considering giving cash transfers to low income households on a case-by-case basis.
Consider the case of a married individual with 2 small children. He has a part-time job. He
earns $20,000 per year (net after taxes), and this is the sole source of income for his household.”
Instead, the beginning for the single/young group reads: “The government is considering giving
cash transfers to low income individuals on a case-by-case basis. Consider the case of a single
individual that recently graduated from college at the age of 21. He has a part-time job. He
earns $20,000 per year (net after taxes), and this is his sole source of income.” The treatment
groups refer to the information displayed immediately after that baseline description.




                                                15
2.3.2   Results

Table 6 shows the results from Survey 2. Note from panel 1 that the results from the replication
of the main treatment arm from Survey 1 look consistent in terms of magnitude and statistical
significance. Indeed, if anything, the difference between hard-working and no-info was border-
line statistically insignificant (p-value=0.12) in Survey 1, but in this replication is statistically
significant (p-value=0.03).
    From the results reported in panel 2, it follows that conveying the message about the type of
the recipient (lazy or hard working) through the job search effort has effects that are qualitatively
consistent with the baseline design reported in panel 1. The effects are somewhat smaller in
magnitude, but that is consistent with the sympathy for the diligent channel: “He has been lazy
for his entire life” is a stronger signal about effort, and thus it should have a stronger effect on
redistributive preferences.
    Finally, comparing the results reported in panel 2 to those reported in panel 3 of Table
6, we can compare the corresponding effects of revealing information about an individual who
is joining the labor force for the first time (panel 3) versus revealing information about an
individual who has been in the labor force for a long time (panel 2). The difference between
these two is that, for the college graduate, there are no differences in past earned income and past
taxes. We find that the hard-working and lazy messages still have a strong effect on preferences
for redistribution towards the college graduate, which rejects the hypothesis that the effects
presented in Survey 1 were driven by differences in past earned income and past taxes paid.
Indeed, if anything, the effects are much stronger in magnitude for the younger individual: the
old hard-working recipient gets an additional $37.60 (or 47% more) than the old lazy (panel 2),
while the young hard-working gets an additional $53.33 (or 133% more) than the young lazy.


2.4     Survey 3: Effect of Sympathy for the Diligent on the Demand
        for Workfare
2.4.1   Survey Design

Survey 1 and 2 provided evidence that individuals are more sympathetic towards the diligent
poor relative to the lazy poor. In Survey 3, we test the hypothesis that individuals with a
stronger sympathy for the diligent have a stronger preference for workfare. To do this, we
construct two sets of variables. The explanatory variable consists of a measure of the intensity
of sympathy for the diligent. The dependent variables measure preferences for workfare over
welfare. Thus, the test boils down to measuring whether higher values of the explanatory
variable are associated with higher values of the dependent variables.


                                                 16
     Table 6: Average Generosity in Cash Transfers across Treatment Arms in Survey 2


                     1. Baseline                                    2. Job Search
      Hard-Working                 130.50 (6.378)    Hard-Working               117.20 (7.084)
      No-Info                      109.70 (7.424)    No-Info                    109.70 (7.424)
      Lazy                         58.04 (6.364)     Lazy                       79.60 (6.749)
      Difference p-values:                           Difference p-values:
      Hard-Working vs No-Info          0.03          Hard-Working vs No-Info        0.46
      Lazy vs No-Info                  <0.01         Lazy vs No-Info                <0.01
      Hard-Working vs Lazy             <0.01         Hard-Working vs Lazy           <0.01
      Observations                      302          Observations                    300

                     3. College
      Hard-Working                 93.33 (6.623)
      No-Info                      72.87 (6.740)
      Lazy                         40.00 (5.089)
      Difference p-values:
      Hard-Working vs No-Info          0.03
      Lazy vs No-Info                  <0.01
      Hard-Working vs Lazy             <0.01
      Observations                      301

Notes: Data from Survey 2 (N = 808). Respondents were put in the hypothetical position
in which the United States government appoints them to choose policies that would aid poor
families. We provided the respondent with a description of the household that would benefit
from the social assistance, and we randomized some information in this description. The three
panels show the additional information that was included in the description of the hypothetical
scenario. No-Info corresponds to the baseline information (i.e., no further information added).
After the description, respondents were asked to recommend to the government a cash transfer
for this beneficiary. We present the mean of the amount of unconditional cash transfer that the
subjects recommended in the hypothetical scenario (standard errors in parenthesis). We present
the p-value for the standard two-sample, two-tailed t-tests for equality of the cash transfer means
across each possible combination of the information provided.




                                                    17
   For the explanatory variable, we used a question that followed the structure proposed by Saez
and Stantcheva [2016] to measure social preferences in a within-subject design.17 We provided
the respondent with a description of two individuals, corresponding to the Hard-Working and
Lazy treatment arms in Survey 1:

    • Individual A: a married individual with 2 small children. He has a part-time job. He earns
      $20,000 per year (net after taxes), and this is the sole source of income for his household.
      He has worked very hard his entire life. However, he cannot find a full-time job because
      his line of work has been dramatically affected by the recent economic crisis.

    • Individual B: a married individual with 2 small children. He has a part-time job. He earns
      $20,000 per year (net after taxes), and this is the sole source of income for his household.
      He has been lazy for his entire life and as a result cannot find a full-time job.

Then, we asked the respondent to report which of these two individuals was more deserving of
a cash transfer of $5,000 per year. The possible answers ranged from “Individual A is much
more deserving” (1) to “They are both equally deserving” (3) to “Individual B is much more
deserving” (5). We consider an individual to have a stronger sympathy for the diligent if he or
she prefers to redistribute to Individual A.
    After eliciting the explanatory variable, we included a series of questions corresponding to
the dependent variables. These three questions are intended to measure preferences for work-
fare over welfare. The first question measured the respondent’s agreement with the following
statement: “Beneficiaries of social programs should be required to do some work in exchange
for government aid. For example, they could perform a few hours of work per week for their
local governments.” The second question measured the degree of agreement with the following
statement: “If beneficiaries of social programs were required to do some work in exchange for
government aid (for example, perform a few hours of work per week for their local govern-
ments), that would prevent lazy people from participating in social programs.” This statement
most closely represents the mechanism discussed in the model section. The last question asks
the respondent to allocate a fixed social assistance budget between the EITC and an uncondi-
tional cash transfer program (i.e., to assign amounts to both that add up to 100%). Given that
some subjects may be unfamiliar with the EITC, we provided a brief explanation about how
the EITC works in comparison to an unconditional cash transfer. The explanation included
a numerical example in which the EITC provides a higher transfer to a low-income household
  17
     As discussed above, relative to Survey 1, this question may under-estimate the sympathy for the diligent,
because subjects may want to conceal that they would like to discriminate in favor of diligent individuals if that
is socially unacceptable. However, if anything, this source of bias would go against our main hypothesis.



                                                       18
head who works (and earns) more, relative to a low-income household head who works (and
earns) less.
   Last, we considered an additional question to be used as a benchmark to the other depen-
dent variables. This question measures the raw willingness to redistribute, with no mention
to whether workfare or welfare would be used for the redistribution: we ask whether the U.S.
government should decrease, maintain, or increase its spending on aid to poor families.

2.4.2   Results

Before testing the main hypothesis, Table 7 shows a full tabulation of the responses for the main
questions in Survey 3. Consistent with the findings from Survey 1, most individuals displayed
a strong sympathy for the diligent poor: when asked which individual is more deserving of the
$5,000, 69.1% of respondents chose “Individual A is much more deserving,” while less than 1%
chose either “Individual B is much more deserving” or “Individual B is slightly more deserving.”
    Table 7 also shows the tabulation corresponding to the other questions from Survey 3. A
53.2% of respondents agreed that work requirements can prevent lazy people from benefiting
from social programs, while only 26.3% disagreed with that statement. A vast majority of
respondents (68.3%) preferred the general use of work requirements in social assistance pro-
grams. Last, respondents assigned almost twice as much funding to the EITC, compared to an
unconditional cash transfer program.
    Table 8 shows the correlation between sympathy for the diligent and the demand for workfare.
We divided the subjects into two levels of sympathy for the diligent: high-sympathy respondents
(the 69.1% who responded that “Individual A is much more deserving”) and low-sympathy
respondents (the remaining 30.9%). Table 8 reports the average of a given dependent variable
in each of those two sympathy groups, along with the p-value of the mean difference test. To
allow for a more direct comparison across dependent variables, all of them were standardized to
take values between 0 and 1.
    As a benchmark, the first panel from Table 8 shows the relationship between sympathy
for the diligent and the raw willingness to redistribute, without any references to workfare or
welfare. Relative to low-sympathy respondents, high-sympathy respondents had 13.8% (i.e.,
13.8%= 0.56−0.65
            0.65
                 x100) lower willingness to redistribute (p-value<0.01). That is, if anything,
higher sympathy for the diligent reduces preferences for redistribution.
    The last three panels from Table 8 correspond to the preferences for work requirements. Rel-
ative to low-sympathy respondents, high-sympathy respondents had a 25.4% higher preference
for work requirements (p-value<0.01). Relative to low-sympathy respondents, high-sympathy
respondents have 36.2% higher belief that work requirements are effective at preventing lazy
people from benefiting from social programs (p-value<0.01). And, relative to low-sympathy

                                               19
                               Table 7: Summary Statistics for Survey 3


                                                                    Rep.     Indep.    Dem.     Total

       Which of these two individuals is more deserving of a cash transfer of $5,000 per year?

       Individual A is much more deserving                           78.9     62.7      69.5     69.1
       Individual A is slightly more deserving                       15.8     22.7      19.7     19.9
       They are both equally deserving                                4.4     13.0      10.8     10.2
       Individual B is slightly more deserving                        0.9      0.0       0.0      0.2
       Individual B is much more deserving                            0.0      1.6       0.0      0.6


       Should beneficiaries of social programs be required to do some work?

       Strongly agree                                                45.6     21.1      20.7     26.5
       Agree                                                         42.1     47.0      36.9     41.8
       Neither agree nor disagree                                     4.4     18.9      20.2     16.1
       Disagree                                                      5.3      11.4      20.2     13.5
       Strongly disagree                                             2.6       1.6      2.0      2.0


       Would work requirements prevent lazy people from participating in social programs?

       Strongly agree                                                22.8      8.1      10.3     12.4
       Agree                                                         45.6     42.7      36.5     40.8
       Neither agree nor disagree                                    12.3     25.4      20.7     20.5
       Disagree                                                      16.7     18.9      27.1     21.7
       Strongly disagree                                              2.6      4.9       5.4     4.6


       What percentage would you assign to each program?

       % Unconditional cash transfer                                 30.9     34.0      41.2     36.2
       % EITC                                                        69.1     66.0      58.8     63.8


Notes: Data from Survey 3 (N = 502). Distribution of responses for the main multiple-choice questions.
Each figure corresponds to the share of respondents that chose the corresponding option. In the first question
we provided the respondent with a description of two individuals of similar characteristics, corresponding to
the Hard-Working (Individual A) and Lazy (Individual B) treatment arms in Survey 1 and we asked them to
report which of these tow individuals was more deserving of a cash transfer of $5,000 per year. The second
group of results elicit the degree of agreement with the statement “Beneficiaries of social programs should be
required to do some work in exchange for government aid. For example, they could perform a few hours of
work per week for their local governments.”. The third set of results elicit the degree of agreement with the
statement “If beneficiaries of social programs were required to do some work in exchange for government aid
(for example, perform a few hours of work per week for their local governments), that would prevent lazy people
from participating in social programs.”. Finally, the last set of results shows the percentage of a hypothetical
government budget that respondents assigned to the EITC program as opposed to an unconditional cash transfer
program. The results are broken down according to respondent’s political identification, based on self-reported
identification as Democrat, Independent or Republican. The last column reports the results for the entire
population. For more details see the Questionnaire in the online appendix.


                                                      20
                   Table 8: Preferences for Redistribution across Individuals
                        with Low and High Sympathy for the Diligent


                       1. Raw Willingness to Redistribute        2. Supports Workfare
  Low Sympathy                     0.65 (0.021)                        0.59 (0.022)
  High Sympathy                    0.56 (0.012)                        0.74 (0.013)
  Difference p-value                  <0.01                               <0.01

                       3. Believes Workfare Screens Lazy      4. Share assigned to EITC
  Low Sympathy                     0.47 (0.022)                        0.57 (0.019)
  High Sympathy                    0.64 (0.014)                        0.67 (0.012)
  Difference p-value                  <0.01                               <0.01

Notes: Data from Survey 3 (N = 502). Respondents were divided into high- and low- sympathy
individuals according to their answer to a question about whether a hard-working individual
deserved an income transfer more than a lazy individual. The set of results labeled Raw Will-
ingness to Redistribute correspond to the question “Should government spending on aid to poor
families increase, decrease, or stay the same?”, where the answers go from “Increase by 50%”
(1) to “Decrease by 50%” (0). The second set of results labeled Supports Workfare elicit the
degree of agreement with the statement “Beneficiaries of social programs should be required to
do some work in exchange for government aid. For example, they could perform a few hours of
work per week for their local governments.” and the answers go from “Strongly Agree” (1) to
“Strongly Disagree” (0). The third set of results labeled Believes Workfare Screens Lazy elicit
the degree of agreement with the statement “If beneficiaries of social programs were required
to do some work in exchange for government aid (for example, perform a few hours of work
per week for their local governments), that would prevent lazy people from participating in
social programs.” and the possible answers are the same as in the previous case. Finally, the
column labeled Share assigned to EITC shows the percentage of a hypothetical government
budget that respondents assigned to the EITC program as opposed to an unconditional cash
transfer program. We present the mean value and standard errors in parenthesis. We present
the p-value for the standard two-sample, two-tailed t-tests for equality of means across Low and
High Sympathy individuals.




                                                  21
respondents, high-sympathy respondents preferred a 17.5% higher share of the social spend-
ing budget to be spent on the EITC (p-value<0.01).18 The results from these three outcomes
suggest that the demand for workfare does increase with stronger sympathy for the diligent.


3      The Model
The previous empirical section showed two important results: individuals want to redistribute
more towards the diligent poor relative to the lazy poor and these social preferences are cor-
related with preferences for workfare over welfare programs. In this section, we incorporate
sympathy for the diligent in the preferences of a benevolent government that decides the level of
income redistribution once individuals’ stochastic incomes are realized. We show under which
conditions it is optimal for the government to implement workfare programs and the equilibrium
consequences of the availability of workfare as a redistributive tool.


3.1     Timing of the Agent’s Decisions and Outcomes
The model analyzed in this paper is an adapted version of the model from Netzer and Scheuer
[2010]. There is a continuum of risk-averse agents of measure one indexed by the set [0, 1].
Agents are expected utility maximizers with a Bernoulli utility function U (c), where c denotes
consumption. We assume that U (c) is twice continuously differentiable with U 0 > 0 and U 00 < 0.
Also, consumption is restricted to be non-negative and the range of U is given by R. The Inada
conditions limc→0 U 0 (c) = ∞ and limc→∞ U 0 (c) = 0 are assumed to hold. Let Φ(U ) be the
inverse function of U , which satisfies Φ0 > 0, Φ00 > 0, limU →−∞ Φ(U ) = 0, limU →∞ Φ(U ) = ∞
and limU →∞ Φ0 (U ) = ∞.
   Each agent faces idiosyncratic risk with respect to the level of output he/she can produce.
There are two possible levels of output: high (yh ) or low (yl ), with yl < yh . In order to
generate this output, agents have to decide between two effort levels e ∈ {e, e}, with e < e.
The assumption that there are only two possible levels of effort is not problematic. Despite
the fact that each agent can only choose between two levels of effort, aggregate effort (and also
aggregate output) can be a continuous variable - because what matters in the aggregate is the
proportion of individuals exerting high effort.19 If e = e, then the agent is an ex post good
type (g), and if e = e, then the agent is an ex post bad type (b). Good types produce the high
output yh with probability pg and bad types produce the high output yh with probability pb ,
  18
    For a discussion of additional evidence, see Appendix B.
  19
    This resembles the necessity of randomization between effort levels in Fudenberg and Tirole [1990]. In our
model, for a given type, we can think of the proportion of agents exerting high effort as the individual probability
of choosing high effort for each individual agent.


                                                        22
where the restrictions 0 < pb < pg < 1 hold. Agent’s preferences are represented by an utility
function that is separable between consumption utility and effort cost, U (c) − H(e), where H(e)
represents the effort cost. We normalize the low level of effort e and the corresponding effort
cost H(e) to zero, which does not affect our results. Agents differ in their disutility of high
effort H(e) = d, which can take the values d ∈ {dl , dh }, with dh > dl .20 A proportion q (1 − q)
of the population has a low (high) effort cost dl (dh ). We assume that neither effort costs nor
effort choices are observable. The fraction q of agents with low disutility from effort and the
probabilities of producing a high level of income are assumed to be known by the government.
    Differences in agents’ effort costs must be interpreted as differences in agents’ preferences
for leisure (as in Cuff [2000]; Fleurbaey and Maniquet [2006] and Moffitt [2006]), as opposed to
differences originated from disabilities or opportunities. It must be noted that our model is not
intended to approximate what the fairness ideal should be. Instead, we want to approximate
the fairness ideals that regular individuals seem to have (in our survey, a sample of Americans).
Also, in reality, individuals can differ in other important dimensions, most notably in ability.
Indeed, since Mirrlees [1971] heterogeneity in ability has played a central role in optimal taxation
analysis, and there is a long tradition in the literature of combining heterogeneity in ability
with heterogeneity in disutility from effort (Sandmo [1993]; Fleurbaey and Maniquet [2006];
Lockwood and Weinzierl [2015]). We focus on differences in just one dimension (disutility from
effort) to make the model tractable. One reason why the distinction between disutility from
effort and ability may be relevant is because of fairness ideals. It is possible that the average
individual believes that exerting low effort because one is lazy is wrong but exerting low effort
because one has low ability is not so wrong. Indeed, it is quite possible that these fairness ideals
differ markedly across individuals from different countries. For instance, Steve Jobs’ genius
may have justified his wealth for the average American, but maybe the average individual from
France believes that Jobs got his genius from the lottery of birth and therefore his wealth is not
justified. Indeed, it would be straightforward to extend our survey to provide direct evidence
about these distinctions.
    We analyze a two-period model of income redistribution in which effort choices are endoge-
nous. In the first stage, agents who exert high effort are individuals who actively try to discover
their comparative advantage by working longer hours and investing in human capital. Those
  20
     The assumption of two ex ante types of agents is a deviation from the original setup from Netzer and
Scheuer [2010], who assume a continuum of ex ante types. The primary goal of this assumption is to reduce the
complexity of the government’s problem. One important implication of this assumption is that, in equilibrium,
different agents with low disutility from effort will choose different levels of effort. As a result, there will be no
one-to-one mapping between agents’ types and effort choices. Therefore, the government will not be able to use
work requirements to perfectly screen diligent individuals. This implication would also be attained in a model
with a continuum of types if we also assumed, for example, that an agent observes an imperfect signal of his/her
own return from effort (i.e., so that the relationship between effort levels and types is not one-to-one).



                                                         23
who perform a low effort represent people who work the bare minimum and do not invest in
human capital. In the second stage, the greater the effort exerted in the first stage the more
likely that the agent will end up with a better outcome. However, some of those who put in
little effort can end up with a high income, and some of those who worked hard can end up with
a low income (e.g., the hard-working athlete who got injured).


3.2     The Government
Once efforts were chosen, the government chooses how to redistribute income. Following Boad-
way et al. [1996], Konrad [2001] and Netzer and Scheuer [2010], we assume that the government
cannot commit to a certain redistributive scheme before effort choices are made.21 This as-
sumption differs from other studies in the literature (Meltzer and Richard [1981]; Alesina and
Angeletos [2005]). Note that it makes no difference whether the redistribution scheme is decided
before the uncertainty is resolved. What is truly important is whether the redistribution scheme
can be modified after the outcomes are realized. The assumption about the government’s lack
of commitment is based on the fact that the time period represents a long horizon. Exerting
high effort in this model does not mean working longer hours during a given year, but rather
the accumulation of human capital over decades (Boadway et al. [1996]).
    The objective of the government is to maximize a weighted average of the ex post utilities of
all agents, where the weights may depend on the agents’ ex post types. In particular, we examine
the case in which the government would like to redistribute more toward agents that exerted high
effort earlier in their lives. This fairness concern from the government’s side can be the result of
the underlying preferences of the voters. An alternative interpretation for the fairness concerns
is that they represent the government’s political constraints: that is, the government wants to
redistribute as much as possible but redistribution is politically viable only if it is perceived as
helping the unlucky rather than coddling the lazy. As in many papers in the positive optimal
tax literature (Cuff [2000]; Auerbach and Hassett [2002]; Roemer et al. [2003]; Fleurbaey and
Maniquet [2006]; Moffitt [2006] and Weinzierl [2014], among many others), we do not explicitly
model the way individuals’ preferences shape the government’s objective function. Since in
reality different groups of individuals have different social preferences and fairness concerns,
understanding how these heterogeneous social preferences end up affecting the choices made by
politicians is important but beyond the scope of this paper.
    Following Netzer and Scheuer [2010], we carry out the analysis in the utility space. A
  21
     An important difference with respect to Netzer and Scheuer [2010] is that we assume that the redistributive
policy is decided after the agent’s income is realized, while they assume that the policy is decided after effort
choices are made but before incomes are realized. Therefore, in their model, an agent must choose between
different contracts offered by the government. In our model, an agent gets a single contract that depends only
on his or her realized income.

                                                       24
contract offered by the government is a vector of consumption utilities that agents obtain when
producing the high and low levels of output, respectively. The optimal tax rate for each agent
can be easily recovered from the level of consumption offered by the government and the level
of output produced by the agent.


3.3     Redistributive Policies
In this subsection, we characterize the set of equilibria that arise with two different redistributive
mechanisms: welfare and workfare. In the following subsection, we compare the outcomes that
are attainable in these two sets of equilibria.

3.3.1    Welfare

Welfare represents a redistributive scheme in which the government can screen agents based on
income only. This restriction implies that all the rich agents receive the same level of utility
and all the poor agents also must receive the same level of utility. The timing of events is the
following:

      Stage 1: Agents simultaneously choose their effort levels.
      Stage 2: Agents’ incomes are realized.
      Stage 3: The government chooses a redistributive policy (ub,h , ub,l , ug,h , ug,l ),

where ui,j represents the consumption utility for agents of ex-post type i ∈ {b, g} that produced
the output level yj (with j ∈ {l, h}). The fact that we focus on the case of a government without
commitment is clearly observed in the timing of the model: choices about income redistribution
are made after effort and output are realized. The model could have an additional Stage 0, in
which the government makes an initial policy announcement. Then, agents make effort choices
based on expectations of future actual policies, which in principle could be different to the
announced policy. If the government lacks commitment power, it will able to change the policy
after effort choices are made. Thus, the initial announcement becomes irrelevant.
    The objective is to find the set of Subgame Perfect Equilibria (SPE). For the sake of sim-
plicity, we will focus on SPE in which only a fraction x of agents with low disutility from effort
exert high effort (and therefore all the high-cost types shirk). We find the set of Subgame Per-
fect Equilibria by backward induction. For a given level of x chosen at Stage 1, we derive the
government’s optimal policy at Stage 3. We assume that the government cannot differentiate
between ex post good low-income agents and ex post bad low-income agents. The idea is to re-
flect the fact that effort is unobservable and most welfare programs base their eligibility criteria
on observable factors only, such as income.

                                                    25
    Once incomes are realized, the government is able to form precise inference about the propor-
tion of agents that exerted high effort during the first stage, x. Let α denote the relative weight
the benevolent government places in its ex post welfare function on individuals who exerted
high effort (regardless of whether they have high or low income). And let (1 − α) denote the
relative weight the benevolent government places in its ex post welfare function on individuals
who exerted low effort (again, regardless of income level). Here, α measures the degree of sym-
pathy for the diligent. The objective of the government is to maximize a weighted average of the
agents’ ex post utilities, taking into account the constraints imposed by the budget constraint
and the redistributive mechanism. Whenever x ∈ (0, 1], so that both ex post types exist, the
benevolent government solves the following problem22

                                   α qx pg uwe              we
                                                                   + (1 − α) (1 − qx) pb uwe              we
                                                                                                          
              max                           g,h + (1 − pg )ug,l                           b,h + (1 − pb )ub,l
   (uwe    we we       we
     b,h ,ub,l ,ug,h ,ug,l )∈R
                               4




subject to the constraints
                                                       uwe     we
                                                        g,l = ub,l ≡ ul ,                                      (1)

                                                      uwe     we
                                                       g,h = ub,h ≡ uh ,                                       (2)

and
            qx[pg Φ(uwe                  we                      we                  we
                     g,h ) + (1 − pg )Φ(ug,l )] + (1 − qx)[pb Φ(ub,h ) + (1 − pb )Φ(ub,l )] ≤ R(x),            (3)

where uwe
       i,j represents the consumption utility agents obtain when only welfare is available and
R(x) represents the per capita (total) resources available in the economy and is given by

                            R(x) = qx[pg yh + (1 − pg )yl ] + (1 − qx)[pb yh + (1 − pb )yl ].

    Equations (1) and (2) impose the restriction that the utility of agents that produced low and
high output can only depend on their realized income, which is the only information observable
to the government. The following Lemma characterizes the solution to the government’s ex-post
problem.

Lemma 1. Fix any x ∈ (0, 1]. (i) The government’s problem has a unique solution V (x) =
(uwe      we                                we          we
  h (x), ul (x)). (ii) If α ≥ (>)1/2, then uh (x) ≥ (>)ul (x). (iii) If α ≤ (<)1/2, then
uwe            we
 h (x) ≤ (<)ul (x).


Proof. See the appendix.
  22
     Since at the time the government decides the optimal redistributive policy agents already decided a level
of effort and because agent’s utility function is separable between consumption utility and effort costs, we can
exclude effort costs from the government’s objective function for presentation purposes. This would just affect
the level of the objective function without affecting the optimal policy.


                                                              26
Lemma 1 characterizes the direction of the ex post optimal redistribution as a function of the
Pareto weight α. When the Pareto weights are tilted towards ex post good agents (α ≥ 1/2),
the government chooses to reward effort by giving the rich a higher utility relative to the utility
that bad-type agents receive. The reason for this is that the assumption pg > pb implies that
the majority of rich agents are going to be ex post good types. If on the other hand, the
Pareto weight of ex post bad type agents is higher (α ≤ 1/2), then redistribution goes in the
opposite direction since the poor are more likely to be bad-type agents. The final case involves
α = 1/2 (i.e., the government has no preference for any particular group of ex post agents).
Then the government decides to fully insure agents by choosing uwe          we
                                                                  h (x) = ul (x) (by setting the
consumption level of both types of agents equal to per capita resources R(x)).
    In the case of x = 0 (i.e., no agent with low disutility from effort exerts high effort), the
benevolent government’s problem simplifies substantially. It reduces to the maximization of the
utility of the unique ex post type subject to the resource constraint. Then, convexity of Φ will
require that the solution satisfies uwe   we
                                     l = uh .
    We define an equilibrium of the game between agents and a benevolent government without
commitment as follows.

Definition 1. A welfare equilibrium is a pair (xwe , V we ), where V we = V (xwe ) and one of the
following conditions holds

  (i) xwe = 0 and

                 pg uwe    we             we we               we    we             we we
                     g,h (x ) + (1 − pg )ug,l (x ) − dl < pb ub,h (x ) + (1 − pb )ub,l (x )



 (ii) xwe ∈ [0, 1] and

                 pg uwe    we             we we               we    we             we we
                     g,h (x ) + (1 − pg )ug,l (x ) − dl = pb ub,h (x ) + (1 − pb )ub,l (x )



(iii) xwe = 1,

                 pg uwe    we             we we               we    we             we we
                     g,h (x ) + (1 − pg )ug,l (x ) − dl > pb ub,h (x ) + (1 − pb )ub,l (x )



     and
                 pg uwe    we             we we               we    we             we we
                     g,h (x ) + (1 − pg )ug,l (x ) − dh < pb ub,h (x ) + (1 − pb )ub,l (x )


    The definition of equilibrium is based on the agents’ ex ante incentives to exert high effort
at Stage 1 taking the government’s response function as given. Agents form expectations about
future redistributive policies and compare the expected utility of working and shirking. There are

                                                 27
three types of subgame perfect equilibria that could arise. Two extreme equilibria (x ∈ {0, 1})
occur when the agent with low disutility from effort strictly prefers to exert/not to exert high
effort, given the anticipated future redistributive policies. There is also an intermediate type
of equilibrium, in which agents with low disutility from effort are indifferent between exerting
high effort or not. Thus, x could be interpreted as the proportion of agents with low disutility
from effort choosing to exert high effort at Stage 1. This can be interpreted as the result of each
individual agent choosing a mixed strategy to exert high effort with probability x.23
    For simplicity, we will focus on equilibria in which only agents with low disutility from effort
may choose to exert high effort at Stage 1 (the reason for doing this will become more clear
when we analyze the benefits of workfare). Notice that the definition of equilibrium imposes
restrictions on the indifference conditions of agents with high disutility from effort for the case
in which xwe = 1 only. For the other two types of equilibrium (xwe = 0 and xwe ∈ [0, 1]),
these restrictions become redundant because of the fact that agents with low disutility from
effort are indifferent or strictly prefer to shirk at Stage 1 implies that agents with high disutility
from effort would strictly prefer to shirk at Stage 1 (due to dh > dl ). Therefore, the indifference
conditions of agents with low disutility from effort are enough to characterize equilibria in which
no agent with high disutility from effort exerts high effort. The following proposition describes
the set of equilibria as a function of the Pareto weights.
Proposition 1. For any parameter values of the model, (xwe , V we ) = (0, V (0)) is a welfare
equilibrium. If α ≤ 1/2, (xwe , V we ) = (0, V (0)) is the unique equilibrium. For any value of
α > 1/2, there exists a value dˆl (α) such that there exists at least one additional equilibrium with
xwe > 0 for dl ≤ dˆl (α).
    If the government’s Pareto weights are such that the government wants to ex post redis-
tribute from ex post good to bad agents (i.e., α ≤ 1/2), the set of welfare equilibria becomes
a singleton. We showed in the previous lemma that when α ≤ 1/2, the government will ex
post choose uwe          we
               h (x) ≤ ul (x). This clearly eliminates any incentives to exert high effort from
an ex ante perspective. From our previous result, it is easy to see that this allocation still
belongs to the set of welfare equilibria when α > 1/2. However, if the government’s Pareto
weights are tilted towards the ex post good types other equilibria might arise, in particular
when dl is below a certain threshold. The reason is that agents’ effort costs do not affect the
government’s ex post choice of the redistributive policy (i.e., uwe              we
                                                                     h (x) and ul (x) are indepen-
dent of dl and dh ). Therefore, as long as uwe              we
                                                 h (x) > ul (x), other equilibria might emerge if
dl < (pg − pb ) (uwe       we
                  h (x) − ul (x)) (i.e., if the effort cost is smaller than the expected net utility
gain of exerting high effort).
  23
    In this case, our definition of equilibrium can be viewed as the standard indifference condition used to
characterize a mixed-strategy equilibria.

                                                    28
3.3.2     Workfare

In this subsection we allow the government to implement a redistributive mechanism that relies
on self-selection. We define workfare as a transfer of utility whose delivery is conditional on
the realization of a certain task. Low-income agents can choose whether to participate in
the workfare program or not, and participation in the program is perfectly observable by the
government. Taking part in the program requires exerting an effort ew , which will be chosen
by the government simultaneously with the decision of uwow , the consumption utility received by
low-income agents who participate in the workfare program, and uwo   l , the consumption utility
received by low-income agents who decide not to participate. The superscript wo is used to
differentiate the solution obtained when workfare is available from the solution found with
welfare (we).
    Since even among the high-income individuals there are individuals who exerted high effort
and individuals who did not, in principle the government could also try to use work-requirements
among the rich. We assume that the government can only use work requirements with low-
income individuals, which is a typical assumption in the literature.24
    We assume that the cost of exerting the effort ew is proportional to the parameter d: i.e.,
H(ew ) = ew · d. For now, we also assume that the effort required in the workfare program
is completely unproductive. That is, the only benefit produced by workfare is the screening
mechanism. In the last part of the paper we present numerical results for an alternative scenario
in which effort exerted in the workfare program produces output. We will show that by making
workfare productive, the main results are even stronger. The timing of events is now:

       Stage 1:   Agents simultaneously choose their effort levels.
       Stage 2:   Agents’ incomes are realized.
       Stage 3:   The government chooses a (welfare/workfare) redistributive policy.
       Stage 4:   If the government chooses ew > 0, low income agents simultaneously choose
       whether    they want to participate in the workfare program or not.

   Intuitively, the government may desire to implement a workfare program, because it allows
identification of individuals who had more likely exerted high effort among the low-income agents
and assignment to them of a different level of utility relative to those who do not participate
in workfare (i.e., agents with high disutility from effort). Since welfare does not provide this
type of screening, if the government’s Pareto weights are tilted towards the good types the
  24
    Intuitively, we can think the high-income outcome corresponds to an individual with a high-paying full-
time job, while the low-income outcome corresponds to unemployment or under-employment. In that case, the
assumption that the government can only use work requirements with low-income individuals would be equal to
the assumption that full-time individuals cannot comply with work-requirements (Besley and Coate [1995]).


                                                    29
utility that ex post good low-income agents receive is lower than what they would receive in
the full-information case (in which effort is observable). In this scenario, workfare becomes a
useful policy instrument since it allows the government to screen both ex ante types of agents
and give a higher utility to ex post good low-income agents.
    We find the set of Subgame Perfect Equilibria by backward induction. The effort level ew
is chosen in a way such that low-income agents with high disutility from effort are indifferent
between participating in workfare and not (we assume that in equilibrium they do not partici-
pate):
                                       uwo     wo
                                         l = uw − ew dh ,                                   (4)

Since dl < dh , Equation (4) implies that poor agents with low disutility from effort will strictly
prefer to participate in the workfare program. There are many levels of ew that would allow
the government to screen the ex ante type of agents, but there are reasons for choosing this
particular level. The restriction imposed by Equation (4) requires the minimum workfare effort
level that makes the agents with high disutility from effort indifferent between participating and
not, and thus minimizes the effort cost of those agents who actually decide to participate. It
is possible to make the agents with high disutility from effort strictly prefer not to participate
in workfare by slightly increasing ew , but this would simply hurt workfare participants without
adding any benefit. Because of this, this level of workfare effort can be justified as the level
of effort that the benevolent government would choose, if it could decide the type of task that
participants need to perform in workfare.25
     Given that the government is able to precisely infer the percentage of agents with low disu-
tility from effort that exerted high effort in Stage 1 and to screen agents with high disutility
from effort from agents with low disutility from effort, the benevolent government’s problem
can be represented by the following maximization problem

                                  max                 α[qx(pg uwo               wo
                                                               g,h + (1 − pg )(uw − ew dl ))]
                        (uwo    wo wo     wo   4
                          b,h ,ul ,ug,h ,uw )∈R ,ew



  + (1 − α)[q(1 − x)(pb uwo               wo                                  wo              wo
                                                                                                
                         b,h + (1 − pb )(uw − ew dl ))] + (1 − α) (1 − q) pb ub,h + (1 − pb )ul

subject to the constraints
                                                 uwo   wo
                                                  l = uw − ew dh ,                                        (5)

                                                  uwo     wo     wo
                                                   g,h = ub,h ≡ uh ,                                      (6)
 25
      This restriction is in line with the assumption of lack of commitment from the government’s side.




                                                            30
and

           qx[pg Φ(uwo                  wo                    wo                  wo
                    g,h ) + (1 − pg )Φ(uw )] + q(1 − x)[pb Φ(ub,h ) + (1 − pb )Φ(uw )]

                                               + (1 − q)[pb Φ(uwo                  wo
                                                               b,h ) + (1 − pb )Φ(ul )] ≤ R(x),


where R(x) represents per capita resources and is defined in the same way as before.26
   Notice that this maximization problem contains the maximization problem with welfare as
a special case when ew = 0. The only benefit of workfare over welfare is that workfare allows
the introduction of a wedge between uwo          wo
                                        w and ul . Thus, it is possible that the maximization
problem yields two types of solutions. For some subset of the parameter space and for some
values of x, the solution to the government’s ex-post problem may require setting ew = 0. This
case can be interpreted as the government optimally choosing not to implement a workfare
program (i.e., simply redistribute via a welfare program). The second case involves ew > 0,
in which case we say that the government wants to implement a workfare program. Next, we
characterize the solution to this problem.

Lemma 2. Fix any x ∈ (0, 1]. (i) The government’s problem has a unique solution V (x) =
(uwo      wo      wo                                wo       wo         wo               wo
  h (x), uw (x), ul (x)). (ii) If ew (x) > 0, then uh (x) > ul (x) and uw (x) − ew dl > ul (x).

    The characterization of the solution omits the case in which ew (x) = 0, because this implies
that the government is choosing to redistribute through a welfare program (whose solution
was previously characterized by Lemma 1). If the government ex post optimally decides to
implement a workfare program, then it must be the case that the government redistributes
utility towards agents that produced the high level of output and towards agents that decided
to participate in workfare. The following two lemmas characterize the government’s optimal
decision to implement workfare as a function of the Pareto weights and the proportion of agents
with low disutility from effort that exerted high effort at Stage 1.

Lemma 3. If α < 1/2, the government chooses ew (x) = 0 for all values of x.

   If the government decided to implement workfare, it must have been the case that the Pareto
weights assigned to ex post good agents are higher than the weights assigned to ex post bad
agents. In our setting this means that the government needs to have particular fairness concerns
towards those who exerted high effort at Stage 1 (as opposed to those who shirked) in order to
prefer a workfare over a welfare redistributive mechanism. If this was not the case, there would
  26
    In this model we let the degree of sympathy for the diligent (denoted by α) to depend on the level of effort
agents made in the first stage but not on the level of effort that workfare participants exert in the last stage.
An interesting extension would be to allow α to depend on the level of workfare effort ew , which would generate
extra demand for workfare, in addition to the screening mechanism. We focused on the screening mechanisms
because we think it is the first order issue.

                                                       31
be no reason to hurt low-income ex post bad types by creating a utility wedge between workfare
participants and non-participants. The following lemma complements the intuition behind the
usefulness of workfare programs.

Lemma 4. If the government uses workfare for some x ∈ [0, 1], then there exists a value x̃ ∈ [0, 1]
such that the government will choose ew (x) > 0 for all x > x̃ and ew (x) = 0 for all x ≤ x̃.

     Lemma 4 demonstrates that a benevolent government will choose not to implement workfare
when x is below a certain threshold. The intuition of this result is straightforward. When a
small proportion of agents with low disutility from effort exerted high effort in Stage 1, the
government infers that the majority of low-income agents are not going to be ex post good
types, making the screening benefits of workfare unappealing. Furthermore, in the appendix
we show that the government is more likely to choose ew (x) > 0 when dh is high compared to
dl . The higher the wedge between effort costs, the lower the effort requirement the government
needs to impose in the workfare program in order to screen workers’ ex ante type and the larger
the desirability to redistribute via workfare.
     Analogously to the case of welfare, we define a workfare equilibrium as a fixed point between
agents’ effort choices and the government’s optimal redistributive policy.

Definition 2. A workfare equilibrium is a pair (xwo , V wo ), where V wo = V (xwo ) and one of
the following conditions holds

  (i) xwo = 0 and

           pg uwo  wo               wo wo         wo
               h (x ) + (1 − pg ) (uw (x ) − ew (x )dl ) − dl <

                                               pb uwo  wo               wo wo         wo
                                                   h (x ) + (1 − pb ) (uw (x ) − ew (x )dl )



 (ii) xwo ∈ [0, 1] and

           pg uwo  wo               wo wo         wo
               h (x ) + (1 − pg ) (uw (x ) − ew (x )dl ) − dl =

                                               pb uwo  wo               wo wo         wo
                                                   h (x ) + (1 − pb ) (uw (x ) − ew (x )dl )



(iii) xwo = 1,

           pg uwo  wo               wo wo         wo
               h (x ) + (1 − pg ) (uw (x ) − ew (x )dl ) − dl >

                                               pb uwo  wo               wo wo         wo
                                                   h (x ) + (1 − pb ) (uw (x ) − ew (x )dl )




                                                32
        and

                pg uwo  wo             wo wo             wo wo              wo wo
                    h (x ) + (1 − pg )ul (x ) − dh < pb uh (x ) + (1 − pb )ul (x ).



The definition of a workfare equilibrium differs slightly from the definition of a welfare equilib-
rium. The indifference condition of agents with low disutility from effort is now modified to take
into account the fact that they will optimally choose to participate in workfare if they end up
producing a low level of output. For agents with high cost of effort, the indifference condition
also has the (no) participation choice embedded in it. Given this definition, we now proceed to
characterize the set of workfare equilibria.

Proposition 2. For any parameter values of the model, (xwo , V wo ) = (0, V (0)) is a workfare
equilibrium. If α ≤ 1/2, (xwo , V wo ) = (0, V (0)) is the unique equilibrium. There exists a set of
values (α, dl , dh ) such that if α and dh are high and dl is low enough, then there exists at least
one additional equilibrium with xwo > 0 and ew (xwo ) > 0.

    We find again that when α ≤ 1/2, (xwo , V wo ) = (0, V (0)) is the unique equilibrium. This
is simply due to the fact that when α ≤ 1/2 the government optimally chooses ew = 0. The
proof to the second part of the Proposition is straightforward. The proof of Lemma 3 shows
that the optimality condition for ew > 0 is more likely to be satisfied for high values of dh . The
result holds because higher values of dh lead to lower levels of effort that need to be made by
workfare participants, which means that workfare becomes “cheaper” to implement in terms of
effort cost. Similar to the case of welfare, the effort cost paid at Stage 1 does not enter the
government’s maximization problem. Therefore, for each level of α, one can find a threshold
value for dl such that additional equilibria with xwo > 0 and ew (xwo ) > 0 emerge.


3.4      Comparison between Welfare and Workfare
3.4.1    Equilibrium Effort

Having characterized the set of welfare and workfare equilibria, we now proceed to compare
both sets focusing on the aggregate level of effort that can be sustained in equilibrium. Given
the possibility of multiple equilibria with both redistributive schemes, we focus on the highest
level of effort that can be sustained in each scheme. In order to prove our main Theorem, we
need to make an additional assumption regarding the utility function:

Assumption 1. The utility function U (·) satisfies the following condition

                                           ∂ Φ00 (u)
                                                     ≤0                                         (7)
                                           ∂u Φ0 (u)

                                                33
    A similar version of this condition has been imposed in the literature (Fudenberg and Tirole
[1990]; Netzer and Scheuer [2010]).27 This condition is sufficient but not necessary for the result
of the Theorem to hold, and it is meant to simplify the proof of the Theorem. With this
condition in hand, we now present the main result of the paper:

Theorem 1. If condition (7) is satisfied and if dh is high enough, then the highest effort level
that can be sustained in a welfare equilibrium x̂we is at least as large as any effort level sustained
in a workfare equilibrium xwo (i.e., x̂we ≥ xwo ). Furthermore, if x̂we < 1, then x̂we > xwo .

    Theorem 1 states that, for high values of dh 28 and whenever condition (7) is satisfied29 , the
largest level of effort that can be sustained in a welfare equilibrium is always as high as the
largest level of effort that can be sustained with workfare. Furthermore, if the largest level of
effort that can be sustained in a welfare equilibrium is interior, then it must be strictly higher
than any effort level that can be sustained in a workfare equilibrium.
    Intuitively, Theorem 1 means that with workfare agents with low disutility from effort will
have a weaker ex ante incentive to exert high effort. This lower incentive can be decomposed
into two channels. The first channel has to do with how agents with low disutility from effort
expect to benefit from workfare in case they end up poor. In the proof of Theorem 1 we show
that, for a given x, uwo                   we
                       w (x) − ew (x)dl > ul (x). From an ex ante perspective, workfare increases
the utility of agents with low disutility from effort, but the corresponding increase in expected
utility will be higher for agents who do not exert high effort at Stage 1, since in the future
they will become workfare participants with a higher probability (due to pg > pb ). The second
channel has to do with how agents with low disutility from effort expect to loose with workfare.
In the proof we show that, for a given x, the government chooses uwe           wo
                                                                      h (x) ≥ uh (x). This means
that the government gives a lower utility to the rich with workfare than with welfare, which
decreases expected utility relatively more for agents who exert higher effort, because in the
future they will have high income with a higher probability.
  27
      For example, this condition is satisfied by utility functions with constant relative risk aversion of one or
below one (Fudenberg and Tirole [1990], Lemma 3.2).
   28
       This condition is introduced for two reasons. In the first place, as we previously mentioned, the government
is more likely to choose ew > 0 for high values of dh . The second reason is more relevant. Because workfare
programs give a higher utility to workfare participants than what they would get in welfare (for a given value of
x), it might be that uwe          wo
                        l (x) > ul (x). If ex post agents with high disutility from effort receive a very low utility
when the government chooses ew > 0 (because the government wants to redistribute away from these agents),
then it might become optimal for some of these agents to decide to exert high effort at Stage 1. In order to
avoid this type of unrealistic equilibria, we focus on cases in which dh is high enough, so that agents with high
disutility from effort would never want to exert high effort at Stage 1.
   29
      The condition we impose is a sufficient but not a necessary condition for the main result to hold. We numer-
ically experimented with other utility functions (CARA, CRRA with coefficient greater than 1) and the results
of the Theorem still apply. However, the assumption we impose allows us to prove the Theorem analytically.




                                                         34
3.4.2      Implications for Social Welfare

So far we showed that, provided some fairly general conditions hold, the availability of workfare
leads to an equilibrium with lower incentives to exert high level of effort. In this subsection, we
use a numerical example to illustrate the potential implications in terms of social welfare. Ad-
ditionally, we use this numerical example to discuss the introduction of “productive” workfare.
    Define surplus as the ex-ante expected utility: Sh for an agent with high disutility from
effort, Sl for an agent with low disutility from effort. If a first equilibrium had higher Sh and Sl
than a second equilibrium, it would imply that the first equilibrium Pareto-dominates the second
equilibrium. Introducing the availability of workfare has the following effect on the surplus of a
given type j:

              ∆j = Sjwo (x∗wo ) − Sjwe (x∗we ) = Sjwe (x∗wo ) − Sjwe (x∗we ) + Sjwo (x∗wo ) − Sjwe (x∗wo )
                                                 |            {z          } |               {z          }
                                                               ≡∆j1                       ≡∆j2

    The first term, ∆j1 , is the change in surplus from reducing equilibrium effort in a welfare
setting, which corresponds to an efficiency channel. Due to the moral hazard problem brought
by the government’s lack of commitment, effort in welfare equilibria is below the social optimum.
As a result, decreasing equilibrium effort due to the introduction of workfare is expected to make
matters even worse. This channel reduces the aggregate amount of resources produced in the
second stage, and therefore harms both types of individuals (i.e., ∆j1 < 0 for every j).
    The second term, ∆j2 , is a distributional channel. Conditional on a given effort level - and
thus a given total output - the workfare contract will distribute that given output differently
among the two types of agents than the welfare contract. Since workfare is used to redistribute
resources from agents with high disutility from effort to agents with low disutility from effort,
this means that ∆l2 > 0 and ∆h2 < 0. Agents with high disutility from effort are expected to loose
from workfare in net terms, since both the efficiency and distributional channels are negative for
them. The net effect on the surplus of agents with low disutility from effort will depend upon
the relative magnitude of the efficiency and distributional channels. It is then possible that the
availability of workfare will lead to a Pareto-dominated equilibrium. In order to illustrate this
possibility, we present numerical results for the sets of welfare and workfare equilibria, including
their corresponding levels of ex-ante expected utility for both types of agents.
    Figures 1(a) and 1(c) show the equilibrium effort levels and the surpluses for different values
of α. The solid black lines correspond to the case in which workfare is not available, and the
dashed black lines denote the scenario in which workfare becomes available. When α ≤ 0.67,
outcomes are identical for the two cases.30 Intuitively, if sympathy for the diligent is too low,
 30
      Even though the figure only shows α ≥ 0.65, the solid and dashed curves are identical for values of α < 0.65.


                                                          35
the incentives to screen low-type individuals are low as well and thus the government does not
want to use the option of workfare in equilibrium. When α > 0.67, then equilibria are different
depending on the availability of workfare. As predicted by Theorem 1, the largest effort level
that can be sustained in equilibrium with workfare is lower than the largest effort level that can
be achieved with welfare. Figure 1(c) shows the comparison of surpluses between workfare and
welfare. When workfare is not available, the surpluses are equal between the two types because
the equilibria are interior (and therefore, agents with low disutility from effort are indifferent
between exerting high effort or not). The introduction of workfare introduces a gap between the
surpluses of agents with low and high disutility from effort. More importantly, the availability of
workfare reduces the surpluses of both types of agents, therefore leading to a Pareto-dominated
outcome.
    We can use this numerical example to illustrate the sensitivity of the results to the assumption
that workfare programs do not generate any output. Here we assume that the effort exerted
in workfare programs produces some output ew · yw , where yw > 0 is a constant representing
the productivity of workfare. The model with productive workfare cannot be compared to the
original model in an straightforward way. Intuitively, when yw is low enough, the only reason
for using workfare would be for screening purposes. But when yw is high enough, a government
would like to use workfare even if it was not interested in screening agents’ types. For instance,
in the extreme case in which workfare is more productive than the effort exerted at Stage 1, the
social optimum would involve exerting no effort in the first stage and mandatory participation
in workfare at stage two. Figures 1(b) and 1(d) reproduce Figures 1(a) and 1(c), but allowing
for productive workfare. The figures with yw > 0 look like a simple translation to the left of
the figures with yw = 0. Intuitively, yw > 0 is equivalent to a subsidy for screening. When such
a subsidy was absent, the government was not interested in using workfare for α slightly below
0.67. When the subsidy is introduced, the government becomes interested in using workfare. For
a given value of α, the introduction of yw > 0 exacerbates the differences between the workfare
and welfare equilibria, either by introducing a gap where there was none (as in α = 0.67), or by
exacerbating the gap (as in α > 0.67).




                                                36
                                                 Figure 1: Comparison of Welfare and Workfare Equilibria

                         xw e      xw o          e w (x w o)                                        xw e      xw o       e w (x w o)
                  1                                                                          1


                 0.8                                                                        0.8


                 0.6                                                                        0.6


                 0.4                                                                        0.4


                 0.2                                                                        0.2


                  0                                                                          0
                  0.65      0.67           0.69           0.71       0.73            0.75    0.65      0.67          0.69          0.71       0.73        0.75
                                                    α                                                                         α
                                (a) Equilibrium Effort, yw = 0                                        (b) Equilibrium Effort, yw = 0.025




37
                0.8                                                                         0.8



                0.7                                                                         0.7



                0.6                                                                         0.6



                0.5                                                                         0.5



                0.4                                                                         0.4

                                          S lw e        S hw e   S lw o     S hw o                                   S lw e       S hw e   S lw o    S hw o
                0.3                                                                         0.3
                 0.65      0.67           0.69           0.71       0.73         0.75        0.65      0.67          0.69          0.71       0.73        0.75
                                                   α                                                                          α
                           (c) Equilibrium Surplus, yw = 0                                           (d) Equilibrium Surplus, yw = 0.025

     Notes: The figures characterize the equilibrium outcomes of welfare and workfare programs that produce the highest level of
     effort in equilibrium. The utility function is U (c) = ln(c) and the parameters were fixed at the following levels: dl = 0.1,
     dh = 0.75, q = 0.75, yl = 0.5, yh = 4, pb = 0.2 and pg = 0.6.
4    Conclusion
We discussed the role of fairness concerns in the demand for redistribution through workfare.
First, we presented survey evidence showing that individuals are more sympathetic toward
the diligent poor than they are toward the lazy poor and, moreover, that such preferences
generate a demand for workfare. Second, we incorporated our empirical findings into a model
of income redistribution. Our model consists of a benevolent government with fairness concerns
that prioritizes the well-being of those individuals who exert high effort. A purely utilitarian
government would never find it optimal to use work requirements if the effort was entirely
wasteful. However, a government with fairness concerns would find it optimal to introduce such
work requirements, because of their capability to discriminate between poor individuals who
exerted high effort and poor individuals who did not. Second, we showed that the availability of
workfare, under lack of commitment power, can lead to a lower equilibrium effort and, possibly,
to a Pareto-dominated allocation.




                                              38
References
Daron Acemoglu, Michael Golosov, and Aleh Tsyvinski. Political economy of mechanisms.
 Econometrica, 76(3):619–641, 2008.

Alberto Alesina and George-Marios Angeletos. Fairness and Redistribution. American Economic
  Review, 95(4):960–980, 2005.

Alberto Alesina and Edward Ludwig Glaeser. Fighting poverty in the US and Europe: A world
  of difference, volume 26. Oxford University Press Oxford, 2004.

Alberto Alesina and Eliana La Ferrara. Preferences for redistribution in the land of opportuni-
  ties. Journal of Public Economics, 89(5):897–931, 2005.

Alberto Alesina, Reza Baqir, and William Easterly. Redistributive Public Employment. Journal
  of Urban Economics, 48(2):219–241, 2000.

Alberto Alesina, Stephan Danninger, and Massimo Rostagno. Redistribution through Public
  Employment: The Case of Italy. IMF Staff Papers, 48(3):447–473, 2001.

Alan J Auerbach and Kevin A Hassett. A New Measure of Horizontal Equity. American
  Economic Review, 92(4):1116–1125, 2002.

Sheryl Ball, Catherine Eckel, Philip J Grossman, and William Zame. Status in markets. Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 116(1):161–188, 2001.

Timothy Besley and Stephen Coate. Workfare versus welfare: Incentive arguments for work
  requirements in poverty-alleviation programs. American Economic Review, 82(1):249–261,
  1992.

Timothy Besley and Stephen Coate. The design of income maintenance programmes. Review
  of Economic Studies, 62(2):187–221, 1995.

Robin Boadway, Nicolas Marceau, and Maurice Marchand. Investment in education and the
  time inconsistency of redistributive tax policy. Economica, 63(250):171–189, 1996.

Alexander W Cappelen, Erik Ø Sørensen, and Bertil Tungodden. Responsibility for what?
  Fairness and individual responsibility. European economic review, 54(3):429–441, April 2010.

Alexander W Cappelen, James Konow, Erik Ø Sørensen, and Bertil Tungodden. Just luck:
  An experimental study of risk-taking and fairness. American Economic Review, 103(4):1398–
  1413, 2013.

                                              39
Andrew E Clark and Carine Milcent. Public employment and political pressure: The case of
 French hospitals. Journal of Health Economics, 30(5):1103–1112, 2011.

Jeremy Clark. Fairness in public good provision: An investigation of preferences for equality
  and proportionality. Canadian Journal of Economics, 31(3):708–729, 1998.

Giacomo Corneo and Hans Peter Grüner. Individual preferences for political redistribution.
  Journal of public Economics, 83(1):83–107, 2002.

Guillermo Cruces, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, and Martin Tetaz. Biased perceptions of income
 distribution and preferences for redistribution: Evidence from a survey experiment. Journal
 of Public Economics, 98:100–112, 2013.

Matthew JC Crump, John V McDonnell, and Todd M Gureckis. Evaluating Amazon’s Mechan-
 ical Turk as a tool for experimental behavioral research. PloS ONE, 8(3), 2013.

Katherine Cuff. Optimality of workfare with heterogeneous preferences. Canadian Journal of
 Economics/Revue Canadienne d‘Economique, 33(1):149–174, 2000.

Ruben Durante, Louis Putterman, and Joël Weele. Preferences for redistribution and perception
 of fairness: an experimental study. Journal of the European Economic Association, 12(4):
 1059–1086, 2014.

Nisvan Erkal, Lata Gangadharan, and Nikos Nikiforakis. Relative Earnings and Giving in a
  Real-Effort Experiment. The American Economic Review, 101(7):3330–3348, December 2011.

Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Konrad Mierendorff. Incentive effects and political accept-
  ability of workfare. Working Paper, Institute for the Study of Labour (IZA), 2006.

Emmanuel Farhi, Christopher Sleet, Ivan Werning, and Sevin Yeltekin. Non-linear capital
 taxation without commitment. Review of Economic Studies, 79(4):1469–1493, 2012.

Ernst Fehr and Klaus M. Schmidt. A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 114(3):817–868, 1999.

Marc Fleurbaey and François Maniquet. Fair Income Tax. Review of Economic Studies, 73(1):
 55–83, 2006.

Christina Fong. Social preferences, self-interest, and the demand for redistribution. Journal of
 Public Economics, 82(2):225–246, 2001.




                                              40
Christina M. Fong and Erzo F.P. Luttmer. Do fairness and race matter in generosity? Evidence
 from a nationally representative charity experiment. Journal of Public Economics, 95(5):
 372–394, 2011.

Drew Fudenberg and Jean Tirole. Moral Hazard and Renegotiation in Agency Contracts. Econo-
  metrica, 58(6):1279–1319, 1990.

Erving Goffman. Stigma: Notes on the management of spoiled identity. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
  Prentice-Hall, 1963.

Elizabeth Hoffman and Matthew L. Spitzer. Entitlements, rights, and fairness: An experimental
  examination of subjects’ concepts of distributive justice. Journal of Legal Studies, 14(2):259–
  297, 1985.

Kai A Konrad. Privacy and time-consistent optimal labor income taxation. Journal of Public
 Economics, 79(3):503–519, 2001.

Claus Thustrup Kreiner and Torben Tranæs. Optimal Workfare with Voluntary and Involuntary
  Unemployment*. Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 107(3):459–474, 2005.

Ilyana Kuziemko, Michael I Norton, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva. How elastic
   are preferences for redistribution? Evidence from randomized survey experiments. American
   Economic Review, 105(4):1478–1508, 2015.

Benjamin B Lockwood and Matthew Weinzierl. De Gustibus non est Taxandum: Heterogeneity
  in Preferences and Optimal Redistribution. Journal of Public Economics, 2015.

Enlinson Mattos and Vitor França. Public employment and income redistribution: causal evi-
  dence for Brazilian municipalities. Public Choice, 146(1-2):43–73, 2011.

Allan H Meltzer and Scott F Richard. A Rational Theory of the Size of Government. Journal
  of Political Economy, 89(5):914–927, 1981.

James A Mirrlees. An exploration in the theory of optimum income taxation. Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 38(2):175–208, 1971.

Robert Moffitt. Welfare work Requirements with Paternalistic Government Preferences. The
  Economic Journal, 116(515):F441–F458, 2006.

Nick Netzer and Florian Scheuer. Competitive markets without commitment. Journal of Polit-
  ical Economy, 118(6):1079–1109, 2010.


                                               41
Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez. Optimal Labor Income Taxation. Handbook of Public
 Economics, 5, 2013. (Amsterdam: North Holland).

John E Roemer, Rolf Aaberge, Ugo Colombino, Johan Fritzell, Stephen P Jenkins, Arnaud
  Lefranc, Ive Marx, Marianne Page, Evert Pommer, Javier Ruiz-Castillo, Maria Jesus San
  Segundo, Torben Tranaes, Alain Trannoy, Gert G Wagner, and Ignacio Zubiri. To what extent
  do fiscal regimes equalize opportunities for income acquisition among citizens? Journal of
  Public Economics, 87(3):539 – 565, 2003.

Emmanuel Saez. Optimal Income Transfer Programs: Intensive Versus Extensive Labor Supply
 Responses. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(3):1039–1073, 2002.

Emmanuel Saez and Stefanie Stantcheva. Generalized social marginal welfare weights for optimal
 tax theory. American Economic Review, 106(1):24–45, 2016.

Agnar Sandmo. Optimal Redistribution When Tastes Differ. FinanzArchiv / Public Finance
  Analysis, 50(2):149–163, 1993.

Matthias Sutter and Hannelore Weck-Hannemann. Taxation and the Veil of Ignorance – A Real
 Effort Experiment on the Laffer Curve. Public Choice, 115(1-2):217–240, 2003.

Matthew Weinzierl. The promise of positive optimal taxation: normative diversity and a role
 for equal sacrifice. Journal of Public Economics, 118(C):128–142, 2014.




                                             42
A       Appendix
Proof of Lemma 1

In order to prove the lemma we will make use of the following claim.

Claim 1. The solution V = (uwe     we     we     we
                            b,h , ub,l , ug,h , ug,l ) to the government’s problem must satisfy constraint (3) with

strict equality.

Proof. Suppose that V = (uwe          we     we     we
                               b,h , ub,l , ug,h , ug,l ) is a solution, but that constraint (3) is satisfied with strict
inequality. Consider the alternative allocation Ṽ = (uwe                we        we        we
                                                               b,h + , ub,l + , ug,h + , ug,l + ), with  > 0 small enough
so that constraint (3) evaluated at Ṽ is still satisfied with strict inequality (such an  exists by the continuity
Φ). Then, the allocation Ṽ still satisfies constraints (1) and (2), and gives a strictly higher value of (1). Then,
V cannot be a solution to the government’s problem.

With this result we can reformulate the benevolent government’s problem as

                     max       α [qx (pg uwe            we                            we            we
                                          h + (1 − pg )ul )] + (1 − α) [(1 − qx) (pb uh + (1 − pb )ul )]
                   (uwe  we
                     h ,ul )



 subject to the constraints

                   (qxpg + (1 − qx) pb ) Φ(uwe                                           we
                                            h ) + (qx (1 − pg ) + (1 − qx) (1 − pb )) Φ(ul ) = R(x).                    (A.1)

 Equation (A.1) implicitly defines uwe                              we                                   we
                                     h as a bijective function of ul . Lets denote this relationship by uh ≡
Γ(uwe
   l ) with
                                          R(x) − [qx(1 − pg ) + (1 − qx)(1 − pb )]Φ(uwe
                                                                                        
                                                                                     l )
                   uwe
                     h   ≡ Γ(u we
                               l  ) = U                                                    .             (A.2)
                                                        qxpg + (1 − qx)pb
 It can be easily shown that Γ0 (uwe           00 we
                                  l ) < 0 and Γ (ul ) < 0. Thus, we can re-express the original problem as


                   max         α [qx (pg Γ(uwe                                              we
                                            l ) + (1 − pg )ul )] + (1 − α) [(1 − qx) (pb Γ(ul ) + (1 − pb )ul )] ,      (A.3)
             uwe
              l ∈[−∞,u(R)]



 which is a strictly concave problem in uwe
                                         l . Thus, there exists a solution to the government’s problem and it is
unique. We rewrite the benevolent government’s problem as the following Lagrangian


  L = α [qx (pg uwe            we                            we            we
                 h + (1 − pg )ul )] + (1 − α) [(1 − qx) (pb uh + (1 − pb )ul )]

                                + λ (R(x) − Φ(uwe                            we
                                               h ) (qxpg + (1 − qx)pb ) − Φ(ul ) (qx(1 − pg ) + (1 − qx)(1 − pb ))) .


 The solution to this problem is characterized by the first order conditions

                       ∂L
                           = αqxpg + (1 − α)(1 − qx)pb − λΦ0 (uwe
                                                               h ) (qxpg + (1 − qx)pb ) = 0,                            (A.4)
                      ∂uwe
                        h

        ∂L
            = αqx(1 − pg ) + (1 − α)(1 − qx)(1 − pb ) − λΦ0 (uwe
                                                              l ) (qx(1 − pg ) + (1 − qx)(1 − pb )) = 0,                (A.5)
       ∂uwe
         l




                                                               43
and the budget constraint. Equations (A.4) and (A.5) can be combined into the following expression

                     Φ0 (uwe
                          h )   (αqxpg + (1 − α) (1 − qx) pb ) (qx (1 − pg ) + (1 − qx) (1 − pb ))
                      0   we  =                                                                    .
                     Φ (ul )    (αqx (1 − pg ) + (1 − α) (1 − qx) (1 − pb )) (qxpg + (1 − qx) pb )

                                                                  Φ0 (uwe
                                                                       h )
Given that pg > pb , it can be easily checked that                Φ0 (uwe    > (<)1 if α > (<)1/2. This completes our proof.
                                                                       l )




Proof of Lemma 2

Following the steps of Claim 1, one can easily show that the solution of the government’s problem with workfare
must satisfy the budget constraint with strict equality. After imposing restrictions (5) and (6), we can state the
following problem
                               wo
                                 max
                                  wo
                                        α[qx(pg uwo              wo
                                                  h + (1 − pg )(ul + ew (dh − dl )))]
                                (uh ,ul ),ew

        + (1 − α)[q(1 − x)(pb uwo             wo                                          wo            wo
                               h + (1 − pb )(ul + ew (dh − dl ))] + (1 − α) [(1 − q) (pb uh + (1 − pb )ul )]

subject to the budget constraint


  qx[pg Φ(uwo                wo                                   wo                wo
           h ) + (1 − pg )Φ(ul + ew (dh − dl ))] + q(1 − x)[pb Φ(uh ) + (1 − pb )Φ(ul + ew (dh − dl ))]+

                                                                                (1 − q)[pb Φ(uwo                wo
                                                                                              h ) + (1 − pb )Φ(ul )] = R(x). (A.6)


 Equation (A.6) implicitly defines uwo                            wo
                                    h as a bijective function of ul  and ew . Lets denote this relationship by
 wo       wo
uh ≡ Ω(ul , ew ) with


  uwo     wo
   h ≡ Ω(ul , ew ) =
                     R(x) − [qx(1 − pg ) + q(1 − x)(1 − pb )]Φ(uwo                                      wo
                                                                                                           
                                                                l + ew (dh − dl )) − (1 − q)(1 − pb )Φ(ul )
                U                                                                                             .
                                                       qxpg + (1 − qx)pb

                             ∂Ω(uwo ,e )
                                    w               w ∂Ω(uwo ,e )      w       ∂ 2 Ω(uwo ,e )     w      ∂ 2 Ω(uwo ,e )
 It is easy to verify that      l
                              ∂uwo    < 0,      l
                                               ∂ew     < 0,        l
                                                               ∂ 2 uwo    < 0 and            l
                                                                                          ∂ 2 ew     < 0. Since U (·) is
                                  l                                  l
strictly increasing and strictly concave, in order to prove that Ω(uwo l , ew ) is strictly    concave we only need to
show that the following function is strictly concave:

          g(uwo                                              wo                                      wo
             l , ew ) = −[qx(1 − pg ) + q(1 − x)(1 − pb )]Φ(ul + ew (dh − dl )) − (1 − q)(1 − pb )Φ(ul ).

                                              ∂ 2 g(uwol ,ew )               ∂ 2 g(uwo
                                                                                     l ,ew )
 Since Φ00 (·) >, it is easy to see that           ∂ 2 uwo       < 0 and        ∂ 2 ew <0 .    The last step consists on determining the
                                                        l
sign of the determinant of the Hessian:

                                                            2
  ∂ 2 g(uwo          2    wo
                                          ∂ 2 g(uwo
                                      
           l , ew ) ∂ g(ul , ew )                l , ew )
                                  −                              =
       ∂ 2 uwo
            l          ∂ 2 ew                ∂ew ∂uwo
                                                    l

                    [qx(1 − pg ) + q(1 − x)(1 − pb )]Φ00 (uwo                          2                 00 wo
                                                           l + ew (dh − dl ))(dh − dl ) (1 − q)(1 − pb )Φ (ul ) > 0.


 Then, the function Ω(uwo
                       l , ew ) is strictly concave. We can now reduce the previous problem to the following
two-dimensional maximization problem

                                max              α[qx(pg Ω(uwo                    wo
                                                            l , ew ) + (1 − pg )(ul + ew (dh − dl )))]
                        (uwo
                          l )∈[−∞,u(R)],ew




                                                                      44
                           + (1 − α)[q(1 − x)(pb Ω(uwo                    wo
                                                    l , ew ) + (1 − pb )(ul + ew (dh − dl ))]

                                   + (1 − α) [(1 − q) (pb Ω(uwo                   wo
                                                             l , ew ) + (1 − pb )ul )] ,

 which is a strictly concave problem in uwo
                                         l  and ew . Thus, there exists a solution to the government’s workfare
problem and it is unique. In order to derive the remaining results we rewrite the benevolent government’s
problem as the following Lagrangian


  L = α [qx (pg uwo              wo                                     wo              wo
                 h + (1 − pg ) (uw − ew dl ))] + (1 − α) [q(1 − x) (pb uh + (1 − pb ) (uw − ew dl ))]

                          + (1 − α) [(1 − q) (pb uwo            wo         wo           wo
                                                  h + (1 − pb )ul )] + η (uw − ew dh − ul )

   + µ (R(x) − Φ(uwo                           wo                                        wo
                  h )[qxpg + (1 − qx)pb ] − Φ(uw )[qx(1 − pg ) + q(1 − x)(1 − pb )] − Φ(ul )(1 − q)(1 − pb )) ,


 where the restriction uwo
                        w − ew d h = ul
                                        wo
                                           has not been replaced and the government chooses ew as well. The
solution to this problem is characterized by the first order conditions

                        ∂L
                            = αqxpg + (1 − α)(1 − qx)pb − µΦ0 (uwo
                                                                h ) (qxpg + (1 − qx)pb ) = 0                       (A.7)
                       ∂uwo
                         h

     ∂L
         = αqx(1 − pg ) + (1 − α)q(1 − x)(1 − pb ) + η − µΦ0 (uwo
                                                               w ) (qx(1 − pg ) + q(1 − x)(1 − pb )) = 0           (A.8)
    ∂uwo
      w

                           ∂L
                               = (1 − α)(1 − q)(1 − pb ) − η − µΦ0 (uwo
                                                                     l )(1 − q)(1 − pb ) = 0                       (A.9)
                          ∂uwo
                            l

                            ∂L
                                = −αqx(1 − pg )dl − (1 − α)q(1 − x)(1 − pb )dl − ηdh = 0                          (A.10)
                            ∂ew
and the budget constraint. Equations (A.7), (A.9) and (A.10) can be combined into the following expression

 Φ0 (uwo
      h )                         (αqxpg + (1 − α) (1 − qx) pb ) ((1 − q)(1 − pb ))
  0   wo  =                                                                                               . (A.11)
 Φ (ul )     (1 − α)(1 − q)(1 − pb ) + (αqx(1 − pg ) + (1 − α)q(1 − x)(1 − pb )) ddhl (qxpg + (1 − qx) pb )

We want to show that if ew (x) > 0 then uwo       wo
                                         h (x) > ul (x), which is equivalent to showing that

                                 (αqxpg + (1 − α) (1 − qx) pb ) ((1 − q)(1 − pb ))
                                                                                                         > 1.
            (1 − α)(1 − q)(1 − pb ) + (αqx(1 − pg ) + (1 − α)q(1 − x)(1 − pb )) ddhl (qxpg + (1 − qx) pb )

The previous inequality can be rewritten as


  (1 − q)(1 − pb )qx(1 − pg )(2α − 1) >
                                 (1 − pg )                                           dl
                                           (αqx(1 − pg ) + (1 − α)q(1 − x)(1 − pb ))    (qxpg + (1 − qx) pb ) . (A.12)
                                    pg                                               dh

Below we show that when the government strictly prefers to use workfare (i.e., ew > 0) the following condition
must hold


  (1 − q)(1 − pb )qx(1 − pg )(2α − 1) >
                                                                                 dl
                                     (αqx(1 − pg ) + (1 − α)q(1 − x)(1 − pb ))      (qx(1 − pg ) + (1 − pb )(1 − qx)) .
                                                                                 dh


                                                           45
Therefore, inequality (A.12) holds if

                                                       dl
  (αqx(1 − pg ) + (1 − α)q(1 − x)(1 − pb ))                (qx(1 − pg ) + (1 − pb )(1 − qx)) >
                                                      dh
                                                (1 − pg )                                           dl
                                                          (αqx(1 − pg ) + (1 − α)q(1 − x)(1 − pb ))    (qxpg + (1 − qx) pb ) .
                                                   pg                                               dh

 After rearranging and canceling terms out, the previous inequality is simplified to pg > pb , which is our
                                                                                                                   Φ0 (uwo
                                                                                                                        h )
maintained assumption. Then, since inequality (A.12) holds when ew (x) > 0, we have that                           Φ0 (uwo    > 1, which
                                                                                                                        l )

implies that uwo       wo
              h (x) > ul (x) when the government implements a workfare program.




Proof of Lemma 3

From the previous characterization we can find the set of parameters for which the government would strictly
prefer to implement workfare (i.e., when ew > 0). In order to do this, we find the set of parameters for which
 ∂L                                                                ∂L
∂ew |ew =0 > 0. The steps are as follows. First, solve for η from ∂uwo :          l



                                   η = (1 − α)(1 − q)(1 − pb ) − µΦ0 (uwo
                                                                       l )(1 − q)(1 − pb ).

                                  ∂L
Replace this expression in       ∂uwo ,   set uwo   wo
                                               w = ul  (which is equivalent to setting ew = 0) and solve for µ:
                                   w



                                                    αqx(1 − pg ) + (1 − α)(1 − pb )(1 − qx)
                                      µ|ew =0 =                                                .
                                                    Φ0 (uwo
                                                         l ) (qx(1 − pg ) + (1 − pb )(1 − qx))

Next, replace this expression in the expression previously derived for η:

                                                        (1 − q)(1 − pb )qx(1 − pg )(1 − 2α)
                                          η|ew =0 =                                         .
                                                          qx(1 − pg ) + (1 − pb )(1 − qx)

                                      ∂L
Finally, put this expression in       ∂ew :


        ∂L                                                            (1 − q)(1 − pb )qx(1 − pg )(2α − 1)
           |e =0 = −dl (αqx(1 − pg ) + (1 − α)q(1 − x)(1 − pb )) + dh                                     .
        ∂ew w                                                           qx(1 − pg ) + (1 − pb )(1 − qx)

                                                                                      ∂L
The previous derivative will be positive only if α > 1/2, otherwise                   ∂ew |ew =0   < 0 for all parameter values.


Proof of Lemma 4
                                                                      ∂L
Here we show that if there exists a value of x ∈ (0, 1) such that ∂e   w
                                                                         |ew =0,x > 0 (which implies α > 1/2), then
                                                                          ∂L
there also exists a value x̃ ∈ (0, 1) such that for all x > x̃ we have ∂e  w
                                                                              |ew =0,x > 0 and for all x ≤ x̃ we have
 ∂L
∂ew |ew =0,x ≤ 0. This result has the implication that ew = 0 for all x ≤ x̃ and that ew > 0 for all x > x̃. For this
                                                 ∂L
purpose, we compute the second derivative of ∂e    w
                                                     |ew =0 with respect to x
                                           
                               ∂L
                      ∂2       ∂ew |ew =0               (1 − q)(1 − pb )2 q 2 (1 − pg )(2α − 1)(pg − pb )
                                                = 2dh                                               3       > 0.
                                ∂2x                           (qx(1 − pg ) + (1 − pb )(1 − qx))




                                                                     46
                                         ∂ 2 ( ∂e
                                                ∂L
                                                   |
                                                  w ew =0
                                                          )                             ∂L
 Thus, the desired result follows from           ∂2x          > 0 and the fact that     ∂ew |ew =0,x=0   < 0. These two results
                                                         ∂L                             ∂L
imply that there exists a single value x̃ such that      ∂ew |ew =0,x̃   = 0 and that   ∂ew |ew =0,x   > 0 only if x > x̃.


Proof of Theorem 1

We want to show that the highest equilibrium level of effort that can be attained in welfare, denoted by x̂we , is
higher than any equilibrium level of effort attainable in workfare, denoted by xwo . The proof focuses in cases
in which there exist workfare equilibria in which the government optimally uses workfare, i.e. ew (xwo ) > 0
(otherwise the comparison is trivial and not interesting). Let

                                    Dwe (x) = (pg − pb ) (uwe       we
                                                           h (x) − ul (x)) − dl


and
                             Dwo (x) = (pg − pb ) (uwo        wo       wo
                                                    h (x) − (uw (x) − ew (x)dl )) − dl

 be the indifference conditions of the agent with low disutility from effort described in the definitions of welfare
and workfare equilibria, respectively. By definition, interior welfare and workfare equilibria have to satisfy the
conditions Dwe (x) = 0 and Dwo (x) = 0, respectively. Similarly, welfare and workfare equilibria with x = 1 must
satisfy Dwe (x) > 0 and Dwo (x) > 0, respectively. Figure 2 illustrates the general idea of the proof.31

                      Figure 2: Comparison of Welfare and Workfare Equilibria




To prove that xwo ≤ x̂we , we need to show that Dwe (x) ≥ Dwo (x) for all x, both with strict inequality if the
government uses workfare (i.e., when ew (x) > 0). To see why this is the case let us consider two scenarios. If
x̂we = 1, the result that xwo ≤ x̂we trivially holds. In the case in which the highest level of effort attainable in a
welfare equilibrium is interior (x̂we < 1), by continuity of Dwe (x) (shown below), the condition Dwe (x) ≥ Dwo (x)
implies that Dwo (x) < 0 for all x ≥ x̂we when ew (x) > 0 (as shown in Figure 2). Therefore, if there exists any
  31
    Notice that, by the definition of x̃, the government only uses workfare when x > x̃. This means that for
x ≤ x̃ the welfare and workfare optimization problems are identical. Thus Dwe (x) = Dwo (x) for x ≤ x̃.



                                                                47
workfare equilibria it must satisfy xwo < x̂we . The condition Dwe (x) ≥ Dwo (x) can be expressed as

                        (pg − pb ) (uwe       wo       we        wo       wo
                                     h (x) − uh (x) − ul (x) + (uw (x) − ew (x)dl )) ≥ 0.


This inequality will be satisfied if the following conditions hold

  (1) uwo       wo         we
       w (x) − ew (x)dl ≥ ul (x)

      and

  (2) uwe       wo
       h (x) ≥ uh (x).


The proof that both conditions hold follows from a series of claims.

Claim 2. Fix any x ∈ (0, 1). If the government uses workfare, the solution to the government’s problem must
satisfy uwe       wo
         l (x) < uw (x).


Proof. The proof goes by contradiction. Suppose that uwe          wo
                                                        l (x) ≥ uw (x). Equations (A.4), (A.5), (A.7), (A.8)
and (A.9) can be arranged in a way to obtain the following inequality

                                            Φ0 (uwe
                                                 l (x))  Φ0 (uwe
                                                              h (x))
                                             0   wo
                                                        < 0 wo       .
                                            Φ (uw (x))   Φ (uh (x))

                                           00
Given that uwe           wo                                                     we        wo
              l (x) ≥ uw (x) and that Φ (·) > 0, this condition implies uh (x) > uh (x). We also know that
when the government uses workfare uwo             wo               we         wo        wo          we
                                       w (x) > ul (x). Thus, ul (x) ≥ uw (x) > ul (x) and uh (x) > uh (x).
                                                                                                              wo

This means that ex post all agents are weakly worse off with the workfare scheme and some are strictly worse
off. This is a contradiction because V wo (x) ≥ V we (x) for all x (with strict inequality when ew (x) > 0). Then it
must be that uwe           wo
                l (x) < uw (x).


Claim 3. Fix any x ∈ (0, 1). If the government uses workfare, the solution to the government’s problem must
satisfy uwe       wo
         h (x) ≥ uh (x).


Proof. The proof goes by contradiction. Suppose that uwe          wo
                                                        h (x) < uh (x). From our previous claim we know that
 we       wo
ul (x) < uw (x). This inequality and the equality of resources across redistributive models (for a given x) imply
that uwe       wo
      l (x) > ul (x). From the budget constraint we get the following inequality


  Φ(uwe
     l ) (qx(1 − pg ) + (1 − qx)(1 − pb )) >

                                               Φ(uwo                                         wo
                                                  w ) (qx(1 − pg ) + q(1 − x)(1 − pb )) + Φ(ul )(1 − q)(1 − pb ),


which can be rewritten as

                              Φ(uwo                                         wo
                                 w ) (qx(1 − pg ) + q(1 − x)(1 − pb )) + Φ(ul )(1 − q)(1 − pb )
                   Φ(uwe
                      l )>                                                                      .
                                             (qx(1 − pg ) + (1 − qx)(1 − pb ))

Note that the right hand side is a weighted average between Φ(uwo          wo
                                                               w ) and Φ(ul ), where the weights sum up to
one. Let CE(Φ) represent the certainty equivalent of the above random variable when the utility function is
Φ(·). Then, Φ0 (·) > 0 implies uwe
                                l  > CE(Φ). On the other hand, the condition uwe       wo
                                                                              h (x) < uh (x) implies λ > µ



                                                        48
(see equations (A.4) and (A.7)). Then, combining equations (A.5), (A.8) and (A.9) we obtain the following
inequality


  Φ0 (uwe
       l (x)) (qx(1 − pg ) + (1 − qx)(1 − pb )) <

                                          Φ0 (uwo                        0 wo
                                               l (x))(1 − q)(1 − pb ) + Φ (uw (x)) (qx(1 − pg ) + (1 − x)(1 − pb )q) ,


which can also be rewritten as

                               Φ0 (uwo                        0 wo
                                    l (x))(1 − q)(1 − pb ) + Φ (uw (x)) (qx(1 − pg ) + (1 − x)(1 − pb )q)
               Φ0 (uwe
                    l (x)) <                                                                              .
                                                   (qx(1 − pg ) + (1 − qx)(1 − pb ))

Let CE(Φ0 ) represent the certainty equivalent of the above random variable when the utility function is Φ0 (·).
Since Φ00 (·) > 0, the previous inequality implies that uwe
                                                         l  < CE(Φ0 ). This is a contradiction. The condition

                                                       ∂ Φ00 (u)
                                                                 ≤0
                                                       ∂u Φ0 (u)

implies that
                                                      Φ000 (u)   Φ00 (u)
                                                  −    00
                                                               ≥− 0      ,
                                                      Φ (u)      Φ (u)
which states that the Arrow-Pratt coefficient of absolute risk aversion is higher with utility Φ0 (·) than with utility
Φ(·). This, in turn implies that CE(Φ) ≥ CE(Φ0 ). Combining all the inequalities we get the contradiction
uwe
 l  > uwe
        l .


Claim 4. Fix any x ∈ (0, 1). If the government uses workfare, the solution to the government’s problem must
satisfy uwo       wo         we
         w (x) − ew (x)dl > ul (x).


Proof. The proof goes by contradiction. Assume uwo              wo          we
                                                      w (x) − ew (x)dl ≤ ul (x). From our previous claim we know
thatuwe         wo
      h (x) ≥ uh (x). From the condition that makes agents with high disutility from effort indifferent between
participating in workfare or not we also know that uworkw    (x) − ewo         wo
                                                                    w (x)dl > ul (x). Therefore all ex post types of
agents are weakly worse off with workfare and the bad-poor agents are strictly worse off. This is a contradiction
since V wo (x) ≥ V we (x) for all x (with strict inequality when ewo
                                                                   w (x) > 0).


Claim 5. The function Dwe (x) is continuous on [0, 1].

Proof. We apply Berge’s Maximum Theorem to show that the function Dwe (x) is continuous for x ∈ (0, 1).
This amounts to showing that uwe              we
                                  h (x) and ul (x) are continuous functions of x, for x ∈ (0, 1). First, notice
that the government’s objective function (A.3) is continuous in x and in ul (because the function Γ(x, uwe l )
                                                                                                              32

in (A.2) is continuous in both arguments). Second, the domain uwe l  ∈ [−∞, u (R(x))] is not compact. However,
                               0
the Inada condition limc→0 U (c) = ∞ implies that there always exists a constant k small enough such that
the constraint uwel ∈ [k, u (R(x))] does not affect the result of the maximization program (A.3). Thus, the
             we
constraint ul ∈ [k, u (R(x))] becomes compact-valued for each x ∈ (0, 1) and continuous (the level of aggregate
resources R(x) is also a continuous function of x). Then, by Berge’s Maximum Theorem, the argument that
maximizes the problem (A.3) uwe  l (x) is upper semi-continuous. Furthermore, since the government’s problem
has a unique solution (Lemma 1), the solution uwe                                         we            we
                                                  l (x) must be continuous in x. Then, uh (x) = Γ(x, ul ) and

  32
       The dependency of Γ(x, uwe
                               l ) on x has been suppressed in earlier proofs.



                                                             49
Dwe (x) are continuous as well. Continuity of the Dwe (x) function at x ∈ {0, 1} is given by: (i) limx→0 uwe
                                                                                                          h (x) =
         we       we        we                     we        we                   we        we
limx→0 ul (x) = uh (0) = ul (0) and (ii) limx→1 uh (x) = uh (1) and limx→1 ul (x) = ul (1), which are easy
to obtain from equations (A.1), (A.4) and (A.5).

Combining the results from the previous claims we can conclude that Dwe (x) ≥ Dwo (x), with strict inequality
if ewo
    w (x) > 0. Let x̂
                        we
                           be the highest effort level that can be sustained in a welfare equilibrium. If x̂we = 1
(D (x̂ ) > 0), the result Dwe (x) ≥ Dwo (x) implies that any workfare equilibria xwo must satisfy xwo ≤ 1. On
    we we

the other hand if x̂we < 1, by definition of x̂we being the highest effort level that can be sustained in a welfare
equilibrium and by continuity of Dwe (x), we know that Dwe (x̂we ) = 0 and that Dwe (x) < 0 for all x > x̂we ,
which implies that Dwo (x) < 0 for all x > x̂we . If ewo         we
                                                            w (x̂ ) > 0 (i.e., the government uses workfare when
x = x̂we ), then Dwo (x̂we ) < 0. Therefore, if there exist a workfare equilibrium it must satisfy xwo < x̂we . The
last step of the proof consists on verifying that agents with high disutility from effort do not want to exert high
effort in the first period. This is equivalent to showing that

                 Dwo (x)   = pg uwo                wo                wo                wo
                                 h (x) + (1 − pg )ul (x) − dh − (pb uh (x) + (1 − pb )ul (x))

                           =    (pg − pb ) (uwo       wo
                                             h (x) − ul (x)) − dh < 0.


The last inequality can be rearranged as

                                           uwo       wo
                                            h (x) − ul (x)      1
                                                           <         .
                                                 dh          pg − pb

 If the numerator is a bounded function of dh , then the condition will hold for high values of dh . It is easy to
                                            xΦ0 (uwo
                                                   h (x))
verify from equation (A.11) that limdh →∞    Φ0 (uwo        = k̄, where k̄ is a positive and bounded constant. Since
                                                  l (x))

Φ0 (·) > 0 and Φ00 (·) > 0, uwo         wo
                             h (x) and ul (x) are bounded functions of dh . This completes our proof.




                                                            50
B      Online Appendix (NOT FOR PUBLICATION)
B.1      Further Evidence from Survey 1
This Appendix provides some additional evidence from Survey 1 about the link between sympa-
thy for the diligent and the demand for workfare. After respondents recommended the level of
the unconditional cash transfer, they were told that the government was going to offer the cash
transfer recommended by the subject as Program A. In addition to Program A, the government
could also offer Program B, which would involve a larger cash transfer, but the beneficiary
would be required to work a fixed number of hours per week for the local government. We
purposely presented the respondents with an extreme scenario in which the effort under work-
fare was costly to the beneficiary but completely wasteful, stressing (in boldface) that: “Due
to over-staffing and management costs, even though the individual will need to work hard in
Program B, his efforts will not produce any value for society whatsoever.” The purpose of this
statement was to assess whether the demand for a work requirement was because of the cost
that it imposes on the beneficiary rather than because of the benefits that it provides to society.
    Even though it was wasteful, around 50% of respondents still chose to offer a workfare
program. This evidence is consistent with our argument that fairness concerns can create a
demand for work requirements even in the extreme case where workfare is completely wasteful.33
Additionally, after eliciting the respondents’ preferences about Program B, we asked an open-
ended question requesting an explanation for their choice. As expected, a majority of the
explanations included references to fairness concerns. Indeed, this evidence is consistent with
Falk et al. [2006], who conducted a laboratory experiment in which subjects voted on whether
to use welfare or workfare for social assistance. They found that, when asked about their
motivation to support workfare, more than two-thirds of the supporters of workfare mentioned
variations of fairness concerns, while only one quarter mentioned self-interested motives.
    In Survey 1, subjects who recommended that the government offer a Program B were further
asked to choose a specific level of cash transfer and a number of hours for the work requirement.
Table B.1 shows average outcomes divided by treatment groups. These outcomes can be used to
proxy the extent to which subjects demanded workfare. For example, the additional workfare
cash is the gap between the cash offered in Program B and the cash offered in Program A
(which, by definition, is zero if no Program B is offered). In the No-Info group, this additional
cash was about $40 per week, equivalent to 36% of the amount offered in Program A. If we focus
  33
    Of course, there are other reasons why individuals may demand workfare in a situation like this. For example,
individuals may have the paternalistic view that working in exchange for the cash transfer will be enriching for
the beneficiary (Moffitt [2006]), because of a feeling of fulfillment or because it can serve as training for future
jobs.



                                                         i
on the subset of subjects who offered a Program B, then the average cash in Program B is $85
more than the cash in Program A (or 77% more cash). In both comparisons, the additional cash
offered under the condition of work requirements was substantial. Also, we included a question
about the perceived probability that the beneficiary would choose Program B over Program A.
The last row from Table B.1 shows the average of an outcome defined as 0 if choosing Program
B was very unlikely and 1 if choosing Program B was very likely. In the No-Info treatment,
individuals thought that there would be a 50%-50% chance that Program B was chosen. Thus,
the evidence suggest that individuals designed the programs such as they are both likely to be
chosen by beneficiaries.
    It is also possible to compare the recommended design of Program B across treatment groups.
There is, however, an important caveat. In Survey 1, individuals first chose Program A; then,
without anticipating it, respondents were offered Program B as an option. The ideal conditions
for workfare to act as a screening device are different: the individual should choose the designs
of Program A and Program B simultaneously. We did not pursue this latter design, because
it seemed too complicated for an online survey. We can examine how the signals about the
hard-working spirit of the beneficiary affected the demand for workfare. First, individuals
demand workfare even when they have a signal that the beneficiary is hard working or lazy. One
interpretation is that respondents do not fully trust the government’s claim that the beneficiary is
lazy or hard-working, so that even conditional on that signal they still demand work requirements
for screening purposes. A more interesting pattern is the difference in demand for workfare
between individuals described as lazy and individuals described as hard-working. Conditional
on not expecting Program B, subjects were much more generous in Program A with hard-
working beneficiaries than with lazy beneficiaries. When they are given the option of offering
Program B, the question is whether subjects would be willing to “close” part of the gap in
assistance to the individuals described as lazy if they are willing to “prove” that they are not
lazy by complying with the work requirement. Consistent with this prediction, the additional
cash offered in Program B was 30% higher when the beneficiary was described as lazy, compared
to when he was described as hard-working (p-value = 0.066). In contrast, signals about the
race and nationality of the beneficiary did not have a significant effect on the demand for
workfare. The case of disabilities is also interesting, because (as discussed in the model) these
individuals are probably perceived as having a “fair” reason not to work. Consistent with this
view, informing the respondent that the beneficiary is disabled caused a statistically significant
drop in the demand for workfare of almost 20.




                                                 ii
                                        Table B.1: Summary Statistics for Survey 1 across Treatment Arms

                                                                                          Treatment
                                       No Info        Hard-          Lazy         African    White           Mexican      American Disabled            Not
                                                     Working                     American                                                            Disabled
       Welfare cash ($)                111.76        121.95          65.98        108.60     100.00            96.73       103.42       120.10        106.91
                                       (4.67)         (4.63)         (4.75)       (4.82)     (4.58)            (4.76)      (4.72)       (4.47)        (4.93)

       % of Indivuals                    0.47          0.50           0.60          0.47           0.46         0.47         0.48        0.43           0.46
       implenting Workfare              (0.04)        (0.04)         (0.04)        (0.04)         (0.03)       (0.04)       (0.04)      (0.03)         (0.04)

       Additional Workfare              40.40         41.23          52.27         37.90          36.70        38.88        33.58       32.56          39.36
       cash ($)                         (4.10)        (4.28)         (4.31)        (3.95)         (3.72)       (4.10)       (3.33)      (3.46)         (4.04)

       Hours of work                     3.72          3.78           4.90          3.42           3.51         3.80         3.69        3.19           3.76
       in Workfare                      (0.31)        (0.31)         (0.32)        (0.29)         (0.30)       (0.31)       (0.31)      (0.29)         (0.32)




iii
       Implicit hourly wage             13.54         14.96          12.74         12.98          12.08        11.89        11.27       11.87          10.99
       in Workfare                      (1.46)        (1.47)         (1.22)        (1.29)         (1.49)       (1.21)       (1.22)      (1.19)         (1.16)

       Expected participation            0.45          0.53           0.35          0.51           0.55         0.50         0.48        0.45           0.54
       in Workfare                      (0.03)        (0.03)         (0.03)        (0.03)         (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.04)         (0.03)

      Notes: N = 1, 778. Data from Survey 1. Respondents were put in the hypothetical position in which the United States government appoints them
      to choose policies that would aid poor families. We provided the respondent with a description of the household that would benefit from the social
      assistance, and we randomized some information in this description. Each column represents a treatment arm. No-Info corresponds to the baseline
      information (i.e., no further information added). Each row corresponds to a different choice made by the respondent. Welfare cash corresponds to the
      amount of unconditional cash transfer (in U.S. $) the respondent chose for the beneficiary. Respondents were also given the possibility to additionally
      offer a workfare program (the hypothetical beneficiary would choose one social program among those two). The second row shows the percentage
      of respondents that wanted to offer the additional workfare program. Additional workfare cash corresponds to the difference between the weekly
      cash transfer chosen in the workfare and welfare programs. The fourth row reports the amount of work requirement (in hours per week at a local
      government) that respondents chose for the workfare program (if the respondent decided not to offer workfare, hours of work were coded as zero).
      The implicit hourly wage is the ratio between additional workfare cash and the hours of work in workfare. Expected participation in workfare is a
      variable that goes from 0 to 1 where 0 indicates that the respondent believed that the hypothetical beneficiary would “very likely choose welfare”
      and 1 that she/he believed the beneficiary would “very likely choose workfare.” Averages computed within each treatment arm listed in the column
      names, with standard errors shown in parenthesis. For more details see the Questionnaire in the Online Appendix.
B.2    Description of Online Surveys
This appendix provides the structure and set of questions used in the online survey. The survey
was divided into 5 blocks. The first block gathers standard background information and was
administered to all participants. The second block consists of questions included in Survey
1 only. This section was randomly assigned to 1,778 individuals. The third block consists of
questions included in Survey 2 and it was randomly assigned to 808 individuals. The fourth block
consists of questions included in Survey 3 and it was randomly assigned to 502 individuals. The
last block contains attention checks and was administered to all participants. Next, we provide
a full transcript of the survey. Text in italics are our notes about the survey and was not seen
by respondents.

Background Questions (Shown to All Respondents)
Introduction Hi. We are a non-partisan group of academic researchers from Stanford Univer-
sity and Microsoft Research. Our goal is to understand individuals’ perceptions and preferences.
This survey should take about five minutes to complete. Your participation in this study is
purely voluntary, and you may withdraw from the study and retract the responses you have
provided at any time without any penalty whatsoever.?Your name will not be recorded in any
fashion. Since this study is related to the United States, you must be a resident of that country
aged 18 years old or older in order to participate.
    Q1.1 Question: To get a general picture of our survey group, we would like to request some
background information. Please remember that your answers will remain confidential and that
the survey will not collect any names. Please indicate your gender: Options: [Female, Male]
    Q1.2 Question: How old are you? Options: [18-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44,45 or over]
    Q1.3 Question: What state do you live in? Options: [List of all U.S. States]
    Q1.4 Question: Please indicate the highest level of formal education that you have com-
pleted: Options: [Less than high school diploma, High school degree or equivalent, College
degree, Post-graduate degree]
    Q1.5 Question: Please indicate your current annual household income in U.S. dollars: Op-
tions: [Under $10,000, $10,000 - $29,999, $30,000 - $59,999, $60,000 - $90,000, Over $90,000]
    Q1.6 Question: On economic policy matters, where do you see yourself on the liberal/conservative
spectrum? Options: [Very conservative, Conservative, Moderate, Liberal, Very liberal]
    Q1.7 Question: Generally speaking, do you usually think of yourself as a Republican,
Democrat or Independent? Options: [Strong Republican, Moderate Republican, Independent,
Moderate Democrat, Strong Democrat]
    Q1.8 This is an attention check. Question: Recent research on decision making shows that


                                               iv
choices are affected by the context in which they are made. Differences in how people feel, in
their previous knowledge and experience, and in their environment can influence the choices
they make. To help us understand how people make decisions, we are interested in information
about you, specifically whether you actually take the time to read the instructions; if you don’t,
some results may fail to tell us very much about decision making in the real world. To help
us confirm that you have read these instructions, please ignore the question below about how
you are feeling and instead check only the ’none of the above’ option. Thank you very much.
Options: [Interested, Distressed, Excited, Upset, Strong, Scared, Hostile, Enthusiastic, Proud,
Irritable, Alert, Inspired, Nervous, Determined, Attentive, Jittery, Active, None of the above]

Section in Survey 1 only (Shown to 1,778 respondents)
   Q2.1 Instructions: Now imagine that you were appointed by the United States government
to choose policies that would aid poor families. Below we ask you about your policy preferences.
Please pay close attention to the description, because this is your main role in this survey. The
government is considering giving cash transfers to low income households on a case-by-case basis.
Consider the case of a married individual with 2 small children. He has a part-time job. He
earns $20,000 per year (net after taxes), and this is the sole source of income for his household.
An additional text is shown, chosen with equal probability from the following groups:
    No-Info Treatment Arm.
    Hard-Working Treatment Arm: He has worked very hard his entire life. However, he cannot
find a full-time job because his line of work has been dramatically affected by the recent economic
crisis.
    Lazy Treatment Arm: He has been lazy for his entire life and as a result cannot find a
full-time job.
    African-American Treatment Arm: He is African American.
    White Treatment Arm: He is White.
    Mexican Treatment Arm: He was born in Mexico.
    American Treatment Arm: He was born in the United States.
    Disabled Treatment Arm: He has a disability.
    Non-Disabled Treatment Arm: He does not have a disability.
    Q2.2 Question: Please remember that your choice applies to this individual only, because
the government is making decisions on a case-by-case basis. What amount of cash transfer
would you give to this individual? Options: [$0 per week ($0 per year), $20 per week ($1,040
per year), $40 per week ($2,080 per year), $60 per week ($3,120 per year), $80 per week ($4,160
per year), $100 per week ($5,200 per year), $120 per week ($6,240 per year), $140 per week
($7,280 per year), $160 per week ($8,320 per year), $180 per week ($9,360 per year), $200 per

                                                v
week ($10,400 per year)]
    Q2.3 Question: The government followed your advice and will offer this individual a cash
transfer of [Here goes choice to question Q2.2 ] in accordance with Program A. In addition to
Program A, the government can offer Program B.
    Program B also involves a cash transfer, but in this program the individual will receive more
money and in exchange will be required to work a fixed number of hours per week for the local
government. If this individual does not comply with the work requirement, he will not receive
the cash transfer. Due to overstaffing and management costs, even though the individual will
need to work hard in Program B, his efforts will not produce any value for society whatsoever.
    If the government offered Program B, it would be up to the individual to choose Program
A or Program B, but he could not choose both.
    Please remember that your choice applies to this individual only: the government is making
decisions on a case-by-case basis. Given that Program A was already offered to the individual,
would you recommend that the government offer Program B as an alternative? Options: [Yes,
I would recommend that the government offer Program B as an alternative to Program A, No,
I would recommend that the government offer Program A only]
    Q2.4 Question: If answer to question Q2.3 was positive, the respondent is asked the following
question. Please tell us which combination of cash transfer and work requirement you would
offer to this individual for Program B. Recall that the individual could choose either Program
A or Program B, but not both:
    Options: Amount of cash transfer
    [Amount chosen in Q2.2+$20 per week,. . . ,Amount chosen in Q2.2+$200 per week]
    Options: Number of hours of work in a local governmental agency in exchange of cash
transfer
    [1 hour per week, 2 hours per week, 3 hours per week, 4 hours per week, 5 hours per week,
6 hours per week, 7 hours per week, 8 hours per week, 9 hours per week, 10 hours per week]
    Q2.5 Question: If answer to question Q2.3 was positive, the respondent is asked the following
question. Do you think the individual will choose Program A (unconditional cash transfer)
or Program B (larger cash transfer conditional on work requirement)? Options: [Very likely
Program A, More likely Program A, Equally likely Program A or B, More likely Program B,
Very likely Program B]
    Q2.6 Question: Previously you had the option of recommending that the government offer
Program B, which combined a cash transfer with a work requirement. Could you please explain
why you did or did not recommend the Program B option?




                                               vi
Section in Survey 2 only (Shown to 808 respondents)
   Q2.1 Instructions: Now imagine that you were appointed by the United States government
to choose policies that would aid poor families. Below we ask you about your policy preferences.
Please pay close attention to the description, because this is your main role in this survey. The
government is considering giving cash transfers to low income households on a case-by-case
basis. An additional text is shown, chosen with equal probability from the following groups:
    No-Info Treatment Arm: The government is considering giving cash transfers to low income
households on a case-by-case basis. Consider the case of a married individual with 2 small
children. He has a part-time job. He earns $20,000 per year (net after taxes), and this is the
sole source of income for his household.
    Hard-Working Treatment Arm: The government is considering giving cash transfers to low
income households on a case-by-case basis. Consider the case of a married individual with 2
small children. He has a part-time job. He earns $20,000 per year (net after taxes), and this is
the sole source of income for his household. He has worked very hard his entire life. However,
he cannot find a full-time job because his line of work has been dramatically affected by the
recent economic crisis.
    Lazy Treatment Arm: The government is considering giving cash transfers to low income
households on a case-by-case basis. Consider the case of a married individual with 2 small
children. He has a part-time job. He earns $20,000 per year (net after taxes), and this is the
sole source of income for his household. He has been lazy for his entire life and as a result
cannot find a full-time job.
    Hard-Working Job Search Treatment Arm: The government is considering giving cash trans-
fers to low income households on a case-by-case basis. Consider the case of a married individual
with 2 small children. He has a part-time job. He earns $20,000 per year (net after taxes), and
this is the sole source of income for his household. He recently tried to find a full-time job.
However, he could not find it despite putting much effort in the job search because his line of
work has been dramatically affected by the recent economic crisis.
    Lazy Job Search Treatment Arm: The government is considering giving cash transfers to low
income households on a case-by-case basis. Consider the case of a married individual with 2
small children. He has a part-time job. He earns $20,000 per year (net after taxes), and this is
the sole source of income for his household. He recently tried to find a full-time job. However,
he did not find it because he did not put much effort in the job search.
    No-Info College Treatment Arm: The government is considering giving cash transfers to low
income individuals on a case-by-case basis. Consider the case of a single individual that recently
graduated from college at the age of 21. He has a part-time job. He earns $20,000 per year (net
after taxes), and this is his sole source of income.

                                               vii
    Hard-Working College Treatment Arm: The government is considering giving cash transfers
to low income individuals on a case-by-case basis. Consider the case of a single individual that
recently graduated from college at the age of 21. He has a part-time job. He earns $20,000 per
year (net after taxes), and this is his sole source of income. He recently tried to find a full-time
job. However, he could not find it despite putting much effort in the job search because his line
of work has been dramatically affected by the recent economic crisis.
    Lazy College Treatment Arm: The government is considering giving cash transfers to low
income individuals on a case-by-case basis. Consider the case of a single individual that recently
graduated from college at the age of 21. He has a part-time job. He earns $20,000 per year
(net after taxes), and this is his sole source of income. He recently tried to find a full-time job.
However, he did not find it because he did not put much effort in the job search.
    Q2.2 Question: Please remember that your choice applies to this individual only, because
the government is making decisions on a case-by-case basis. What amount of cash transfer
would you give to this individual? Options: [$0 per week ($0 per year), $20 per week ($1,040
per year), $40 per week ($2,080 per year), $60 per week ($3,120 per year), $80 per week ($4,160
per year), $100 per week ($5,200 per year), $120 per week ($6,240 per year), $140 per week
($7,280 per year), $160 per week ($8,320 per year), $180 per week ($9,360 per year), $200 per
week ($10,400 per year)]
    Q2.3 Question: The government followed your advice and will offer this individual a cash
transfer of [Here goes choice to question Q2.2 ] in accordance with Program A. In addition to
Program A, the government can offer Program B.
    Program B also involves a cash transfer, but in this program the individual will receive more
money and in exchange will be required to work a fixed number of hours per week for the local
government. If this individual does not comply with the work requirement, he will not receive
the cash transfer. Due to overstaffing and management costs, even though the individual will
need to work hard in Program B, his efforts will not produce any value for society whatsoever.
    If the government offered Program B, it would be up to the individual to choose Program
A or Program B, but he could not choose both.
    Please remember that your choice applies to this individual only: the government is making
decisions on a case-by-case basis. Given that Program A was already offered to the individual,
would you recommend that the government offer Program B as an alternative? Options: [Yes,
I would recommend that the government offer Program B as an alternative to Program A, No,
I would recommend that the government offer Program A only]
    Q2.4 Question: If answer to question Q2.3 was positive, the respondent is asked the following
question. Please tell us which combination of cash transfer and work requirement you would
offer to this individual for Program B. Recall that the individual could choose either Program


                                                viii
A or Program B, but not both:
   Options: Amount of cash transfer
   [Amount chosen in Q2.2+$20 per week,. . . ,Amount chosen in Q2.2+$200 per week]
   Options: Number of hours of work in a local governmental agency in exchange of cash
transfer
   [1 hour per week, 2 hours per week, 3 hours per week, 4 hours per week, 5 hours per week,
6 hours per week, 7 hours per week, 8 hours per week, 9 hours per week, 10 hours per week]
   Q2.5 Question: If answer to question Q2.3 was positive, the respondent is asked the following
question. Do you think the individual will choose Program A (unconditional cash transfer)
or Program B (larger cash transfer conditional on work requirement)? Options: [Very likely
Program A, More likely Program A, Equally likely Program A or B, More likely Program B,
Very likely Program B]
   Q2.6 Question: Previously you had the option of recommending that the government offer
Program B, which combined a cash transfer with a work requirement. Could you please explain
why you did or did not recommend the Program B option?

Section in Survey 3 only (Shown to 502 respondents)
    Q3.1 Question: Do you agree with the following statement? “One’s income is mostly the
result of one’s individual effort rather than luck.” Options: [Strongly agree, Agree, Neither agree
nor disagree, Disagree, Strongly disagree]
    Q3.2 Question: Here are two opinions about poor people in this country. Which comes
closest to your view? Options: [They are poor because they have been unlucky, They are poor
because of laziness and lack of will power]
    Q3.3 Question: Should government spending on aid to poor families increase, decrease, or
stay the same? Options: [Increase by 50% or more, Increase by 40%, Increase by 30%, Increase
by 20%, Increase by 10%, Stay the same, Decrease by 10%, Decrease by 20%, Decrease by 30%,
Decrease by 40%, Decrease by 50% or more]
    Q3.4 Question: Now imagine that you were appointed by the United States government to
choose policies about aid to poor families.
The government is considering giving a cash transfer to low income households. The government
is evaluating these transfers on a case-by-case basis. Consider the following two cases:
    Individual A: a married individual with 2 small children. He has a part-time job. He earns
$20,000 per year (net after taxes), and this is the sole source of income for his household. He
has worked very hard his entire life. However, he cannot find a full-time job because his line of
work has been dramatically affected by the recent economic crisis.



                                                ix
    Individual B: a married individual with 2 small children. He has a part-time job. He earns
$20,000 per year (net after taxes), and this is the sole source of income for his household. He
has been lazy for his entire life and as a result cannot find a full-time job. Which of these two
individuals is more deserving of a cash transfer of $5,000 per year? Options: [Individual A is
much more deserving, Individual A is slightly more deserving, They are both equally deserving,
Individual B is slightly more deserving, Individual B is much more deserving]
    Q3.5 Question: There are different ways for the government to distribute money to poor
families. Some programs provide unconditional cash transfers, while other programs make the
amount of the cash transfer conditional on some characteristics - such as how much the recipient
works.
    The Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) is an example of the latter option. The EITC is a
refundable tax credit for low- to moderate-income working individuals and couples’ particularly
those with children. In a nutshell, it gives more money to low-income individuals who work
more.
    To illustrate how the EITC works, consider a first individual who works 15 hours per week
at $10 per hour, making an annual gross income of $7,800. A second individual works 20 hours
per week at the same job for $10 per hour, making an annual gross income of $15,600. Under
an unconditional cash transfer, both individuals would get the same cash transfer from the
government. Under the Earned Income Tax Credit, the second individual would get a cash
transfer that is twice as high as the first individual’s because he worked twice as many hours.
    Imagine that you have been appointed by the U.S. government to decide how the government
should spend the fixed amount of money it has for these two programs. What percentage of
this fixed funding would you assign to each program? The percentages must add up to 100.
    Unconditional Cash Transfers         Options: [Any integer between 0 and 100]
    Earned Income Tax Credit          Options: [Any integer between 0 and 100]
    Q3.6 Question: Do you agree with the following statement? “Beneficiaries of social pro-
grams should be required to do some work in exchange for government aid. For example, they
could perform a few hours of work per week for their local governments.” Options: [Strongly
agree, Agree, Neither agree nor disagree, Disagree, Strongly disagree]
    Q3.7 Question: Could you please tell us why you agree/disagree with the previous state-
ment?
    Q3.8 Question: Do you agree with the following statement? “If beneficiaries of social
programs were required to do some work in exchange for government aid (for example, perform
a few hours of work per week for their local governments), that would prevent lazy people from
participating in social programs.” Options: [Strongly agree, Agree, Neither agree nor disagree,
Disagree, Strongly disagree]


                                               x
Concluding Questions (Shown to All Respondents)
   Q4.1 Question: In the past three months, have you donated some of your time to an
organization that supports those in need? Options: [Yes, No]
    Q4.2 This is an attention check. Question: Individuals have different ways of following
news. Nevertheless, we would like you to skip this question to show that you are reading
carefully. Please do not check any of the following options: Options: [Print Newspapers, TV
News, Online Newspapers, Other Online Sources (e.g., blogs, social networks)]
    Q4.3 Question: In your opinion, were the questions included in this survey easy or difficult
to understand? Options: [Easy to understand, Neither easy nor difficult, Difficult to understand]
    Thank you for your time. Please click on the arrow below to finish.




                                               xi
