NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EMERGENCE OF WEAK, DESPOTIC AND INCLUSIVE STATES
Daron Acemoglu
James A. Robinson
Working Paper 23657
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23657

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017

We thank Pooya Molavi for exceptional research assistance, Marco Battaglini, Roland
Benabou, Kim Hill, Josh Ober and Mark Pyzyk for discussions and seminar participants at the
ASSA 2017, CIFAR, Chicago, NBER, University of Illinois, Lund, Northwestern and Yale for
useful comments and suggestions. Daron Acemoglu gratefully acknowledges financial support
from the Carnegie Foundation and ARO MURI Award No. W911NF-12-1-0509. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Emergence of Weak, Despotic and Inclusive States
Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 23657
August 2017
JEL No. H4,H7,P16
ABSTRACT
Societies under similar geographic and economic conditions and subject to similar external
influences nonetheless develop very different types of states. At one extreme are weak states
with little capacity and ability to regulate economic or social relations. At the other are despotic
states which dominate civil society. Yet there are others which are locked into an ongoing
competition with civil society and it is these, not the despotic ones, that develop the greatest
capacity. We develop a dynamic contest model of the potential competition between state
(controlled by a ruler or a group of elites) and civil society (representing non-elite citizens),
where both players can invest to increase their power. The model leads to different types of
steady states depending on initial conditions. One type of steady state, corresponding to a weak
state, emerges when civil society is strong relative to the state (e.g., having developed social
norms limiting political hierarchy). Another type of steady state, corresponding to a despotic
state, originates from initial conditions where the state is powerful and civil society is weak. A
third type of steady state, which we refer to as an inclusive state, emerges when state and civil
society are more evenly matched. In this case, each party has greater incentives to invest to keep
up with the other, and this leads to the most powerful and capable type of state, while
simultaneously incentivizing civil society to be equally powerful as well. Our framework
highlights that comparative statics with respect to structural factors such as geography, economic
conditions or external threats, are conditional — in the sense that depending on initial conditions
they can shift a society into or out of the basin of attraction of the inclusive state.

Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics, E52-446
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and CIFAR
and also NBER
daron@mit.edu
James A. Robinson
University of Chicago
Harris School of Public Policy
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, Illinois 60637
and NBER
jamesrobinson@uchicago.edu

1

Introduction

The capacity of the state to enforce laws, provide public services, and regulate and tax economic
activity varies enormously across countries. The dominant paradigm in social science to explain
the development of state capacity links this diversity to the ability of a powerful group, elite or
charismatic leader to dominate other powerful actors in society and build institutions such as a fiscal
system or bureaucracy (e.g., Huntington, 1968). This paradigm also relates this ability to certain
structural factors such as geography, ecology, natural resources and population density (Mahdavy,
1970, Diamond, 1997, Herbst, 2000, Fukuyama, 2011, 2014), the threat of war (Hintze, 1975, Brewer,
1989, Tilly, 1975, 1990, Besley and Persson, 2009, 2011, O’Brien, 2011, Gennaioli and Voth, 2015),
or the nature of economic activity (Mann, 1986, 1993, Acemoglu, 2005, Spruyt, 2009, Besley and
Persson, 2011, Mayshar, Moav and Neeman, 2011). However, historically, societies with similar
ecologies, geographies, initial economic structures and external threats have diverged sharply in terms
of the development of their states. Moreover, in many instances in which the state has built capacity,
it has not dominated a meek society; on the contrary, it has had to continuously contend and struggle
with a strong, assertive (civil) society.1
These dynamics are illustrated by the historical evolution of the power of the state and statesociety relations in Europe. European nations share not only a great deal of history and culture but
also broadly similar economic conditions. And yet, the types of states and political dynamics we
observe in the continent over the last several centuries are hugely varied. At one end of the spectrum,
Prussia in the 19th century constructed an autocratic, militarized state under an absolutist monarchy,
backed by a traditional landowning Junker class, which continued to exercise enough authority to help
derail the Weimar democracy in the 1920s (Evans, 2005). Meanwhile, just to its south, the Swiss state
attained its final institutionalization in 1848, not as a consequence of an absolutist monarchy, but
from the bottom-up construction of independent republican cantons based on rural-urban communes.
A little further south, places in the Balkans, such as Montenegro, never had centralized state authority
at all. Prior to 1852 Montenegro was in effect a theocracy, but its ruling Bishop, the Vladika, could
exercise no coercive authority over the clans which dominated the society partly via a complex web
of traditions and social norms. As a consequence of this lack of state authority, blood feuds and other
inter-clan conflicts were extremely common.2
1

Throughout, we use “civil society” and “society” interchangeably when this will cause no confusion.
Simić (1967) and Boehm (1986) emphasize the importance of clans and traditions as a constraint on state power
in Montenegro (see also Djilas, 1966). For example, “Continued attempts to impose centralized government were in
conflict with tribal loyalty” (Simić, 1967, p. 87), and “It was only when their central leader attempted to institutionalize
forcible means of controlling feuds that the tribesmen stood firm in their right to follow their ancient traditions. This
was because they perceived in such interference a threat to their basic political autonomy.” (Boehm, 1986, p. 186).
Indeed, the first attempt at a codified law in 1796 by Vladika Peter I reflected the fact that order in society was
regulated by the institution of blood feuds. It included the clauses: “A man who strikes another with his hand, foot, or
chibouk, shall pay him a fine of fifty sequins. If the man struck at once kills his aggressor, he shall not be punished. Nor
shall a man be punished for killing a thief caught in the act...” and “If a Montenegrin in self-defense kills a man who
has insulted him ... it shall be considered that the killing was involuntary.” (quoted in Durham, 1928, pp. 78-88). The
Montenegrin politician and writer Milovan Djilas describes the importance of blood feuds in the 1950s thus “the men of
several generations have died at the hands of Montenegrins, men of the same faith and name. My father’s grandfather,
my own two grandfathers, my father, and my uncle were killed, as though a dread curse lay upon them . . . generation
after generation, and the bloody chain was not broken. The inherited fear and hatred of feuding clans was mightier
than fear and hatred of the enemy, the Turks. It seems to me that I was born with blood in my eyes. My first sight was
of blood. My first words were blood and bathed in blood” (1958, pp. 3-4).
2

1

This diversity is hard to explain based on the structural differences. Switzerland and Montenegro
are both mountainous (which Braudel, 1966, emphasized as crucial), were both part of the Roman
Empire, have been Christian for centuries, were specialized in similar economic activities such as
herding, and have been involved in continuous wars against external foes. Before the founding of
the Swiss Confederation in 1291, feuding was also common in that area. Scott, for example, notes:
“There is general agreement amongst recent historians that the origins of the Swiss Confederation
lay in the search for public order. The provisions of the Bundesbrief of 1291 were clearly directed
against feuding in the inner cantons” (1995, p. 98; see also Blickel, 1992). The parallels between
Switzerland and Prussia are even stronger. Both countries have very close cultural and ethnic roots
(and historically Switzerland had been settled by Germanic tribes, particularly the Alemanni), and
have shared similar religious identities before and after the Reformation. Though Prussia, unlike
Switzerland, was not part of the Holy Roman Empire, its institutions have been heavily influenced
by those of the Empire and had feudal roots similar to those of Switzerland.
In this paper, we develop a simple theory of state-society relations where the competition and
conflict between state and (civil) society is the main driver of the institutional change and the emergence of state capacity (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2012). Small differences, such as those between
Prussia, Switzerland and Montenegro which we further discuss below, can set off political dynamics
in very different directions. In our model, though the elites that control the state wish to establish
dominance over society, the ability of society to develop its own strengths (in the form of coordination,
social norms and local organization) is central, because it induces the state to become even stronger
in order to compete with society. Likewise, the race against the state encourages society to invest
further in its capacity. When this balance between state and society is not achieved, either the state
fully dominates society or society is powerful and the state remains weak. Crucially, however, when
society is weak, state capacity is relatively limited as well, because the state can control society easily
and does not need to invest much in its own capacity (strength).3 In addition to highlighting the
vital role of the race between state and society in the development of state capacity, our theory shows
that, just as in the examples discussed above, polities with similar initial conditions and subject to
similar structural influences can nonetheless experience divergent state-society relations and evolution
of state capacity, because they may fall into the basins of attraction of different dynamic equilibria.
This history-dependent development of state capacity and our main theoretical results are summarized in Figure 1. This figure plots the global dynamics of state-society relations. Region I illustrates
the Huntingtonian path, approximating the political dynamics of Prussia. Here, the state is stronger
than civil society to start with and fully dominates it; for this reason, we call this type of state
despotic. Region III is the case in which the social norms of the society, especially in how they are
able to act collectively and control political power and hierarchy, are strong and this prevents the
emergence of a powerful state, paving the way to weak states as in Montenegro. Region II illustrates
the happy middle ground where state and society are initially in balance, and this triggers a positive
competition between the two, whereby they both become stronger over time. We refer to this type of
3
Throughout, we use power, strength and capacity interchangeably. In practice, one might wish to distinguish
between the underlying, infrastructural power of the state, which then creates capacity to achieve certain goals or
implement certain objectives, but in our abstract model, this distinction does not arise.

2

Power of the State

Despotic State:
Prussia,
China

Region I

Region II
Inclusive State:
UK,
Switzerland

Region III
Weak State:
Montenegro,
Somalia

Power of Society

Figure 1: The emergence and dynamics of weak, despotic and inclusive states.
state, which best resembles the Swiss path, as the inclusive state.4 As the figure shows, it is in this
inclusive case that the state achieves the greatest capacity. The fact that the capacity of the state
is greater in this case than in Region I highlights that it is the competition between state and civil
society that triggers greater investments by the state (or the ruler and elites controlling it)
Our theory and Figure 1 suggest that divergent political paths such as those between Prussia,
Switzerland and Montenegro may lie not in large differences in structural factors, but in small differences that get amplified as a result of the competition between state and society. Such small
differences indeed favored the development of a powerful state in Prussia, which emerged out of the
militarized state of the Teutonic Knights to the east of the River Elbe, where feudalism was possibly the most intense in Europe (Gerschenkron, 1943, Moore, 1966, Clark, 2009). In contrast, they
likely favored the weak state path in Montenegro, where the ‘herdsman’ culture was very strong and
a legitimate political order like the Holy Roman Empire was absent for several centuries. In contradistinction to both of these cases, the powers of state and society were more evenly balanced in
Switzerland. Differently from Prussia, Swiss peasants were more ‘free’ (Steinberg, 2015), independent
cities such as Basel, Bern and Zürich played a more important economic and political role, and the
major demographic changes of the 14th century, in particular the Black Death of the 1340s, appear to
have weakened the elites even further (e.g., Morerod and Favrod, 2014). Compared to Montenegro,
4
This terminology is motivated by the fact that, in this case, the state is not just strong (capable) but also evenly
matched with civil society, which is then able to actively participate in political conflict and partially check the domination of the state and the elites that control it.

3

Switzerland’s history of established political order under the Holy Roman Empire and of corporations
such as monasteries and cathedral chapters (Church and Head, 2013, Morerod and Favrod, 2014) may
have created the small differences facilitating the emergence of a state capable of competing against
civil society.
Theoretically, our setup is one of a dynamic contest between two players, the elite controlling
the state and the (civil) society representing non-elite citizens. At each date, the state and society
both choose investments in their strength, and these strengths determine both the overall output in
the economy which is distributed between the elite controlling the state and the rest of the citizens,
and how this distribution takes place. We introduce some degree of economies of scale in the contest
technology so that the cost of investment for either state or society becomes higher if their strength
falls below a certain level.5 The interplay of contest incentives and the presence of economies of
scale underpins the emergence of three stable steady states as shown in Figure 1: when one party is
significantly stronger than the other, the weaker player is discouraged from investing. But since as
in contest models, part of the reason why each player invests is to be stronger than the other, the
discouragement of the weaker party also reduces the investment incentives of the dominant player.
In contrast, when the two players are evenly matched, they are both induced to invest more. These
results are an application of Harris and Vickers’ (1984, 1987) discouragement effect.6 After illustrating
the workings of our model in the simplest possible case where the players act myopically, we show
that similar results obtain when the players are forward-looking but sufficiently impatient.
Though our theory does not link the evolution of state capacity to structural factors, our general
framework provides comparative static results that clarify when a society is more likely to be in the
basin of attraction of different types of steady states (as already hinted by Figure 1). Specifically,
changes in underlying parameters — corresponding to technologies, economic conditions and the
external environment — change the basins of attraction of the three steady states. For example,
starting from the basin of attraction of Region III, a need for greater coordination in the economy,
resulting either because of increasing importance of public goods or national defense, can shift a
society into Region II, and thus trigger the long-run development of the state. However, crucially,
our framework also clarifies that the effects of structural factors are conditional — the same change
in external threats can also shift a society from Region II to Region I, thus triggering the evolution
of a despotic state and ultimately limiting the growth of state capacity. This, for example, explains
why theories such as those of Tilly mentioned above, which emphasize the threat of war as a driver
of state building, tend to have only limited explanatory power (see Pincus and Robinson, 2016, for a
historical discussion).
Our model is purposefully reduced-form and simple, which helps to highlight the potential generality of the forces we are emphasizing. One drawback of this strategy is that the mapping from
the investments by the state and society in our model to the data is not as clear as it would have
5

This appears to be a reasonable assumption both for society and the state. Many scholars have argued that there
are increasing returns to collective action (e.g., Marwell and Oliver, 1993, Pearson, 2000) or the acquisition of social
capital (Francois, 2002). It also appears reasonable that there are fixed costs involved in the creation of fiscal systems
or bureaucracies (e.g. Dharmapalaa, Slemrod and Wilson, 2011, Gauthier, 2013).
6
See Dechenaux, Kovenock and Sheremeta (2015) for a survey of experimental evidence on discouragement effect in
contests. See also Aghion, Bloom, Blundell, Griffith and Howitt (2005) and Aghion and Griffith (2008) for evidence on
the discouragement effect in the context of innovation investments.

4

been under a setup with explicit microstructure. We attempt to partially rectify this in Section 7
by revisiting the evolution of different types of states in Ancient Greece through the lenses of our
framework, and clarify the empirical content of the investments and the political economy forces in
our model. Specifically, this example, as well as several others from stateless societies studied by
anthropologists and discussed in Flannery and Marcus (2014) and Acemoglu and Robinson (2018),
show that many societies invest in and develop a whole range of norms and practices in order to
limit political hierarchy and the capability of powerful agents to impose their wishes. These norms
and practices in turn discourage the development of state capacity when initial political hierarchy is
limited and state institutions are weak, but can morph into institutional constraints on the exercise
of state power when initial state institutions are more developed as in the case of Athens.
Our paper is related to a number of literatures. As already discussed above, prominent in the
social science literature on state building are approaches that situate the roots of state capacity in
the ability of the state and groups controlling it to dominate society.7 In addition, these approaches
also emphasize the role of structural factors in triggering or preventing state building. Our theory
thus sharply differs from these approaches, and has much more in common with a few works in
sociology and political science emphasizing the interaction of state and society. Most importantly,
Migdal (1988, 2001) argues that weak states are a consequence of a strong society (as in our Region
III). Scott (2010) has similarly stressed the ability of people to resist the state and its interference.
Putnam (1993) argued that a strong society leads to better governance and bureaucratic effectiveness.
None of these scholars note our key distinction from the previous literature — the idea that state
capacity develops most strongly when state and civil society are matched in terms of their strengths
and compete dynamically.8 Acemoglu (2005) argues that the capacity of the state is highest when
it is “consensually strong”. In his model this emerges not because of competition between state and
society, but as a result of a repeated game equilibrium in which citizens are expected to replace rulers
who do not provide sufficient public goods or otherwise misbehave.
Our work is also related to a large literature in archaeology focusing on how societies start the
process of state formation (so-called “pristine state formation”). Most of these, for example Flannery
(1999) or Flannery and Marcus (2013), emphasize a ‘top-down’ elite centric approach, but other work,
particularly by Blanton and Fargher (2008), has placed equal weight on the role of society.
Finally, our model is an example of a dynamic contest, though most of our analysis involves myopic
players. Static models of contests in economics go back at least to Tullock (1980), and have been
7

In addition to the works such as Huntington (1968), Tilly (1990) and Fukuyama (2011) mentioned above, this
includes authors emphasizing the role of state capacity in enabling elites controlling the state to dominate society via
various means, including repression (e.g., Anderson, 1974, Hechter and Brustein, 1980, Slater, 2010, Saylor, 2014).
The recent economics literature, mentioned above, mirrors these approaches. For example, Besley and Persson (2009,
2011) focus on the incentives of the elites controlling the state to undertake investments to build state capacity and link
this to the probability that they will lose power domestically and to external threats. Gennaioli and Voth (2015) develop
a model of the interaction between warfare and state capacity, while Mayshar, Moav and Neeman (2011) emphasize
the effect of the type of crop on state building. Other work by Acemoglu, Robinson and Santos-Villagran (2013) and
Acemoglu, Ticchi and Vindigni (2011) again emphasize elite incentives.
8
Our theory is also related to a few works stressing the implications of state centralization on civil society’s organization. These latter works include Tilly (1995), who illustrates these political dynamics using the British case in the
18th and 19th centuries, Acemoglu, Robinson and Torvik (2016), who develop a formal model along these lines, and
Habermas (1989), who suggests that the origins of the “public sphere”, which can be viewed as an important aspect of
strong society, lie in the process of state formation.

5

more systematically studied by Dixit (1987), Skaperdas (1992, 1996), Cornes and Hartley (2005),
and Corchon (2007). They are similar to models of (patent) races as in Loury (1979), and to all-pay
auctions as studied, among others, by Baye et al. (1996), Krishna and Morgan (1997) and Siegel
(2009). Our formulation uses a contest function in differences, introduced by Hirshleifer (1989), and
is mathematically closer to all-pay auctions (e.g., Che and Gale, 2000).9 Dynamic contests and related
racing models are more challenging and various special cases have been discussed in Fudenberg et al.
(1983), Harris and Vickers (1985, 1987), Grossman and Shapiro (1987), Grossman and Kim (1996),
Konrad (2009, 2012), and Cao (2014), while the literature on dynamic public good games deals
with related problems, but crucially without the contest element (e.g., Levhari and Mirman, 1980,
Lockwood and Thomas, 2002, and Battaglini, Nunnari and Palfrey, 2014). None of these papers, and
to the best of our knowledge no others, derive the possibility of three locally stable steady states with
different configurations of power.10
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we introduce our main model.
In Section 3, we characterize the dynamic equilibrium and steady states of this model when players
are short-lived or myopic. To maximize transparency, this section uses a number of simplifying
assumptions, many of which are relaxed later. Section 4 analyzes the same model with forwardlooking players, and establishes that the same results when these players are sufficiently impatient.
Section 5 relaxes one of the most important simplifying assumptions, allowing the investments of the
state and civil society to also affect the size of the pie to be divided. In this setup, it also provides
additional comparative static results on how different steady states and their basins of attraction
are affected by changes in parameters. Section 7 shows how our conceptual framework is useful
for interpreting the divergent paths of state capacity and state-society relations in Ancient Greece.
Finally, Section 8 concludes, while the Appendix provides some generalizations and microfoundations
for the setup studied in the main text.

2

Basic Model

In this section, we introduce our basic model, aimed at capturing the dynamics of conflict between
state and society discussed in the Introduction. We consider the state to be controlled by a ruler or
group of elites acting in a coordinated manner — motivating our convention of using elite and state
interchangeably in this paper. The main decision for the elite will be how much to invest in the power
of the state, which captures, among other things, the military power, the presence of state employees
(i.e., what Mann, 1986, refers to as the “infrastructural power of the state”) and the ability of the
state to regulate and tax economic activity. On the other side, we will consider groups interacting
with the state that do not have direct control over its actions. These groups could be other (e.g., local)
elites or regular citizens. Throughout, we will refer to them as “civil society” or simply as “society”.
Civil society will also invest in its power, partly as a defensive measure, to balance the power of
the elites and the state. As already discussed in the Introduction, these investments correspond to
9

We show in the Appendix that the particular formulation is not critical for the results since the discouragement
effect arises in many standard models.
10
In a very different context, Benabou, Ticchi and Vindigni (2015) emphasize how the initial balance of power between
religion and science can influence the long-run evolution of a society.

6

society’s efforts to coordinate its activities, its local organization and social norms that are useful for
limiting political hierarchy and the capability of powerful agents and the state to impose their wishes
on non-elite agents.
In this section we start with our general framework. We then analyze the cases in which both state
and civil society are myopic (e.g., consisting of non-overlapping generations) and fully forward-looking
separately. The framework we present here is reduced form. The Appendix outlines a model that
is more explicit about the economic and conflict decisions that civil society takes, and shows that it
maps into our reduced-form model.

2.1

Preferences and Conflict

We start with a discrete time setup, where period length is ∆ > 0 and will later be taken to be small,
so that we work with differential rather than difference equations in characterizing the dynamics. At
time t, the state variables inherited from the previous period are (xt−∆ , st−∆ ) ∈ [0, 1]2 , where the
first element corresponds to the strength of civil society and the second to the strength of the state
controlled by the elite.
At each point in time, the elite or the state is represented by a single player, and civil society is also
represented by a single player. In the next two sections, we study both the case in which these players
are short-lived and are immediately replaced by another player (so that we have a non-overlapping
generations model with “myopic” players), and the case in which players are long-lived and maximize
their discounted sum of utilities.
At time t, players simultaneously choose their investments, ixt ≥ 0 and ist ≥ 0, which determine
their current strengths according to the equations:
xt = xt−∆ + ixt ∆ − δ∆,

(1)

st = st−∆ + ist ∆ − δ∆,

(2)

and

where δ > 0 is the depreciation of the strength of both parties between periods. Both investment and
depreciation are multiplied by the period length, ∆, since they represent “flow” variables, and when
period length is taken to be small, they will be suitably downscaled.11
The cost of investment for civil society during a period of length ∆ is given as ∆ · C̃x (ixt , xt−∆ )
where
C̃x (ixt , xt−∆ )


=

cx (ixt )

cx (ixt )
+ (γ x − xt−∆ ) ixt

if xt−∆ > γ x ,
if xt−∆ ≤ γ x .

This cost function is multiplied by ∆, since it is the cost of investing an amount ixt during the period
of length ∆ (as captured by equation (1)). The presence of the term γ x > 0, on the other hand,
captures the “increasing returns” nature of conflict mentioned in the Introduction: starting from a
low level of conflict capacity, it is more costly to build up this capacity. We specify this in a very
simple form here, with the cost of investments increasing linearly as last period’s conflict capacity
11

Assuming that depreciation is independent of the current level of the strength of the state or civil society is for
convenience only. In addition, we can easily allow the two state variables to have different depreciation rates, but do
not do so in order to prevent the notation from becoming more cumbersome.

7

falls below the threshold γ x . This increasing returns aspect plays an important role in our analysis
as we emphasize below.
The cost of investment for the state during a period of length ∆ is similarly given as ∆· C̃s (ist , st−∆ )
where
C̃s (ist , st−∆ ) =


cs (ist )

cs (ist )
+ (γ s − st−∆ )ist

if st−∆ > γ s ,
if st−∆ ≤ γ s .

In these expressions, it will often be more convenient to eliminate investment levels and directly
work with the two state variables, xt and st , especially when we take ∆ to be small and transition
to continuous time. In preparation for this transition, let us substitute out the investment levels and
observe that the cost function for civil society and state can be written as:




xt − xt−∆
xt − xt−∆
Cx (xt , xt−∆ ) = cx
+ δ + max {γ x − xt−∆ , 0}
+δ ,
∆
∆
and


Cs (st , st−∆ ) = cs




st − st−∆
st − st−∆
+ δ + max {γ s − st−∆ , 0}
+δ ,
∆
∆

where the increasing returns to scale nature of the cost function is now captured by the max term.12
During the lifetime of each generation, a polity with state strength st and civil society strength
xt produces output/surplus given by
f (xt , st ),

(3)

where f is assumed to be nondecreasing and differentiable.13 The dependence of the total output
of the economy on the strength of the state captures the various efficiency-enhancing roles of state
capacity. In addition, we allow for output to depend on the strength of civil society as well, which
might be because a strong civil society prevents extractive uses of the capacity of the state that
tend to reduce the total output or surplus in the economy, or because its greater cooperation and
coordination improves economic efficiency.
We next discuss how the output of society is distributed between the elite (controlling the state)
and citizens. At date t, if the elite and civil society (citizens) decide to fight, then one side will win
and capture all of the output of the economy, and the other side receives zero. Winning probabilities
are functions of relative strengths. In particular, the elite will win if
st ≥ xt + σ t ,
where σ t is drawn from the distribution H independently of all past events. We denote the density
of the distribution function H by h. The existence of the random term σ t captures the fact that
12

Note that when we consider the limit ∆ → 0, we obtain
Cx (ẋt )

=

cx (ẋt + δ) + max {γ x − xt , 0} (ẋt + δ),

Cs (ṡt )

=

cs (ṡt + δ) + max {γ s − st , 0} (ṡt + δ).

13

The fact that (3) refers to output during the lifetime of each generation means that each generation will produce
this quantity regardless of ∆ > 0. As we show more explicitly in footnote 14, this feature is important to ensure that the
incentives for investment do not vanish when we consider short-lived players as in the next section and ∆ → 0. (When
we return to long-lived, forward-looking players, incentives for investment will not vanish and similar results apply as
∆ → 0 even if (3) is multiplied with the period of length ∆; see footnote 13).

8

various stochastic factors impact the outcome of any conflict. Throughout, since both sides have the
same assessment of the outcome of conflict, we will presume that they divide total output according
to their expected shares, but whether they do so or actually engage in conflict is immaterial for our
results.
This specification of the stochastic contest function, and a symmetry assumption which we will
shortly impose, implies that when the strengths of civil society and state are given, respectively, by
x and s, the probability that the state will win the conflict is H(s − x), and the probability that the
civil society will do so is 1 − H(s − x) = H(x − s), a property we will use frequently below.
In the Appendix, we also show that the most important qualitative features implied by this
formulations of conflict between the elite (state) and society are shared by other formulation of the
contest between these parties.

2.2

Assumptions

We next introduce three assumptions. The first one is a simplifying assumption, which we impose
initially and then relax subsequently:
Assumption 1 f (x, s) = 1 for all x ∈ [0, 1] and s ∈ [0, 1].
This assumption makes it transparent that the multiple steady-state equilibria and their dynamics
— our main focus — are driven by the dynamic contest between the state and civil society, not because
of changes in the value of the prize in this contest. It will be relaxed in Section 5.
The next two assumptions are imposed throughout.
Assumption 2

1. cx and cs are continuously differentiable, strictly increasing and weakly convex

over R+ , and satisfy limx→∞ c0x (x) = ∞ and limx→∞ c0s (s) = ∞.
2.
c0s (δ) 6= c0x (δ).
3.

1
|c00s (δ) − c00x (δ)|
<
.
00
00
min{cx (δ), cs (δ)}
supz |h0 (z)|

4.
c0s (0) + γ s ≥ c0x (δ) and c0x (0) + γ x > c0s (δ).
Part 1 of Assumption 2 is standard. Part 2 is imposed for simplicity and rules out the non-generic
case where the marginal cost of investment at δ is exactly equal for the two parties. Part 3 is also
imposed for technical convenience, and is quite weak. For example, if the gap between c00x (δ) and c00s (δ)
is small, this condition is automatically satisfied. We will flag its role when we come to our analysis,
but anticipating that discussion, it makes it much easier for us to establish the instability of some
“uninteresting” steady-state equilibria. Part 4 ensures that the marginal cost of each player in the
increasing returns region (when x < γ x or s < γ s ) when making zero investment is greater than the
marginal cost of the other player outside this region when evaluated at δ — the marginal cost on the
right-hand side is evaluated at δ since, as our above transformation showed, the level of investment
9

necessary for maintaining any positive steady-state level of capacity is δ. We will flag the role of this
assumption when we come to our formal analysis.
Assumption 3

1. h exists everywhere, and is differentiable, single-peaked and symmetric around

zero.
2. For each z ∈ {x, s},
c0z (0) > h(1).
3. For each z ∈ {x, s},
min{h(0) − γ z ; h(γ z )} > c0z (δ).
Part 1 contains the second key assumption for our analysis — single peakedness and symmetry
of h around 0 (differentiability is standard). This assumption not only simplifies our analysis as it
ensures that h(x − s) = h(s − x) and h0 (x − s) = −h0 (s − x), but also implies that incentives for
investment are strongest when x and s are close to each other. We highlight the role of this feature
below as well.
Part 2 imposes that when a player has the maximum gap between itself and the other player, it
has no further incentives to invest. Part 3, on the other hand, ensures that at or near the point where
conflict capacities are equal, there are sufficient incentives to increase conflict capacity. Both of these
assumptions restrict attention to the part of the parameter space of greater interest to us.

3

Equilibrium with Short-Lived Players

We now present our main results about the dynamics of the power of state and civil society, focusing
on the non-overlapping generations setup, where at each point in time, each side of the conflict is
represented by a single short-lived agent who will be replaced by a new agent from the same side next
period. This ensures that when players take decisions today they do not internalize their impact on
the future evolution of the power of either party.

3.1

Preliminaries

Suppose that the above-described society is populated by non-overlapping generations of agents —
on the one side representing the elite (state) and on the other, civil society.
With these assumptions, at each time t, civil society maximizes
H(xt − st ) − ∆ · Cx (xt , xt−∆ )
by choosing xt (or equivalently ixt ), taking xt−∆ as given. Simultaneously, the elite maximize
H(st − xt ) − ∆ · Cs (st , st−∆ )
by choosing st , taking st−∆ as given. A dynamic (Nash) equilibrium with short-lived players is given
∗
∗
∗
∗
by a sequence {x∗k∆ , s∗k∆ }∞
k=0 such that xk∆ is a best response to sk∆ given x(k−1)∆ , and likewise sk∆

is a best response to x∗k∆ given s∗(k−1)∆ .

10

The investment decisions of both elites and civil society are then determined by their respective
first-order conditions (with complementary slackness). In particular, at time t, we have:14
x −x

xt −xt−∆
∆

s −s

st −st−∆
∆

h(xt − st ) ≤ c0x ( t ∆t−∆ + δ) + max{0; γ x − xt−∆ } if
x −x
h(xt − st ) ≥ c0x ( t ∆t−∆ + δ) + max{0; γ x − xt−∆ }
x −x
h(xt − st ) = c0x ( t ∆t−∆ + δ) + max{0; γ x − xt−∆ }
and

h(st − xt ) ≤ c0s ( t ∆t−∆ + δ) + max{0; γ s − st−∆ } if
s −s
h(st − xt ) ≥ c0s ( t ∆t−∆ + δ) + max{0; γ s − st−∆ }
s −s
h(st − xt ) = c0s ( t ∆t−∆ + δ) + max{0; γ s − st−∆ }

= −δ or xt = 0,
if xt = 1,
otherwise,

= −δ or st = 0,
if st = 1,
otherwise.

The first line of either expression applies when the relevant player has chosen zero investment so that
its state variable shrinks as fast as it can (at the rate δ), or is already at its lower bound xt = 0 or
st = 0. In this case, we have the additional cost of investment on the right-hand side, and also the
optimality condition is given by a weak inequality, since at this lower boundary, the marginal benefit
could be strictly less than the marginal cost of investment. The second line, on the other hand, applies
when the state variable takes its maximum value, 1, and in this case the marginal benefit could be
strictly greater than the marginal cost of investment. Away from these boundaries, the third line
applies and requires that the marginal benefit equal the marginal cost. Note also that the marginal
benefit for civil society is the same as the marginal benefit for the state — since h(st −xt ) = h(xt −st ).
On the other hand, we also have from Assumption 3 that changes in the marginal benefits of the two
players are the converses of each other — that is, h0 (st − xt ) = −h0 (xt − st ).
Now letting ∆ → 0, we obtain the following continuous-time first-order optimality (and thus
equilibrium) conditions

and

h(xt − st ) ≤ c0x (ẋt + δ) + max{0; γ x − xt } if ẋt = −δ or xt = 0,
h(xt − st ) ≥ c0x (ẋt + δ) + max{0; γ x − xt }
if xt = 1,
h(xt − st ) = c0x (ẋt + δ) + max{0; γ x − xt }
otherwise,

(4)

h(st − xt ) ≤ c0s (ṡt + δ) + max{0; γ s − st } if ṡt = −δ or st = 0,
if st = 1,
h(st − xt ) ≥ c0s (ṡt + δ) + max{0; γ s − st }
0
otherwise.
h(st − xt ) = cs (ṡt + δ) + max{0; γ s − st }

(5)

In what follows, we work directly with these continuous-time first-order optimality conditions. Moreover, it is straightforward to see that in continuous time, away from the boundaries of [0, 1]2 these
first-order optimality conditions will hold as equality, and thus the dynamics of state and civil society
strength can be represented by the following two differential equations:
ẋ = max{(c0x )−1 (h(x − s) − max{γ x − x, 0}); 0} − δ

(6)

ṡ = max{(c0s )−1 (h(s − x) − max{γ s − s, 0}); 0} − δ.
The roles of the two key assumptions highlighted above — the single-peakedness of h and the
increasing returns aspect of the cost function — are evident from (6). First, when x and s are close
14

Following up on footnote 13, we can more clearly see the role that ∆ in front of the cost function plays here:
without this term (or equivalently if the return was also multiplied by ∆), the marginal cost of investment would be
multiplied by 1/∆, and thus as ∆ → 0, investments would converge to zero. This is because short-lived players that are
not forward-looking do not take the impact of their instantaneous investments on future stocks (and have infinitesimal
impact on the current stock).

11

to each other, h(x − s) is large, and thus both of these variables will tend to grow further. Conversely,
when x and s are far apart, h(x − s) is small, and investment by both parties is discouraged. This
observation captures the key economic force that will lead to the emergence of different dynamics of
state-society relations and different types of states in our setup (in the Appendix, we see that this
same property holds with other formulations of the contest function). Secondly, the presence of the
max term implies that once the conflict capacity of a party falls below a critical threshold (γ x or γ s ),
there is an additional force pushing towards further reduction in this capacity.

3.2

Dynamics of the Strength of Civil Society and the State

Our main result in this section is summarized in the next proposition.
Proposition 1 Suppose Assumptions 1, 2 and 3 hold. Then there are three (locally) asymptotically
stable steady states:
1. x∗ = s∗ = 1.
2. x∗ = 0 and s∗ ∈ (γ s , 1).
3. x∗ ∈ (γ x , 1) and s∗ = 0.
This proposition shows that there exist three relevant (asymptotically stable) steady states, one
corresponding to an inclusive state, one corresponding to a despotic state and one to a weak state.
The intuition, as already anticipated, is that when we are in the neighborhood of the steady state
x∗ = s∗ = 1, h(x − s) is large, encouraging both parties to move further towards x∗ = s∗ = 1. In
contrast, in the neighborhood of x∗ = 0 or s∗ = 0, h(x − s) is small, and neither party has as strong
incentives to invest, and in fact, one of them ends up with zero conflict capacity.15
The steady states presented in Proposition 1 and their local dynamics are depicted in Figure
2. Our analysis so far establishes the dynamics in the neighborhoods of these steady states. After
providing the proof of Proposition 1, we turn to a characterization of global dynamics.

3.3

Proof of Proposition 1

We start with a series of lemmas on the steady-state equilibria of this model, and their stability
properties. Before presenting these results, we remark that, mathematically, there can be three types
of steady states: (i) those in which the party in question (say the civil society) chooses a positive
level conflict capacity, and thus we will have x∗t = x∗ ∈ (0, 1), so that the marginal cost of investment
is simply c0x (δ) + max{γ x − x∗ , 0}, which is equal to the benefit from this conflict capacity; (ii) those
in which we have zero conflict capacity, in which case the marginal cost of investment, c0x (0) + γ x , is
greater than or equal to the benefit from building further conflict capacity; (iii) those in which the
party in question has conflict capacity equal to 1, in which case marginal cost of investment, c0x (δ), is
less than or equal to the benefit from building additional conflict capacity.
15
Under Assumption 1, there is no social benefit in reaching the steady state x∗ = s∗ = 1, since the capacities of the
state and society do not contribute to the size of the social surplus. This will be relaxed below when we consider the
general environment in which x and s contribute to the size of total surplus.

12

Power of the State

1

s∗
Region I

Region II

Region III

0

x∗

0

1
Power of Society

Figure 2: Steady states and their local dynamics.
Lemma 1 There exists a (locally) asymptotically stable steady state with x∗ = s∗ = 1.
Proof. At x∗ = s∗ = 1, the marginal cost of investment for player z ∈ {x, s} is c0z (δ), while the
marginal benefit starting from this point is h(0), so Assumption 3 ensures that the marginal benefit
strictly exceeds the marginal cost, and neither player has an incentive to reduce its investment.
Furthermore, because 1 is the maximum level of investment, neither party has the ability to increase
it.
We turn next to asymptotic stability of this steady state. First note that from (6), the laws of
motion of x and s in the neighborhood of the state state (x∗ = 1, s∗ = 1) are given by
c0x (ẋ + δ) = h(x − s) if x < 1 and ẋ = 0 if x = 1

(7)

c0s (ṡ + δ) = h(s − x) if s < 1 and ṡ = 0 if s = 1,
where we are exploiting the fact that once we are away from the steady state, there cannot be an
immediate jump and thus the first-order conditions have to hold in view of Assumption 2. We have
also used the information that we are in the neighborhood of the steady state (1, 1) in writing the
system for x > γ x and s > γ s . Now to establish asymptotic stability, we will show that
L(x, s) =

1
1
(1 − x)2 + (1 − s)2
2
2

is a Lyapunov function in the neighborhood of the steady state (1, 1). Indeed, L(x, s) is continuous
and differentiable, and has a unique minimum at (1, 1). We next verify that in a sufficiently small
13

neighborhood of (1, 1), L(x, s) is decreasing along solution trajectories of the dynamical system given
by (7). Since L is differentiable, for x ∈ (γ x , 1) and s ∈ (γ s , 1), we can write
dL(x, s)
= −(1 − x)ẋ − (1 − s)ṡ.
dt
First note that since h(x − s) > c0x (δ) and h(s − x) > c0s (δ) for x and s in a sufficiently small
neighborhood of (1, 1), we have both ẋ > 0 and ṡ > 0. This implies that, in this range, both
terms in

dL(x,s)
dt

are negative, and thus

dL(x,s)
dt

< 0. Moreover, the same conclusion applies when

x = 1 (respectively when s = 1), with the only modification that

dL(x,s)
dt

no longer includes the ṡ

(respectively the ẋ) term, but still continues to be strictly negative, even on the boundary of [0, 1]2 .
Then the asymptotic stability of (1, 1) follows from LaSalle’s Theorem (which takes care of the fact
that our steady state is on the boundary of the domain of the dynamical system in question, see, e.g.,
Walter, 1998).
This lemma shows that under our maintained assumptions, both parties investing at their maximum conflict capacity is a steady-state equilibrium. Intuitively, this proposition exploits the fact that
when the two players are “neck and neck,” they both have strong incentives to invest. If instead we
had, say, x much larger than s, then from part 1 of Assumption 3, both h(x − s) and h(s − x) would
be smaller than h(0), reducing the investment incentives of both parties. The stronger investment
incentives around x∗ = s∗ = 1 are key for maintaining this combination as an (asymptotically stable)
steady state — combined with part 2 of Assumption 3, which ensures that these strong incentives
are sufficient to guarantee a corner solution. If the inequality in part 2 of Assumption 3 did not hold,
x∗ = s∗ = 1 could not be a steady-state equilibrium, and in this case, the only possible steady-state
equilibria would be those identified in Lemma 2 below.
The local stability of this steady state is then established by constructing a Lyapunov function.
The use of this method is necessitated by the fact that x∗ = s∗ = 1 is at the corner of the feasible
set, [0, 1]2 , and thus dynamics around it cannot be characterized by using linearization methods.
Our next result identifies two additional locally asymptotically stable steady states.
Lemma 2 There exist two additional (locally) asymptotically stable steady states:
1. one with x∗ = 0 and s∗ ∈ (γ s , 1), and
2. one with s∗ = 0 and x∗ ∈ (γ x , 1).
Proof. We start with the first statement. Suppose first that x∗ = 0. Then from (5) an interior
steady-state level of investment for the state requires
h(s) = c0s (δ) + max{0; γ s − s}.
Note that Assumption 3 implies that at s = 1, h(1) < c0s (δ), and at s = γ s , h(γ s ) > c0s (δ), thus by
the intermediate value theorem, there exists s∗ between γ s and 1 satisfying
h(s∗ ) = c0s (δ).

(8)

Moreover, because h is single peaked and symmetric around 0, h(s) is decreasing in s ≥ γ s , and thus
only a unique s∗ satisfying this relationship exists.
14

We next verify that x∗ = 0 is indeed consistent with the optimization of civil society. This follows
immediately since
h(−s∗ ) = h(s∗ ) = c0s (δ) < c0x (0) + γ x ,
where the first equality follows from the symmetry of h, the second one simply replicates (8), and the
inequality follows from Assumption 2, and establishes that x∗ = 0 is optimal for civil society.
The local stability is again established using a Lyapunov argument as in the proof of Lemma 1.
Now in the neighborhood of the state state (x = 0, s = s∗ ), the dynamical system in (6) can be
written as
c0x (ẋ + δ) = h(x − s) + γ x − x if x > 0 and ẋ = 0 if x = 0, and
c0s (ṡ + δ) = h(s − x),
where we are now using the fact that we are in the neighborhood of (0, s∗ ) so that x < γ x and s > γ s .
The dynamical system in (6) in this case can be written as
ẋ = (c0x )−1 (h(x − s) + γ x − x) − δ

(9)

ṡ = (c0s )−1 (h(s − x)) − δ.
We now choose the Lyapunov function
1
1
L(x, s) = x2 + (s − s∗ )2 ,
2
2
which is again continuous and differentiable, and has a unique minimum at (0, s∗ ). We next verify
that in the neighborhood of (0, s∗ ), L(x, s) is decreasing along solution trajectories of the dynamical
system given by (9). Specifically, since L is differentiable, for x ∈ (0, γ x ) and s ∈ (γ s , 1), we can write
dL(x, s)
= xẋ + (s − s∗ )ṡ.
dt
First note that as h(−s∗ ) < c0x (δ) + γ x , for x and s in the neighborhood of (0, s∗ ),
ẋ = (c0x )−1 (h(x − s) + γ x − x) − δ < 0.

(10)

Then, using a first-order Taylor expansion of (9) in this neighborhood, we obtain
(s − s∗ )ṡ =

1
c00s (δ)

h0 (s∗ )(s − s∗ )(s − x − s∗ ) + o(·),

(11)

where o(·) denotes second-order terms in x and s − s∗ .
The desired result follows from the following arguments: (i) for x ∈ (0, γ x ) and s ∈ (γ s , 1), |xẋ| >
|(s − s∗ )ṡ|, regardless of the sign of (s − s∗ )ṡ, as x → 0 and s → 0, (s − s∗ )(s − x − s∗ )/x → 0, because
in the neighborhood of the steady state (0, s∗ ), ṡ is of the order s − s∗ , while h(−s∗ ) < c0x (δ) + γ x ,
ensuring that ẋ < 0). Therefore, in the range where x ∈ (0, γ x ) and s ∈ (0, γ s ),
x = 0, (11) implies that
(iii) when s =

s∗ ,

(s − s∗ )ṡ

< 0 in view of the fact that

h0 (s∗ )

(10) ensures that ẋ < 0, so that we again have

dL(x,s)
dt

< 0, and thus we have

dL(x,s)
dt

dL(x,s)
dt

< 0.

< 0. Then in all three cases,

the asymptotic stability of (0, s∗ ) follows from LaSalle’s Theorem (e.g., Walter, 1998).
15

< 0. (ii) when

The proof of the existence, uniqueness and asymptotic stability of the steady state with s∗ = 0
and x∗ ∈ (γ x , 1) is analogous, and is omitted.
These two additional steady states have a very different flavor than the steady state in Lemma
1. Now both parties have a lower level of conflict capacity, and one of them is in fact at zero. The
intuition is again related to the incentives for investment in conflict capacity: when one party is at
zero capacity, h(·) is small for both players, which encourages the first player to build a state with
low capacity, and discourages the other player from building further capacity.
Assumptions 2 and 3 play an important role in this lemma as well. Without the boundary conditions in Assumption 3, there could be other steady states with some of them including investments
below γ x and γ s . Though these steady states would be locally unstable (with the same argument as
in Lemma 4 below), it would also become harder to ensure that there exists a locally stable steady
state, making us prefer these assumptions.
The next lemma rules out several types of steady states.
Lemma 3 There is no steady state with (i) x∗ = s∗ = 0; or (ii) x∗ = 0 and s∗ ∈ (0, γ s ), or s∗ = 0
and x∗ ∈ (0, γ x ); or (iii) x∗ ∈ (γ x , 1) and s∗ ∈ (γ s , 1).
Proof. Claim (i) follows immediately, since from part 3 of Assumption 3, we have h(0)−γ s > c0s (0),
so that when x∗ = 0, the elite will deviate from s = 0. Claim (ii) follows directly from the proof of
Lemma 2. Finally, for claim (iii), note that a steady state with x∗ ∈ (γ x , 1) and s∗ ∈ (γ s , 1) would
necessitate
h(s∗ − x∗ ) = c0s (δ)

(12)

h(x∗ − s∗ ) = c0x (δ),
but then from the symmetry of the h function around zero, we have that h(s∗ − x∗ ) = h(x∗ − s∗ ), so
that
c0s (δ) = h(s∗ − x∗ ) = c0x (δ),
which contradicts part 2 of Assumption 2.
There are other types of steady states that could exist, but the next lemma shows that when they
do, they will all be asymptotically unstable.
Lemma 4 All other (possible) steady states are asymptotically unstable.
Proof. We will prove this lemma by considering three types of steady states, which exhaust all
possibilities.
Type 1: x∗ ∈ (0, γ x ) and s∗ ∈ (0, γ s ).
The optimality conditions in such a steady state are
h(s∗ − x∗ ) = c0s (δ) + γ s − s∗
h(x∗ − s∗ ) = c0x (δ) + γ x − x∗ .

16

The dynamical system (6) now becomes
ẋ = (c0x )−1 (h(x∗ − s∗ ) + γ x − x∗ ) − δ
ṡ = (c0s )−1 (h(s∗ − x∗ ) + γ s − s∗ ) − δ.
Since the steady-state levels of state and civil society strength are defined by equality conditions in
this case, local dynamics can be determined from the linearized system, with characteristic matrix
given by
1
[h0 (s∗ − x∗ ) + 1]
c00
s (δ)
− c001(δ) [h0 (x∗ − s∗ )
x

Using the fact that from Assumption 3,
can be computed as

1
00
c00
s (δ)cx (δ)

trace of this matrix is

h0 (s∗

−

− c001(δ) h0 (s∗ − x∗ )
s
1
0 ∗
∗
c00 (δ) [h (x − s ) + 1]

!
.

x

x∗ )

= −h0 (x∗ − s∗ ), the determinant of this matrix

> 0. Moreover, from part 2 of Assumption 2, we can show that the

1
1
[h0 (s∗ − x∗ ) + 1] + 00 [h0 (x∗ − s∗ ) + 1].
c00s (δ)
cx (δ)

Once again using Assumption 3, this expression is positive provided that
h0 (s∗ − x∗ )(c00s (δ) − c00x (δ)) ≤ c00x (δ) + c00s (δ).
Assumption 2 ensures that
c00s (δ) − c00x (δ) ≤

(13)

c00x (δ)
,
|h0 (s∗ − x∗ )|

which is a sufficient condition for (13), establishing that both eigenvalues are positive, and we have
asymptotic instability.
Type 2: x∗ ∈ (γ x , 1) and s∗ ∈ (0, γ s ), or x∗ ∈ (0, γ x ) and s∗ ∈ (γ s , 1). Consider the first of these,
h(s∗ − x∗ ) = c0s (δ) + γ s − s∗
h(x∗ − s∗ ) = c0x (δ).
Now once again, local dynamics can be determined from the linearized system, with characteristic
matrix

[h0 (s∗ − x∗ ) + 1] − c001(δ) h0 (s∗ − x∗ )
s
1
0 ∗
∗
− c001(δ) [h0 (x∗ − s∗ )
c00 (δ) h (x − s )
1

!

c00
s (δ)

x

.

x

The trace of this matrix is
1
c00s (δ)

[h0 (s∗ − x∗ ) + 1] +

1
c00x (δ)

h0 (x∗ − s∗ ),

which is positive provided that
h0 (s∗ − x∗ )(c00s (δ) − c00x (δ)) ≤ c00x (δ).
The same argument as in the proof of Type 1 shows that this condition follows from Assumption 2,
implying that at least one of the eigenvalues is positive and thus establishing asymptotic instability.
The argument for the case where x∗ ∈ (0, γ x ) and s∗ ∈ (γ s , 1) is analogous.
Type 3: s∗ = 1 and x∗ < 1 or x∗ = 1 and s∗ < 1.
17

We prove the first case (the proof for the second is analogous). Such a steady state exists only if
h(1 − x∗ ) ≥ c0s (δ)
h(x∗ − 1) = c0x (δ) + max{γ x − x∗ , 0}.
Exploiting these conditions, we will show that such a steady state cannot be asymptotically stable.
To do this, let us distinguish between x∗ > γ x and x∗ ≤ γ x . Consider the first one of these. Then
consider a perturbation that keeps s∗ constant and reduces x∗ to x∗ − εx for εx > 0 small (since it is
sufficient to show asymptotic instability for a specific set of perturbations). Then, we have
ẋ = −

1
c00x (δ)

h0 (x∗ − 1) − δ < 0.

The sign follows because h0 (x∗ − 1) > 0 from Assumption 3, and implies that x∗ decreases away
from the steady state in question, establishing asymptotic instability. Consider finally the second
possibility, with the same perturbation which yields
ẋ = −

1
[h0 (x∗ − 1) + 1] − δ < 0,
c00x (δ)

which is also locally asymptotically unstable. This completes the proof of the lemma.
Proposition 1 then follows straightforwardly by combining these lemmas.

3.4

Global Dynamics

We next partially characterize the global dynamics. In particular, we will determine three regions, as
shown in Figure 3, separating the phase diagram into basins of attraction of the three asymptotically
stable steady states characterized in the previous subsection. For example, starting from Region I,
equilibrium dynamics converge to the steady state with x∗ = 0 and s∗ ∈ (γ s , 1); from Region II,
convergence is to the steady state with x∗ = s∗ = 1; and from Region III, convergence will be to
the steady state with x∗ ∈ (γ x , 1) and s∗ = 0. Unfortunately, it is not possible to determine the
boundaries of these regions analytically, but we will be able to characterize subsets thereof explicitly.
Consider first Region II, which is the basin of attraction of the steady state x∗ = s∗ = 1. Recall
that the dynamical system for the behavior of the conflict capacity of civil society and state take the
form given in (6) above. We proceed by first noting that any subset S of [0, 1]2 for which there exists
a Lyapunov function L(x, s) such that (i) S = {(x, s) : L(x, s) ≤ K} for some K > 0; (ii) L(x, s) ≥ 0
for all (x, s) ∈ S, with equality only if x = s = 1; and (iii) ∂L(x, s)/∂t ≤ 0 for all (x, s) ∈ S, with
equality only if x = s = 1, is part of the basin of attraction of this steady state.
Let us first construct a subset of the parameters (x, s) such that ẋ ≥ 0 and ṡ ≥ 0, with one
of them holding as strict inequality. Let us define x̄ such that c0x (δ) = h(x̄ − 1). Clearly, from
Assumption 2 c0s (δ) < h(1 − x̄). This defines R00II = {(x, s) : x ≥ max{γ x , x̄} and s ≥ max{γ s , x̄}}.
This region can be further extended by noting that any combination of (x, s) such that (c0x )−1 (h(x −
s) − max{γ x − x, 0}) − δ ≥ 0 and (c0s )−1 (h(s − x) − max{γ s − s, 0}) − δ ≥ 0 also satisfies ẋ ≥ 0 and
ṡ ≥ 0. Let us define s̄(x) such that h(s̄(x) − x) − max{γ s − s̄(x), 0} − c0s (δ) = 0. Similarly, define
x̄(s) such that h(x̄(s) − s) − max{γ x − x, 0} − c0x (δ) = 0. Both s̄(x) and x̄(s) are upward sloping, and
in fact correspond to lines with slope 1 when s ≥ γ s and x ≥ γ x , respectively. Then starting within
18

Power of the State

1

s̄(x)
s∗

x̄(s)
0

x∗

0

1
Power of Society

Figure 3: Global dynamics.
R0II = {(x, s) : s ≤ s̄(x) and x ≤ x̄(s)}, we also have ẋ ≥ 0 and ṡ ≥ 0 (and in fact, R00II ⊂ R0II ). This
region, as well as R00II , is depicted in Figure 3. The shape of the region is intuitive.
Now consider the family of functions, L(x, s | lx , ls ) =

lx
2

(1 − x)2 +

ls
2 (1

− s)2 , indexed by lx > 0

and ls > 0. Clearly, for any member of this family, we have that for all (x, s) ∈ R0II \(1, 1),
∂L(x, s | lx , ls )
= lx (1 − x)ẋ − ls (1 − s)ṡ < 0.
∂t
So if we in addition define the subset RII of R0II where L(x, s | lx , ls ) ≤ K, then RII satisfies the
above conditions and by construction is part of the basin of attraction of the steady state (1, 1).
Now consider the problem of choosing K, lx and ls such that we achieve the largest set RII =
{(x, s) : L(x, s | lx , ls ) ≤ K} contained in R0II . Mathematically, let A(RII ) be the area of set RII .
Then the problem is to choose
max A(RII ).

K,lx ,ls >0

Figure 3 shows the construction of region RII in this manner, which is by construction part of the
basin of attraction of the steady state (1, 1).
Subsets of the basins of attraction of the other steady states can be constructed analogously and
are shown in Figure 3.
We also verify numerically that dynamics take the form shown in Figures 2 and 3. In Figure 4,
we depict the vector field for a specific parameterization of the model. We take f (x, s) = 0.6, and
choose H to be a raised cosine distribution over [−1, 1] with mean µ = 0, which is single-peaked and
19

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

s

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

x

Figure 4: The direction of change of the power of state and society in a simulated example.
symmetric consistent with Assumption 3.16 The cost functions of the state and civil society are
cx (i) = 3.25 × i2 (for i ∈ [0, 10]) and cs (i) = 3.25 × i2 (for i ∈ [0, 15]),
and outside of these ranges, the cost functions become vertical, placing a bound on investment
levels.17 In addition, we set γ x = 0.35, γ s = 0.35, and δ = 0.1. The figure verifies the qualitative
characterization provided so far.

3.5

The “Conditional” Effects of Changes in Initial Conditions

Though we will discuss comparative statics (or “comparative dynamics”) in greater detail in Section
5, here we undertake a simple exercise: change the initial conditions and trace the effects of these on
equilibrium dynamics. The immediate but important conclusion is that the same change in initial
conditions, starting from different parts of the state space, can have drastically different implications.
Consider an increase in s0 to s0 + s̄. This can leave us in the same region as before, in which
case the equilibrium trajectory will be shifted uniformly up, but the long-run outcome will remain
unchanged. Alternatively, this increase can shift us from, say, Region III to Region II, in which
case not only the equilibrium trajectory but also the long-run outcome will change, and in fact it
will involve greater state capacity. However, depending on the exact value of (x0 , s0 ), an increase of
the same amount s̄ could also shift us from Region II to Region I, in which case the impact on the
16

Assumption 1 imposed that f (x, s) = 1 rather than setting it equal to a constant, say φ0 , in order to reduce the
number of parameters. We consider a more general surplus function in Assumption 10 below. Setting φ0 = 0.6 enables
us to construct an example with more equally-sized regions.
17
This bound plays no role in the numerical results reported here, but facilitates convergence when we consider the
dynamic model with the same parameterization and low discount rates in the next section.

20

long-run state capacity will be negative instead of positive. This illustrates, while also providing a
simple proof, that the effects of changes in initial conditions in this model are conditional — they
depend exactly on where we start. This discussion thus establishes:
Proposition 2 The effects of changes in the initial conditions (x0 , s0 ) on equilibrium dynamics and
the long-run outcome of the society are conditional in the sense that these depend on which region we
move out of and into.

4

Equilibrium with Forward-Looking Players

In this section, we analyze our general framework with long-lived, forward-looking players. After
briefly describing preferences, we first show that for high rates of discounting, equilibrium behavior
converges to behavior with short-lived players, which we characterized in the previous section. We
then numerically study the dynamics of the equilibrium for a range of discount rates. In this section,
we continue to impose Assumption 1, and then relax it in the next section.

4.1

Preferences

We start with the discrete time model. The technology of investment and conflict are the same as in
the previous two sections. The only difference is that now both civil society and state are long-lived
and forward-looking. To maximize the parallel with the model with short-lived players, we assume
that both players again correspond to sequences of non-overlapping generations, but each generation
has an exponentially-distributed lifetime or equivalently, a Poisson end date with parameter, 1 − β,
where β = e−ρ∆ . We assume that this random end date is the only source of discounting. Clearly,
this specification guarantees that as the period length ∆ shrinks, discounting between periods will
also decline (and the discount factor will approach 1). Again to maximize the parallel with our
static model, we assume that in expectation, there is one instance of conflict between the two players
during the lifetime of each generation. Since with this Poisson specification, the expected lifetime of
his generation is 1/(1 − β), this implies that a conflict arrives at the rate 1 − β.18

4.2

Main Result

The main result we prove in this forward-looking model is provided in the next proposition.
Proposition 3 Suppose Assumptions 1, 2 and 3 hold. Then there exist discount rates ρ̄ ≥ ρ > 0
such that for all ρ > ρ̄, there are three (locally) asymptotically stable steady states:
1. x∗ = s∗ = 1.
2. x∗ = 0 and s∗ ∈ (γ s , 1).
18
An alternative specification of the model with long-lived players which leads to identical equations, but eschews the
parallel with the static model, is to assume that both players are infinitely lived and discount the future at the rate
β = e−ρ∆ and there is a conflict during each interval of length ∆. Recall from footnote 14 that in this case there will be
no investment when ∆ → 0 with short-lived players (because they do not take into account the benefit from increasing
future conflict capabilities), but incentives for investment do not disappear with long-lived, forward-looking players even
as ∆ → 0 (because they do take into account the benefit from increasing future conflict capabilities).

21

3. x∗ ∈ (γ x , 1) and s∗ = 0.
Moreover, for all ρ < ρ, there exists a unique globally stable steady state x∗ = s∗ = 1.
This result thus shows that the main insights from our analysis apply provided that players, though
forward-looking, are sufficiently impatient. We note that this result is not a simple consequence of
the fact that as we consider larger and larger values of ρ, players are becoming closer to myopic. It
necessitates establishing properties of the the relevant value functions and their derivatives in the
limit.19

4.3

Proof of Proposition 3

With the specification introduced above, we can straightforwardly represent the maximization problem of each player as a solution to a recursive, dynamic programming problem, written as
Vx (xt−∆ , st−∆ , β; ∆) = max



xt ∈[0,1]

(1 − β)H(xt − st ) − ∆ · Cx (xt , xt−∆ ) + βVx (xt , s0∗ (xt−∆ , st−∆ , β; ∆), β; ∆) ,
(14)

and
Vs (xt−∆ , st−∆ , β; ∆) = max

st ∈[0,1]



(1 − β)H(st − xt ) − ∆ · Cs (st , st−∆ ) + βVs (x0∗ (xt−∆ , st−∆ , β; ∆), st , β; ∆) .
(15)

Several things are important to note. First, as anticipated in the previous section, we multiply the
flow costs with ∆, but not the benefits, since these capture life-time benefits from conflict, and we
have conditioned on ∆ in writing the value functions for emphasis. Second, notice that we have
already imposed the boundary conditions, xt ∈ [0, 1] and st ∈ [0, 1], in the maximization problems.
Third, x0∗ (x, s, β; ∆) and s0∗ (x, s, β; ∆) are the policy functions, which give the next period’s values
of the state variables as a function of this period’s values (and are explicitly conditioned on ∆ > 0).
A dynamic equilibrium in this setup as given by a pair of policy functions, x0∗ (x, s, β; ∆) and
s0∗ (x, s, β; ∆) which give the next period’s values of the state variables as a function of this period’s
values (for ∆ > 0), and each solves the corresponding value function taking the policy function of the
other party is given. Once these policy functions are determined, the dynamics of civil society and
state strength can be obtained by iterating over these functions.
Since these are standard Bellman equations, the following result is immediate (throughout this
proof we take (x, s, β) ∈ [0, 1]3 ).
Lemma 5 For any ∆ > 0, Vx (x, s, β; ∆) and Vs (x, s, β; ∆) exist and are continuously differentiable
in x, s and ∆. Moreover, x0∗ (x, s, β; ∆) and s0∗ (x, s, β; ∆) and are continuous in x, s and ∆.
In particular, from (14) and (15), as β → 0, Vx (x, s, β; ∆) → Vx (x, s, β = 0; ∆) and Vs (x, s, β; ∆) →
Vs (x, s, β = 0; ∆). But since x0∗ (x, s, β; ∆) and s0∗ (x, s, β; ∆) are maximizers of the continuous
(and bounded) functions, (14) and (15), we can apply Berge’s maximum theorem to conclude that
x0∗ (x, s, β; ∆) and s0∗ (x, s, β; ∆) are also continuous, particularly in β, and thus x0∗ (x, s, β; ∆) →
19
When ρ is between ρ and ρ̄, we may have a situation in which one of the two corner steady states disappears while
the other one still exists.

22

x0∗ (x, s, β = 0; ∆) and s0∗ (x, s, β; ∆) → s0∗ (x, s, β = 0; ∆), and thus for β sufficiently close to 0, we
have that x0∗ (x, s, β; ∆) and s0∗ (x, s, β; ∆) are approximately the same as their myopic values. Therefore, there exists β̄ > 0, such that for all β < β̄, a steady state of the dynamical system given by
x0∗ (x, s, β; ∆) and s0∗ (x, s, β; ∆) exists and is locally stable if and only if it is a locally stable steady
state of the myopic model.
This argument establishes that the forward-looking, discrete-time dynamics when the discount
factor is sufficiently close to 0 will have the same locally stable steady states as the myopic, discretetime dynamics. In the previous section, we approximated the discrete-time dynamics with their
continuous-time limit, and it is also convenient to do the same here, and to maximize the parallel,
this is how we have stated the proposition.
We can also observe that when the discount factor β → 1, the two steady states other than (1, 1)
disappear. The argument is simple: take the steady state with x = 0, where the society’s flow return
is zero. If civil society invests at a high level for a finite number of periods, this will ensure that
x ≥ γ x , eliminating the region of higher costs of investment for civil society, and thus taking x to 1
(which gives the society a positive flow return). When β is arbitrarily close to 1, the costs of investing
at a high level for a finite number of periods are negligible, and hence such a deviation is profitable
for civil society. This argument, again from continuity, ensures that there exists β x < 1 such that
for β > β x , x = 0 is not consistent with a steady state. With the parallel argument, we also have
that there exists β s < 1 such that for β > β s , s = 0 cannot be part of a steady state. Then, for
β > β = max{β x , β s } only (1, 1) remains as an asymptotically stable steady state.
The next subsection discusses the continuous-time limit and also derives the continuous-time
Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equations, which can be used to characterize the equilibrium more
generally. We then come back to completing the proof of Proposition 3.

4.4

Continuous-Time Approximation

For characterizing the equilibrium for any value of the players’ impatience, we can once again use
the continuous-time approximation by taking the limit ∆ → 0, which shrinks the period length (and
correspondingly adjusts the discount factor β = e−ρ∆ , so that the discount rate remains constant at
ρ). In this limit, conditions on β translate into conditions on ρ. More specifically, we have:
Lemma 6 As ∆ → 0, the value functions Vx (x, s, β; ∆) and Vs (x, s, β; ∆) converge to their
continuous-time limits Vx (x, s) and Vs (x, s), and the policy functions x0∗ (x, s, β; ∆) and s0∗ (x, s, β; ∆)
converge to their continuous-time limits x0∗ (x, s) and s0∗ (x, s).20
Proof. This follows given the continuous differentiability of Vx (x, s, β; ∆) and Vs (x, s, β; ∆) and
of x0∗ (x, s, β; ∆) and s0∗ (x, s, β; ∆) for all ∆ > 0.
The continuous-time Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equations can be obtained as follows. First
20
We also drop the conditioning on the discrete-time discount factor β in writing the continuous-time value and policy
functions and do not add conditioning on its continuous-time equivalent, the discount rate ρ to simplify the notation.

23

rearrange (14) evaluated at the optimal choices and divide both sides by ∆ to obtain
1−β
Vx (xt−∆ , st−∆ , β; ∆)
∆

Vx (xt , s∗∆ (xt−∆ , st−∆ ), β; ∆) − Vx (xt−∆ , st−∆ , β; ∆)
1−β
.
= max
H(xt − st ) − Cx (xt , xt−∆ ) + β
xt ≥0
∆
∆
Now note that as ∆ → 0, (1 − β) → 0 and (1 − β)/∆ → ρ. Moreover the last term in the previous
expression tends to the total derivative of the value function with respect to time. Therefore, the
continuous-time HJB equation for civil society is


∂Vx (x, s)
∂Vx (x, s) ∗
−Cx (x, ẋ) +
ρVx (x, s) = ρH(x − s) + max
ẋ +
ṡ (x, s),
ẋ≥−δ
∂x
∂s
where we have used the notation Cx (x, ẋ) to denote the continuous-time cost function as a function of
the change in the conflict capacity of civil society, while ẋ∗ (x, s) and ṡ∗ (x, s) designate the continuoustime policy functions, conveniently written in terms of the time derivative of the conflict capacities
of the two parties. We have also imposed that ẋ cannot be less than −δ.
Applying the same argument to (15) and denoting the continues-time cost function for the state
by Cs (s, ṡ), we also obtain


∂Vs (x, s) ∗
∂Vs (x, s)
ṡ +
ẋ (x, s),
ρVs (x, s) = ρH(s − x) + max
−Cs (s, ṡ) +
ṡ≥−δ
∂s
∂x
The first-order optimality conditions for civil society are given by
∂Cx (x, ẋ)
∂Vx (x, s)
=
∂ ẋ
∂x
∂Cx (x, ẋ)
∂Vx (x, s)
≤
∂ ẋ
∂x
∂Cx (x, ẋ)
∂Vx (x, s)
≥
∂ ẋ
∂x

if

− δ < ẋ(x, s), and x ∈ (0, 1),

if

x = 1,

if

ẋ(x, s) = −δ or x = 0.

In the first case, when we have an interior solution, we can also write



 (c0x )−1 ∂Vx (x,s) − γ x + x
if x ≤ γ x
∂x


ẋ =
.
∂V
(x,s)
x

(c0x )−1
if
x
>
γ
x
∂x

(16)

(17)

The first-order conditions for the state are also similar, and for an interior solution, they yield



 (c0s )−1 ∂Vs (x,s) − γ s + s
if s ≤ γ s
∂s


ṡ =
.
(18)
(x,s)

(c0s )−1 ∂Vs∂s
if s > γ s

4.5

Completing the Proof of Proposition 3

We have already established that, for fixed ∆ > 0, as β → 0, the solution and the implied dynamics
in the forward-looking case converge to their equivalents. This ensures that there exists β̄ > 0, such
that for β < β̄, the dynamics of the myopic and forward-looking cases will be sufficiently close to
each other and thus will have the same set of locally stable steady states. Then taking the limit
∆ → 0, this can be expressed in terms of the continuous-time approximations for both systems, thus
24

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

s

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

x

Figure 5: The direction of change of the power of state and society in a simulated example with
ρ = 30.
establishing that for ρ > ρ̄, the locally stable steady states in Propositions 1 and 3 coincide. Similarly,
we also argue that for β > β (where β < 1), there cannot exist a steady state with either x = 0 or
s = 0, and thus the only asymptotically stable steady state is (1, 1). With the same argument, when
∆ → 0, we can then conclude that there exists ρ > 0 such that for discount rates below this, only
(1, 1) remains as the asymptotically stable steady state.

4.6

Numerical Results

We next provide a numerical characterization of the dynamics in the forward-looking model. We use
the same formulation of the cost function and parameter values as above. The critical threshold for
ρ is computed as ρ̄ = 100, and for discount rates above this value, the vector field is identical to that
shown in Figure 4, confirming that for high discount rates the equilibrium dynamics of the model with
forward-looking agents coincide with the equilibrium of the model with myopic agents as claimed in
Proposition 1. In Figure 5, we also show the implied vector field when ρ is smaller than ρ̄ (in this
instance, ρ = 30), which illustrates the very different dynamics in this case.

5

General Characterization

In this section, we relax Assumption 1. Since we have established the equivalence of the myopic and
forward-looking models when the discount rate is sufficiently large in the latter (which is a result
that does not depend in any way on Assumption 1), here we focus on a model with forward-looking
players. We also simplify the analysis throughout by assuming that f is linear as specified in the next
assumption, which replaces Assumption 1.
25

5.1

Modified Assumptions

Assumption 10 f (x, s) = φ0 + φx x + φs s, where φ0 > 0, φx > 0 and φs > 0.
Our other two assumptions also require some minor modifications, which are provided next.
Assumption 20

1. cx and cs are continuously differentiable, strictly increasing and weakly convex,

and satisfy limx→∞ c0x (x) = ∞ and limx→∞ c0s (s) = ∞.
2.
c0s (δ) 6= c0x (δ).
3.

|c00s (δ) − c00x (δ)|
2h(z)(φs + φx )
< inf 0
.
00
00
z |h (z)| (φ0 + φs + φx )
min{cx (δ), cs (δ)}

4.
c0s (0) + γ s ≥ c0x (δ) and c0x (0) + γ x > c0s (δ).
The minor modifications in parts 3 and 4 are in view of the fact that marginal benefits of investment
are different between the state and civil society. For same reason, we also modify Assumption 3 as
follows.
Assumption 30

1. h exists everywhere, and is differentiable, single-peaked and symmetric around

zero.
2. For each z ∈ {x, s},
c0z (0) > h(1)(φ0 + φz ) + H(1)φz .
3. For each z ∈ {x, s},
min{h(0)φ0 + H(0)φz − γ z ; h(γ z )(φ0 + φz γ z ) + H(γ z )φz } > c0z (δ).
Under these assumptions, the first-order optimality conditions with short-live players (in continuous time) are modified in the following straightforward fashion:
h(xt − st )(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + H(xt − st )φx ≤ c0x (ẋt + δ) + max{0; γ x − xt } if ẋt = −δ or xt = 0,
h(xt − st )(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + H(xt − st )φx ≥ c0x (ẋt + δ) + max{0; γ x − xt }
if xt = 1,
h(xt − st )(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + H(xt − st )φx = c0x (ẋt + δ) + max{0; γ x − xt }
otherwise.
and
h(st − xt )(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + H(st − xt )φs ≤ c0s (ṡt + δ) + max{0; γ s − st } if ṡt = −δ or st = 0,
h(st − xt )(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + H(st − xt )φs ≥ c0s (ṡt + δ) + max{0; γ s − st }
if st = 1,
0
h(st − xt )(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + H(st − xt )φs = cs (ṡt + δ) + max{0; γ s − st }
otherwise,

5.2

Main Result

We have the following straightforward result.
Proposition 4 Suppose that Assumptions 10 , 20 and 30 hold. Then Propositions 1 and 3 apply.
Proof. The proof of this proposition is provided in the Appendix.
26

5.3

Comparative Statics

In this subsection, we discuss how changes in parameters affect the steady states and the dynamics
of equilibrium. We focus on the effects of changes in the parameters φx , φs , γ x and γ s as well as the
cost functions cx and cs . The effects of changes in initial conditions are identical to those already
discussed in Section 3.5
Assumption 30 guarantees that x∗ = 1 and s∗ = 1 is a steady state. There are also at least two
interior steady states. These steady states are one of two types. The first type is given by x∗ = 0 and
any s∗ that satisfies the following equation:
h(s)(φ0 + φs s) + H(s)φs = c0s (δ).
The second type is given by s∗ = 0 and any x∗ that satisfies the following equation
h(x)(φ0 + φx x) + H(x)φx = c0x (δ).
Assumption 30 guarantees that at least one steady state of each type exists. We impose the following
assumption to make sure that only one steady state of each type exist:
Assumption 4 h(y)(φ0 + φz y) + H(y)φz is a decreasing function of y ≥ 0 for z ∈ {s, x}.
This assumption is fairly mild. The following two conditions would be sufficient to guarantee it:
(i) φz is small, in which case the fact that, from Assumption 30 , h(y) is decreasing for y ≥ 0 ensures
that this assumption is also satisfied, or that (ii) the elasticity of the h function is greater than 1/2,
in which case for any value of φ0 , Assumption 4 is satisfied.
Let us focus on the comparative statics of the steady state with x∗ = 0 and s∗ ∈ (γ s , 1). The
other case is identical. s∗ solves the following equation:
h(s∗ )(φ0 + φs s∗ ) + H(s∗ )φs = c0s (δ).

(19)

The parameter φx does not directly appear in this equation. Therefore,
∂s∗
= 0.
∂φx
Implicitly differentiating with respect to φ0 , we get


∗
∂s∗
∂s∗
0 ∗ ∂s
∗
∗
h (s )
(φ0 + φs s ) + h(s ) 1 + φs
+ h(s∗ )φs
= 0.
∂φ0
∂φ0
∂φ0
Therefore,

−h(s∗ )
∂s∗
= 0 ∗
> 0,
∂φ0
h (s )(φ0 + φs s∗ ) + 2h(s∗ )φs

where the inequality follows from Assumption 4. Implicitly differentiating equation (19) with respect
to φs , we get


∂s∗
∂s∗
∂s∗
∗
∗
∗
(φ0 + φs s ) + h(s ) s + φs
+ h(s∗ )
φ + H(s∗ ) = 0.
h (s )
∂φs
∂φs
∂φs s
0

∗

27

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

s

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

x

Figure 6: Changes in steady states and dynamics in response to an increase in φx . The red curves
depict the boundaries between the basins of attraction of the different steady states when φx = 0 and
the green curves show the same boundaries when φx = 0.1.
Therefore,

∂s∗
−h(s∗ )s − H(s∗ )
= 0 ∗
> 0,
∂φs
h (s )(φ0 + φs s∗ ) + 2h(s∗ )φs

where again the inequality is a consequence of Assumption 4. Let us next focus on comparative statics
with respect to the cost function. Clearly γ s , γ s , and cx (·) do not affect the solution of equation (19).
Therefore,

∂s∗
∂s∗
=
= ∇cx (·) s∗ = 0,
∂γ s
∂γ x

(where ∇cx (·) denotes the (Gateaux) derivative of the steady-state level of state capacity with respect
to the cost function of society).
But the marginal cost of increasing capacity affects the location of the steady state. To quantify
this effect, let us implicitly differentiate equation (19) with respect to c0s (δ):
h0 (s∗ )
Therefore,

∂s∗
∂s∗
∂s∗
∗
∗
∗
(φ
+
φ
s
)
+
h(s
)
+
h(s
)
φ = 1.
0
s
∂c0s (δ)
∂c0s (δ)
∂c0s (δ) s
∂s∗
1
= 0 ∗
< 0.
0
∂cs (δ)
h (s )(φ0 + φs s∗ ) + 2h(s∗ )φs

Even though there are unambiguous comparative statics of changes from changes in the output
and cost functions on s∗ and x∗ , it has to be borne in mind that these are the values of state and
civil society capacity in a given steady state. The more important conclusion continues to be the
one already highlighted in Proposition 2, that comparative statics in this model are conditional.
Proposition 2 emphasized this for initial conditions, but they are no less true when we consider
28

changes in the output or cost functions. For instance, an increase in the marginal benefit of the
capacity of civil society on output, φx , increases x∗ as we have just shown. However, such a change
also shifts the boundaries of the basins of attraction of the different steady states as depicted in Figure
6. As a result, an economy that was previously in Region II — the basin of attraction of the steady
state (1, 1) — can now shift to the basin of attraction of the corners steady state (0, x∗ ) in Region III.
Consequently, the long-run state capacity may end up decreasing rather than increasing following an
increase in φx . This reiterates the conclusions of Proposition 2.

5.4

Numerical Results

Figure 6 illustrates how the steady states and the basins of attraction change when we increase φs ,
making the capacity of the state more important for overall output. To draw this figure, we use
exactly the same parameterization as in the simulation reported in Figure 4, which corresponds to
the case in which φx = φs = 0 in terms of the model of this section. We then show how the steady
states and dynamics are affected when we increase φx to .1. Particularly noteworthy are the shifts
in the boundaries between the regions, which show that the same type of conditional comparative
statics highlighted in Section 3.5 in response to shifts in initial conditions now apply when we consider
changes in parameters such as the sensitivity of aggregate surplus to the capacity of the state.
In addition, we also show numerically that the same results as those provided above generalize
even when f is concave. Figure 7 depicts the dynamics of state and civil society when we consider
the concave surplus function,
f (x, s) = .6 + 0.1x0.8 + 0.1s0.8 .
We can see that in this case, the dynamics are very similar to the ones studied in the section where
the surplus function is linear.

6

Direct Transitions between Region I and Region III

Figure 2 demonstrates how in our main model, the state space is divided into three regions, and
Region II always lies between Regions I and III. However, throughout much of pre-modern history
(though notably not in Ancient Greece which we discuss in the next section), we have many examples
of societies approximating our Regions I and III, but relatively fewer examples of Region II. Perhaps
more challengingly for our model, we observe several transitions from Region I directly into Region
III, which would not be possible in our baseline model, since Region II is in-between and should be
traversed. Here we present a simple modification of the model where Region II shrinks, and creates
a subset of the state space (with low levels of state and civil society strength) where Regions I and
III are adjacent. The basic idea is to modify the model such that the economies of scale in the cost
of investment function becomes dependent on relative strengths.
Suppose that the cost functions for the two players take the form




xt − xt−∆
xt − xt−∆
+ δ + [max {γ − xt−∆ , 0} − max {γ − st−∆ , 0}]
+δ ,
Cx (xt , xt−∆ ) = c
∆
∆

29

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

s

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

x

Figure 7: Dynamics when the aggregate output function, f (x, s), is concave.
and

Cs (st , st−∆ ) = c




st − st−∆
st − st−∆
+ δ + [max {γ − st−∆ , 0} − max {γ − xt−∆ , 0}]
+δ ,
∆
∆

where we have made two changes relative to our baseline model. First, we have made c and γ the
same for the two players, which is just for simplicity’s sake. Second and more important, we have
changed the formulation of economies of scale in conflict, so that it is the relative strength of the two
players that matters. In particular, when both x and s are less than γ, the second term in the cost
function becomes simply a function of the gap between x and s. Clearly this leaves the dynamics
when xt > γ and st > γ unchanged. Consider the case in which xt < γ and st < γ. The differential
equations for the strength of society and state can now be written as
ẋ = (c0 )−1 (h(x − s) + x − s) − δ
ṡ = (c0 )−1 (h(s − x) + s − x) − δ.
Therefore, defining a new variable z = x − s, we have
ż = (c0 )−1 (h(z) + z) − (c0 )−1 (h(z) − z).
Or approximating this around z = 0, we have
ż =

2z
c00 (δ)

.

Thus regardless of whether x ≷ s, the gap between these two variables will grow, with either x or s
increasing. Moreover, with x and s sufficiently small, this implies that we converge to one of these
30

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

s

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

x

Figure 8: Dynamics with the relative formulation of increasing returns to scale in the cost function for
investing in capacity for the state and society. We see that shrinking of Region II and the possibility
of direct transitions between Regions I and III.
two variables being zero. Therefore, we can conclude that there exists a neighborhood of (0, 0), such
that starting in this neighborhood, Region II is absent, and the economy will go to either of the
two steady states in Regions I or III. This is depicted in Figure 8, where we use exactly the same
parameterization as in Figure 4, except that we use the cost functions in this section and also set
cx (i) = cs (i) = 9 × i2 , and let γ x = γ s = 0.4. This pattern implies that starting with low values of
state and civil society strength, a society that starts with a weak state could transition directly into
one on the path to a despotic state. However, when we consider societies with sufficiently developed
states and civil societies, transitions from despotic or weak states could take us towards an inclusive
state.

7

Weak, Despotic and Inclusive States in Classical Greece

A revealing example of the divergence of state capacity and institutions is that which took place in
Classical Greece. Existing evidence suggests that at least in the Greek Dark Ages,21 there were few
differences in the institutions of different Greek societies. In the ‘Catalogue of Ships’ in the Iliad,
for example, Homer recounts the forces that united to sail to attack Troy. These involved; Athens;
Sparta (Lacedaemonia); and a collection of cities in the Peloponnese also led by Menelaus the King of
Sparta: Messe, Augeaes, Amyclae and Laas, part of an area known as the Mani. Leaders and people
gathered from all over mainland Greece to join the hunt for Hellen and the subsequent siege of Troy.
21
The standard periodization of Greek history is: the Dark Ages, 1200-750 BC, the Archaic Period, 750-480 BC, and
the Classical Age from 480 to 323 BC (Morris, 2010, p. 100).

31

They shared the same language and religion, thought that the Gods lived on Mount Olympus, and
that Zeus was their King. Although there was plenty of rivalry between Achilles and Agamemnon,
they both traced their ancestry back to the mythical ancestor Hellen — as did all Greeks. They all
grew the same crops — the triad of wheat, olives and grapes. They used the same iron agricultural
technology. They lived in lands that were geographically very similar to each other. They had similar
military technologies and used the same tactics such as the famous hoplite warfare. Homer’s poem
does not suggest there were significant cultural, ethnic or institutional differences between the warriors
from Athens, Sparta and the Mani.22
Yet during the Archaic and Classical periods, there was a dramatic divergence in the nature of
their states and societies. On the one hand, many Greek city states, epitomized by Athens, developed
inclusive states. Others, like Sparta, created despotic states. Still others, like those polities inhabiting
the Mani peninsula of the Peloponnese, never developed proper states at all, and indeed fought tooth
and nail against other states and empires extending their influence into the Mani. These outcomes
bear an obvious resemblance to our three steady states.

7.1

Athens: An Inclusive State

In the century after 600 BC Athens developed a centralized state with a great deal of popular involvement and control.23 This state was forged in the context of a conflict between elites and citizens, as in
our model. Aristotle notes that it emerged in the context of “an extended period of discord between
the upper classes and the citizens” (Aristotle, 1996, II.1), while Plutarch discusses the “long-standing
political dispute, with people forming as many different political parties as there were different kinds
of terrain in the country. There were the Men of the Hills, who were the most democratic party, the
Men of the Plain, who were the most oligarchic, and thirdly, the Men of the Coast, who favored an
intermediate, mixed kind of system” (Plutarch, Solon, 13).
For Athens, the pivotal period in the creation of a far stronger state is bracketed by the reforms
of Solon in 594 BC and those of Cleisthenes in 508/07 BC. Aristotle records that there were eleven
constitutions of Athens up to his time (probably around 330 BC), with Solon’s being the fourth
after the mythical ones of the Ionians and Theseus, and Draco’s first written constitution of 621 BC
(The Constitution of Athens, XLI.2). Solon was made archon, one of the chief executive positions in
Athens, for a year in 594 BC, with a mandate to re-configure institutions. Solon himself observed, in
a preserved fragment of his writings, that his institutional design was intended to create a balance of
power between the rich and the poor:
“To the people I gave as much priviledge as was sufficient for them, neither reducing
nor exceeding what was their due. Those who had power and were enviable for their
22

Though Homer’s poem is supposedly describing Bronze Age society, the standard view amongst scholars is that it
more accurately represents late Dark Age society with which Homer was familiar. For example, we know Bronze Age
polities were quite bureaucratized with writing and ‘palace economies,’ but this is nowhere mentioned in Homer (see
Finley, 1954).
23
All the historical facts we cite here about Athens and Sparta are standard in works on Greek history, see for example
the surveys of Hall (2013), Ober (2105a), Osborne (2009), and Powell (2016). These treatments rest heavily on classical
writers such as Diodorus, Plutarch, and Thucydides, as well as more recent archaeological evidence.

32

wealth I took good care not to injure. I stood casting my strong shield around both
parties and allowed neither to triumph unjustly” Solon quoted in Aristotle (1996, XII.1).
Solon increased the strength of both state and society. From the perspective of the state, first in
significance were his judicial reforms. Solon abolished all of Draco’s laws except one, his homicide
law. As Osborne puts it, the homicide law was “not a law about homicide as such, but about the
extent of the family which can pursue vendetta, and the ways in which conditions can be made safe
for the homicide’s return to the community. It is a law which aims to end the situation where any
killing leads the perpetrator to a life of wandering exile” (Osborne, 2009, p. 176).24 Thus Draco’s
‘constitution’ was really a codification of feuding regulations, something more akin to the Albanian
Kanun, than a real constitution.25 Solon’s laws were very different, and Hall (2013) points out an
interesting feature of the homicide law in that it states that guilt is to be judged by a basileis, an
archaic Homeric word for a ruler which Hall compares to “Big Man” in the ethnographic literature
on political institutions. Hall shows how significant it is in terms of state formation that a “feature
of the earliest laws is the appearance of named offices and magistracies in place of the generic term
basileis.” Bureaucracy began to emerge at the same time as Solon’s laws to implement them and
Solon is attributed with creating a systems of courts known as the Dikasteria as well as re-organized
a pre-existing Athenian judicial institution, the Areopagus.
Second in importance was the reform of the executive. Athenian political system had previously
been oligarchic with the choice of the archons being obscure and likely determined by powerful families.
Solon stipulated that there were to be nine archons. He divided the population into four classes based
on their incomes from land and only men from the top two classes could be chosen as archons (chosen
by lot from a list of people nominated by the four traditional ‘tribes’ of Athens). After serving as
archon, which they could do only once and for a year, a man could serve in the Areopagus.
At the same time, Solon’s laws made society stronger by restoring the rights of Athenian citizens.
At the time many had been forced into debt peonage since “all loans were made on the security of
the person of the debtor until the time of Solon” (Aristotle, 1996, II.2). Solon’s laws made enserfing
an Athenian citizen illegal, eliminating debt peonage, and implemented a land reform by the act of
uprooting the boundary markers of fields. Osborne suggests “the boundary markers will ... have
recorded ... the obligation to pay a sixth of the produce, and in uprooting them Solon would have
been freeing the tenants from landowners, giving them the land they owned, and turning Attica into
the land of small farmers which it was in the classical period” (2009, p. 211). He also eliminated
restrictions on movement and location within Athens.
Second, Solon increased popular control over the newly strengthened state. A popular Assembly,
the Ekklesia, pre-dated Solon and he ruled that all Athenian citizens (non-slave, male) could attend
it. Freeing enserfed Athenians was a critical part of making this institution more democratic. Indeed,
as a consequence of serfdom, Aristotle noted that “the mass of the people ... had virtually no share
in any aspect of government” (The Constitution of Athens, II.3) since they lost their citizenship.
However, while democratizing the Assembly, the Archons, as we noted, were elites. The agenda for
24

For the text of the law: https://www.atticinscriptions.com/inscription/IGI3/104
Which is why it became notorious for punishing every crime with death, something quite common in codes like the
Kanun.
25

33

the Assembly was drawn up by a Council of 400, the Boule, equally representing the four Athenian
tribes, whose membership excluded the lowest income class. Though the poorest people were only
represented in the Assembly, Aristotle observes that “These three seem to be the features of Solon’s
constitution which most favored the people: first and greatest, forbidding loans on security of a
person’s body; second, the possibility of a volunteer seeking justice for one who was wronged; third,
and they say that this particularly strengthened the people, appeal to the court” (The Constitution
of Athens, IX.1). Thus he emphasizes that Solon’s constitution of courts, which guaranteed popular
membership of juries and openness to everyone, was a key aspect of citizen’s control of the state since
“when the people have the right to vote in the courts they control the constitution” (The Constitution
of Athens, IX.1-2).
Third, Solon institutionalized social norms that helped to contain elites. The most important
example is the Hubris Law (Ober, 2005, Chapter 5). This forbade any act of hubris, meaning any
behavior aimed at humiliation and intimidation, against any resident of Attica (the broader region
in which Athens lay). Importantly, people could be charged with acting hubristically towards slaves,
who were thus also protected and people were executed for repeated violations of the law.
Solon’s reforms made the state and society stronger, but they did not stop the contest. After he
left power a series of ‘tyrants’, such as Peisistratos, staged coups and took power. Nevertheless, these
tyrants further strengthened some dimensions of the state. For instance, Peisistratos took a series
of measures to integrate Athens with the countryside in Attica. These included the establishment of
rural circuit judges, a system of roads centered on Athens and the introduction of processions linking
Athens with rural sanctuaries as well as the Great Panathenaea festival. Peisistratos also coined the
first Athenian money.
Ultimately, tyranny collapsed and Cleisthenes was brought to power by a mass popular uprising
against his opponents and their Spartan backers. The reforms he implemented also strengthened both
state and society. With respect to the state, he developed an elaborate fiscal system (see Ober, 2015b,
van Wees, 2013, Fawcett, 2016), which levied a poll tax on metics (resident foreigners), and direct
taxes on the wealthy, who had to pay for festivals or for outfitting warships, a variety of customs tolls
and charges, particularly at the port of Piraeus, and taxes on the silver mines of Attica. Second, the
state began to provide an array of public goods, not just security or coinage, but infrastructure in
the forms of walls, roads and bridges, relief for orphans and the disabled, and prisons. Third, the
state became more bureaucratic and was run by various types of functionaries. Aristotle claims that
in the days of Aristides, probably 480-470 BC, there were 700 men working for the state in Attica
and 700 abroad and in addition 500 guards in the docks and 50 on the Acropolis. The Boule had
authority over expenditure decisions and there were a series of boards of magistrates (usually 10)
which implemented policy. Though these were chosen by lot and served annually, they were aided by
professional and state owned slaves.26 Fourthly, he abolished the four tribes that had provided the
people for Solon’s Boule of 400 and replaced it with a new Boule of 500 composed of people chosen
26

The Athenian state at this time had no professional state prosecutors or police force. In fact prosecutions for
violations of laws had to be brought by private citizens and guilty verdicts had to be collectively enforced (Lanni, 2016).
Gottesman (2014) shows that to be implemented, laws passed by the Assembly had to generate a great deal of consensus
more broadly in society and be implemented by popular force. ‘Popular’ included women, slaves and non-citizens. One
reason this worked so well was the vibrancy of civil society.

34

by lot from ten new political units which replaced the four tribes of Solon’s constitution. These units
were made up of smaller units called demes which were regionally based within Attica. There were
now no class restrictions on membership. The creation of the regional units in itself was a state
building measure that consolidated the initiatives of Peisistratos. Aristotle, for example, notes that
Cleisthenes “made fellow demesmen of those living in each deme so they would not reveal the new
citizen by using a man’s father’s name, but would use his deme in addressing him” (Aristotle, 1996,
XXI.4)). Thus Cleisthenes tried to underpin his new political institutions with new non-kin based
identities.27
Cleisthenes then deepened popular control over the state. Membership of the Boule was restricted
to citizens over the age of 30 and any person could only serve for a year and at most twice in a lifetime.
This implies that most Athenian citizens served at some point in their life. The Boule president was
randomly chosen and served for 24 hours, again giving agenda setting power to any citizen of Athens
irrespective of their wealth or social background. As Aristotle puts it “The people had taken control
of affairs” (Aristotle, 1996, XX.4).
Cleisthenes also formalized the informal institution of ‘ostracism’. Every year the Assembly could
take a vote as to whether or not to ostracize someone. If at least 6,000 people voted in favor of
an ostracism then each citizen got to write the name of a person who they wanted ostracized on a
shard of pottery. Whichever name was written on the most shards was ostracized — banished from
Athens for 10 years. This law, like Solon’s Hubris law, seems to have formalized existing social norms
which were used to discipline elites. Indeed, Aristotle notes about the law “it had been passed by a
suspicion of those in power” (The Constitution of Athens, XXII.3). Even Themistocles, the genius
behind the Athenians victory at Salamis over the Persians, and probably the most powerful man in
Athens at the time, was ostracized for 10 years sometime around 476 BC. Ostracism was used very
sparingly, however, only 15 people were ostracized over the 180 year period when the institution was
in full force, but the threat of ostracism “off the equilibrium path” was a powerful way for citizens to
discipline elites.
The evolution of the Athenian constitution did not stop with Cleisthenes, this was only the sixth of
Aristotle’s eleven constitutions, but it moved steadily towards both greater empowerment of citizens
and a stronger state. This did not happen without conflict. During the Persian wars, the aristocratic
Aeropagus, which Cleisthenes had left alone, took upon itself more power. In response, reforms by
Ephialtes in 462/1 BC stripped it of most of its power. Democracy was overthrown and restored
twice during the Peloponnesian wars, but the trend was towards “increasing power being assumed
by the people. They have made themselves supreme in all fields; they run everything by decrees
of the Ekklesia and by decisions of the Dikasteria (courts) in which the people are supreme” (The
Constitution of Athens, XL.3).
Apart from the formal political institutions and direct measures to strengthen the power of society
relative to elites, there is evidence for social change over time in Athens in the direction of a greater
“public sphere” and also greater social capital (Jones, 1999, Kierstead, 2013). Gottesman (2014, p.
50) discusses the emergence of what he calls “mixed associations” which became institutionalized
after 306 BC, when a right of association emerged “for many groups that before could not express
27

An aspect of state building first studied by Weber (1976).

35

their solidarity publicly.” An earlier institutional innovation, which occurred between 353 and 330
BC, was that of “supplication” whereby people had the right to petition the Assembly and ask for
their action on a particular issue. This practice arose earlier but after this time fully one quarter of
Assembly meetings were given over to dealing with supplicants. Gottesman (2014, p. 103) surveying
the existing inscriptions which resulted from these supplications concludes “they appear to involve
only non-citizens” (see also Forsdyke, 2012).
More broadly there is a lot of evidence that state and society evolved together in Athens. The
nature of Athenian democracy did not remain fixed after 508 BC, and neither did the state. As late
as 337 BC it passed the tyranny law (Teegarden, 2013) to provide citizens with another instrument
to fight against despotism. The dynamics of state and society in Classical Athens fit well into the
inclusive state development path in Region II of our model.

7.2

Sparta: A Despotic State

Like Athens, Sparta had a pivotal moment in the emergence of a strong state, the so-called Great
Rhetra initiated by Lycurgus, and probably around the late 8th century BC (see Finley, 1982, on
the dates). Yet the consolidation of the Spartan state came with a very different relationship with
society.
Like Athens’s reforms under Solon, the Great Rhetra took place in a contest over power and
political institutions. Herodotus says (speaking of the period before the Lycurgian reforms) that
Sparta “had the most disorderly state of all the Greeks” (Herodotus, 1.65.2). Thucydides, similarly,
notes that Sparta was in a “state of civil unrest” (Thucydides, 1.18.1) in the same period. Forsdyke
concludes her analysis by noting (2005, p. 292) “It is safest to conclude, therefore, that both conflict
within the elite and tensions between elites and non-elites were driving forces in the development of
the Spartan political system”.
The reforms of Lycurgus definitively organized Spartan society into three groups. Most important
were the Spartan citizens, the homoioi (equals), also known as Spartiates. These were adult males
over the age of 30 who had gone through the system of agoge (literally meaning leading or guidance),
which involved the formation of collective male age groups, starting from the age of seven, for warrior
training. During adulthood they were members of particular messes and to maintain ones rights as
a Spartan citizen, one had to provide a certain amount of food to the mess. The other classes were
the helots, now reduced to state owned serfs, and the perioikoi who were settled in villages and made
manufactured goods for the Spartiates.28
The institutionalization of this class structure went along with a land reform which divided between
the Spartan citizens the land, particularly that of Messenia, and the helots with it, though the helots
were the property of the state and could not be bought or sold by individual citizens. The produce
of these lands is what Spartans used to provide for their mess.
The state was ruled by the two hereditary kings of the Agiad and the Eurypontid families, who had
religious, judicial, and military roles. They communicated with the oracle at Delphi, presided over
various types of legal cases and led the army into battle. The democratic element of the constitution
28
Finlay describes them as “free men probably enjoying local self-government” but “were subject to Sparta in military
and foreign affairs” (1982, p. 25)

36

was the council of five ephors, elected democratically by the citizens. A ephor could serve for one year,
and only once in a lifetime. The ephors monitored the kings and could depose them for misconduct.
There was another council of 28 elders over the age of 60 plus the two kings known as the Gerousia.
Members of the Gerousia were elected for life and usually seem to have consisted of part of the
royal households in addition to the kings themselves. Finally there was the analogy to the Athenian
Assembly, the Apella which was an assembly of all Spartan citizens.
The type of state that emerged from this process was very different from the Athenian state
however. Though the Great Rhetra created a Spartan state which was militarily powerful (holding
back the Persians at Thermopylae and eventually winning the Peloponnesean Wars), it was less strong
than the Athenian state is several obvious ways. First, it provided far fewer public goods. It coined
no money and made no effort to support trade or mercantile activities which instead were actively
discouraged.29 Second, Sparta had neither the type of bureaucracy that Athens built, nor a fiscal
system. Weapons, for example, were procured directly by fiat from perioikoi while the Athenians
taxed rich people to pay for their fleet.30 Sparta did not build fiscal capacity to finance military
power and instead constructed the Peloponnesean league where they went into a coalition with other
states in the Peloponnese so that they provided troops during wartime. As Morris (2010, p. 155)
puts it
“. . . the Spartans chose a low cost way to concentrate coercive power, outsourcing war
rather than building state capacity, then spent the next century and a half quarreling over
whether or accept its limitations or to restructure their society to build state capacity and
overcome them. The two key issues were the relationship between citizens and helots and
oliganthropia, the decline in citizen numbers.”
Morris here emphasizes a third issue, rather than broadening the citizenship base as Solon and
Cleisthenes had done and trying to free it from kinship to build an Athenian identity, the Great
Rhetra narrowed citizenship. This narrowing of citizens was not just about the definition of helots
and perioikoi. Over time increasing concentration of wealth meant that fewer and fewer Spartiates
could actually provide the food required to stay members of their mess. Indeed, Aristotle noted that,
“some of the Spartan citizens have quite small properties, others have very large ones: hence the
land has passed into the hands of a few ... although the country is able to maintain 1500 cavalry and
30,000 hoplites, the whole number of Spartan citizens fell below 1000.”
A key to thinking about why this might be is that the Great Rhetra did not institutionalize the
power of society the way that Solon or Cleisthenes did. First, and most obvious, the vast mass of the
population, probably around 90%, were reduced to hereditary slavery. Athens of course had slaves
as well, but this was around 25% of the population31 and as we noted slaves were protected by the
rule of law and seem to have even played a role in enforcing the law. In contradistinction, the ephors
declared war on the helots every year and Spartiates were even encouraged to murder them. Second,
29

There was a type of money consisting of iron bars but it was so unwieldy that it was useless as a medium of exchange.
Aristotle says “the revenues of the state are ill-managed; there is no money in the treasury, althought they are
obliged to carry on great wars, and they are unwilling to pay taxes” The Politics, 1271 10.
31
This is the estimate of Morris and Powell, (2006, p. 210) for the 4th century BC. It is possible that it was higher
at the time of Cleisthenes.
30

37

though there was an assembly in Sparta, and though this had to vote on policies formulated by the
kings or the Gerousia, “unlike the Athenian Assembly the Spartans rarely discussed proposals: they
normally only voted (by shouting)” (Morris, 2010, p. 123). The Great Rhetra did not create the
same sorts of democratic institutions which Athens had. Indeed, while the Great Rhetra did endorse
“the final decision-making authority of the dêmos, it also made it fairly explicit that its role was
primarily ratifying proposals formulated by the kings and the aristocratic council ... the nominal
supremacy of the Spartan dêmos was little more than an illusion” Hall (2013, p. 220). Leading
scholar of Sparta Hodkinson (1983, p. 280), sums up his view by stating “for all the uniqueness of
the Spartiates upbringing and way of life [the political system] perpetuated the existence of a typical
Greek aristocracy.”
In terms of our model, in Sparta a state emerged which was much more despotic in the way it
treated a society which was far less strong and organized than Athenian society. Again there was a
contest for power, but it evolved dynamically in a very different way. In terms of our model Sparta
fits into Region I.

7.3

The Mani: A Weak State

While Greece experienced different patterns of state formation in the Classical era, not all parts of
it underwent such dynamics of political institutions. Both Thrace and Scythia to the northeast seem
to have not experienced it until much later and instead stayed as stateless societies based on kinship.
Hall (2013, p. 91) distinguishes between different parts of Greece where the polis, the city state,
emerged first, possibly as a consequence of greater cultural and settlement continuity with Mycenean
Greece. In contradistinction to the polis was the ethnos, which he describes as “a group of people or more generally, a population. Its common identity resided in the bonds of kinship, however fictive,
that were recognized by its members, bolstered no doubt by shared rituals and customs ... while the
population of a polis take their name from an urban center, those populations that are described as
ethnê typically give their name to the general region they inhabit.”
Within the heart of Greece, some ethnê stayed on the fringe of the states attempting to maintain
their independence and statelessness. One was the Mani, located on the Tainaron peninsula in the
Southern Peloponnese. Mani was on the borders of Laconia in Sparta and it is probable that during
Sparta’s heyday, its citizens were mostly perioikoi, though probably with some helot communities as
well (Mexis, 2006, pp. 43-45). As we noted, they are described by Homer as having been mustered
by Menelaus at the time of the Trojan War.
Though they may have lived under the shadow of Sparta historically, the Maniates managed to
have subsequently avoided the creation of centralized authority. They maintained this equilibrium not
just in the Classical period of Greece, but also subsequently under Roman, Byzantine, Venetian and
Ottoman rule. None of these empires were able to exert their authority or rule over the Mani. During
the Roman period they were recognized as the ‘Commonwealth of the Lacedaemonians’ and Mexis
notes “on the Tainaron Peninsular Roman colonizers never established themselves” (2006 p. 92).
With respect to the Ottomans, “The armed Maniati populace fought til the last towards two ends.
The first was to keep the Turks out of Mani. The second was for the individual producer-cultivator
himself personally not to have a bond of subservience with the Turkish feudalist. And on both scores
38

they were successful” (Mexis, 2006, p. 352).
In its stead the society was governed in a very decentralized way by clans and kinship groups
who developed a system of conflict resolution based on feuding and vendetta of a type very similar
to the one we described in Montenegro in the Introduction as well as many other stateless societies.
Mexis notes “During the period of Turkish occupation courts did not exist in Mani; neither did
they exist during the period of the national revolutions of 1821. And neither were there any after
independence” (2006, p. 409). Instead clans resolved disputes and also engaged in prolonged conflicts
(many documented in Mexis, 2006, see also Fermor, 1958).

7.4

Comparison

As we mentioned above, during the Greek Dark Ages there seems to have been little to distinguish
Athens, Sparta and Mani, even if they ended up in dramatically different places. Moving closer to
Solon or the Great Rhetra, the similarities are again evident.32
Yet they diverged, and both elites and citizens made different decisions that led to and intensified
that divergence. For example, while the Spartans were consolidating the dependent status of perioikoi,
“the situation in early sixth century Athens may have been fairly close to the situation in contemporary
Laconia” (Hall, 2013, p. 256) to the extent that something close to the perioikoi, the dependent
artisans of Sparta, existed in Attica. Nevertheless, “In the final decade of the sixth century ... the
city made a choice concerning its perioikic neighbors that was not taken by Sparta” (Hall, 2013, p.
257).
Just as in Athens, where the state-building reforms of Cleisthenes were designed to break down
kinship ties and replace them with new identities, the Great Rhetra was designed to “transfer allegiance away from the family or kinship group to various male groups ... the family, in sum, was
minimized as a unit of either affection or authority, and replaced by overlapping male groupings” (Finlay, 1982, p. 28). But the lost role of the family was taken over by the agoge, something controlled
by elites.
A final interesting point of comparison and divergence is the differing fates of social norms bolstering the control of society over the state. We discussed above Solon’s Hubris law and Cleisthenes’
Ostracism law. There was no such law in Sparta after the Great Rhetra. But the evidence is that
32
Most existing scholarly work focuses not on such variation, but on why Classical Greece was so different from Bronze
Age (Mycenean Greece) or other parts of the Mediterranean basin or the Near East (such as Persia). Seminal work
by Morris (1987, 1996) has argued that the deconcentration of political power after 1200 BC led to the emergence of
much more democratic societies where citizens had relatively greater power compared to elites. Morris tracked the
consequences of this for grave goods and the location and number of graves in addition to the distribution of house sizes.
Though the
evidence is compelling, it does less well at explaining the variation within Greece. This is also true of other arguments
often used in this context such as the democratizing impact of iron technology (Childe, 1942, and Snodgrass, 1980) since
iron was widely used everywhere. Similarly, the argument that the broader access to writing and literacy which came
with the transition from Linear B to Greek, had a democratizing effect (Ober, 2015a) cannot explain the variation we
are interested in. A further argument is that elites did not exercise religious power, which while true again does not
distinguish our three cases. Finally, the same applies to the argument that the creation of hoplite warfare redistributed
power towards citizens. Both the Athenians and the Spartans used hoplites, but significantly in the Spartan case,
because of the organization of the economy, the military equipment of the hoplites was provided by the state, not by
the individual hoplite (Finlay 1982, p. 30). Here the political and social organization of the state probably trumped
any empowering impact military technology or tactics might have had.
See Hodkinson ed. (2009) for a recent collection of essays by Classical scholars that does focus on the differences
between Sparta and other Greek states.

39

such social norms were widespread in Archaic Greece. Forsdyke, for example, argues “In general,
consideration of the evidence from outside Athens suggests that Athenian ostracism was simply one
elaboration of a more generalized Greek practice of using written ballots - whether leaves or potsherds
- as a means of determining a penalty (removal from public office or exile)” (Forsdyke, 2005, p. 285).33
Though Sparta did not use the institution of ostracism in the same way there is evidence of the legacy
of similar institutions which partially lived on even after the Great Rhetra. Forsdyke (2005, Appendix
Three) points out how both Athens and Sparta used exile as a judicial punishment and in Sparta
it was used several times to discipline kings. For example, Leotychidas in 476 BC and Pleistoanax
in 446/5 BC were both exiled for accepting bribes. Given Forsdyke’s arguments about the common
origins of ostracism and exile it seems likely that this use of exile to discipline kings is a residue of
the types of social norms which led to the laws of hubris and ostracism in Athens. That such norms
did not perpetuate themselves after the Great Rhetra may be due to the massive re-organization of
society that this entailed. Thus it is not that Sparta lacked the social norms that the Athenians
had; rather, they were present in a situation where elites were initially more powerful. Hence after
the Great Rhetra, instead of these social norms being institutionalized and thus strengthened, as in
Athens, they were instead significantly eroded, partially surviving only in the judicial instrument of
exile.
Just as there were many similarities between Athens and Sparta, so there were between these
two societies and the Mani. We noted for example that Draco’s Homicide Law was a codification of
feuding regulations suggesting that the institutional equilibrium in Athens at that time was not so
different from that of Mani. Yet Solon’s reforms initiated a transition towards greater state capacity.
This process is in fact captured in Aeschylus’ trilogy The Orestia, which is the classic depiction of
the transition from a stateless society where conflicts are resolved by feuding and revenge (see Finlay,
1954, for a characterization) to one based on law, modelled after Aeschylus’ own Athens. In the first
play, Clytaemnestra murders her husband Agamemnon after his return from the Trojan wars. In
the second play, The Libation Bearers, Agamemnon’s son, Orestes, murders his mother in revenge.
The chorus eggs him on with the words “stroke for bloody stroke be paid, The one who acts must
suffer, Three generations strong the word resounds.” (The Libation Bearers, 315-321). Here Aeschylus
depicts a society based on the feud, on ‘retribution’ and ‘stroke after bloody stroke’, lacking centralized
authority. But in the final play, The Eumenides, Orestes is sent by the god Apollo to Athens pursued
by the Furies seeking revenge for his killing of Clytaemnestra. But in Athens, the patron goddess
Athena breaks the cycle of revenge by creating a court which judges Orestes. The nature of the feud
also seems to be very ancient in Mani society. Mexis points out the Mani vendetta, or ‘chosia’ bares
a strong resemblance to surviving depictions of the Dorian ‘krypteia’:
“Maniati ‘chosia’ has to be a survival of the methodology of a ‘krypteia’ that was
preserved in the traditions of the armed clan” (Mexis, 2006, p. 382).
Moreover, “Such a supposition is supported also by the fact that the vendetta in Mani was a
means for the solution of the differences between the “powerful”. Thus he argues that there are very
33
Archaeological evidence attests to ostracism being used as an institution outside of Athens in Argos, Cyrene (in
Libya), Megara, Syracuse and Tauric Chersonesus (in the Crimea), see Robinson (2011).

40

deep roots of the vendetta in Mani stretching back to the Classical period.34
According to our theory one can understand the divergence of Athens, Sparta and the Mani as a
consequences of conflict between the state and citizens, but in a situation where there were initially
differences, possibly small ones, in the balance of power between state and citizens. To understand
the divergence of Athens and Sparta, for example, our model suggests one should look for differences
in the balance of power between citizens and elites. A natural interpretation is that social norms
regulating the exercise of power by elites and hierarchy were stronger in Athens than in Sparta, and
even stronger in Mani.
There seem to be a number of reasons for believing that this was indeed the case. Consider first
Athens and Sparta.
First, potentially important is that the Spartans were Dorians who migrated into the Peloponnese
from central Greece at some point in the early Dark Ages. A consequence of this migration was the
enslavement of helots as they expanded out of Laconia where they first settled. Thus one can imagine
the Spartans a bit like colonial societies elsewhere in the world, for example in Latin America after
1492. Coming from the outside, like the Spanish in Latin America, the Spartans found densities of
indigenous peoples and created institutions to exploit them. As everywhere in history, this seems to
have created the basis for hierarchical elite dominated societies. It is possible that the problem of
controlling and exploiting a large population of slaves made the society more militarized and gave
more power to kings and elites who were useful in organizing the militarized suppression of the helots.
Indeed, Rhodes (2011, p. 4) notes that “Originally Sparta’s culture had been like its neighbours,” and
he goes on to argue that one source of Spartan institutional distinctiveness was indeed that because
of “the conquest of Messenia” there was a “need to keep the subject population under control”. Like
Rhodes, Hall (2013, p. 230) notes “Sparta ... had not originally been so distinct from other Greek
poleis. There must have been some sort of turning point”; he proposes that what distinguishes Sparta
was the fact that the territory over which it ruled was “large” (p. 232).35
Second, though the government of Athens before Solon appears to have been oligarchic, Athens
did not have the type of hereditary kings that Sparta did, and elites could not dominate society. That
elites were more powerful in Sparta is attested to in Plutarch’s life of Lycurgus, where he notes that
Soos, supposedly an ancestor of Lycurgus, was the Spartan king who enslaved the helots. Soos’ son,
Eurypon
“appears to have been the first king to relax the excessive absolutism of his fellow-lords,
seeking favor and popularity with the multitude” (Lycurgus, 2).
There was no such “excessive absolutism” to relax in Archaic Athens, nor anything like a king
who could have implemented a mass enslavement.36
34
Nevertheless, due to the nature of the society, the Mani in the Classical period are obviously not documented in
the same way that Athens and Sparta are, so the claim for the historical roots of the clan based feuding society, while
plausible, is conjectural.
35
In practice the territory of Sparta was about 80% larger than that of Attica.
36
Plutarch describes another telling incident. The Spartan assembly, known as the Apella, which existed prior to the
Great Rhetra, used its right to sanction the Spartan kings (of which there were two). During the First Messenian War
of 743-722 BC, in the midst of a revolt by the helots, the slave class of Sparta, the kings Polydoros and Theopobos
attacked citizens’ rights by promulgating a law such that “if the people should adopt a distorted motion, the senate and

41

Another final potentially important factor is that the Spartan capital never really became an
urban center like Athens, but remained an agglomeration of four, subsequently five, separate villages
(see Cartledge, 2002). This perhaps made the type of mass democratic participation built in the
Athenian state less feasible and harder to organize and again strengthened the power of elites.
Thus the evidence is consistent with the idea that the despotic state emerged in Sparta based on the
exploitation of helots, and to a lesser extent perioikoi, as a consequence of the initial balance of power
favoring elites. This allowed a relatively pro-elite constitution to be constructed by Lycurgus, albeit
with some notable elements of checks and balances. Equally significant was the social organization
and socialization of Spartiates via the agoge which seems to have eliminated the types of resources
the citizens of Athens had available to discipline elites.
What distinguished the Mani from these other cases to which it seems to have been so historically
similar? In our theory this is a consequence of society being more powerful than in the Athenian case.
There were no elites with institutionalized power in Mani like the Spartan kings or even Athenian
oligarchs who filled the positions of Archons prior to their reform under Solon. Rather, there was
a balance of power between different clans and families. Centralization would have involved one
clan dominating the others and as is well documented in ethnographically observed societies, such
a move would have been stringently opposed by other clans who feared being dominated. In some
circumstances, of course, such state formation does take place, often when some clan gains a military
or other advantage over the other. But in many parts of the world a stateless stalemate occurs.
The long persistence of this in Mani is not unusual. For example, in West Africa, at the time of
the scramble for Africa possibly one third of people lived in stateless societies (Curtin, Feierman,
Thompson and Vansina, 1995). Many of these, such as the Tiv in Nigeria studied by Bohannan
(1958), share many features with the Mani or Montenegrins, and in all of these cases, social norms
and practices aimed at limiting political hierarchy and inequality of political power in society appear
to play a central role.

8

Conclusion

There is a great deal of diversity in the nature of states in the world today, in particular in the extent
to which they have capacity to fulfill basic functions, such as raise tax revenues, establish a monopoly
of violence or effectively regulate society. But societies, not just states, also differ enormously. Some
are highly mobilized and organized collectively, with high levels of ‘social capital’ while others are
not. In this paper we have developed a simple model to understand the variation in state capacity,
arguing that states endogenously acquire capacity in a dynamic contest with society. At the heart
of our model is the notion that elites that control states must contest with society (non-elites) for
control over political power, resources and rents. If the state accumulates capacity — what we called
‘strength’ — then this helps it win this contest. But in response society can also accumulate strength,
for example in the form of collective organization and social norms regulating the exercise of power
by elites, and these help it contest against the state.
kings shall have power of adjournment” (Lycurgus, 6) in effect shutting down the Apella if it did something the kings
didn’t like.

42

We showed that a simple model incorporating this intuition had three very distinct stable steady
states with very different constellations of state society relations. In one steady state, which we called
a despotic state, the state acquired far more strength than society, in a sense dominating it. In the
reverse situation, where society accumulates more strength than the state, we have a weak state.
Finally, and arguably most interestingly, a rough balance of power between state and society leads
to the emergence of an inclusive state. Our model clarifies how the competition between state and
society in this case leads to a type of state with the greatest capacity. Despotic states, because they
can easily dominate society, have less reason to accumulate as much power and capacity.

Bibliography
Acemoglu, Daron (2005) “Politics and Economics in Weak and Strong States,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 52, 1199-1226.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2012) Why Nations Fail, New York: Crown.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2018) Balance of Power: The Race between
State and Society, manuscript in preparation.
Acemoglu, Daron, James A. Robinson and Rafael J. Santos-Villagran (2013) “The
Monopoly of Violence: Evidence from Colombia,” Journal of the European Economic Association,
11(s1), 5–44.
Acemoglu, Daron, James A. Robinson and Ragnar Torvik (2016) “The Political Agenda
Effect and State Centralization,” NBER Working Paper #22250.
Acemoglu, Daron, Davide Ticchi and Andrea Vindigni (2011) “Emergence and Persistence of Inefficient States,” Journal of European Economic Association, 9(2), 177-208.
Aghion, Philippe, Nick Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith and Peter Howitt
(2005) “Competition and Innovation: An Inverted-U Relationship,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
120, 2, 701-728
Aghion, Philippe and Rachel Griffith (2008) Competition and Growth: Reconciling Theory
and Evidence, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Anderson, Perry (1974) Lineages of the Absolutist State, London: Verso.
Aristotle (1996) The Politics and the Constitution of Athens, New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Battaglini, Marco, Salvatore Nunnari and Thomas Palfrey (2014) “Dynamic Free Riding
with Irreversible Investments,” American Economic Review, 104(9), 2858-2871.
Baye, Michael R, Dan Kovenock and Casper G. de Vries (1996) “The All-Pay Auctions
with Complete Information,” Economic Theory, 8, 291–305.
Benabou, Roland, Davide Ticchi and Andrea Vindigni (2015) “Forbidden Fruits: The
Political Economy of Science, Religion and Economic Growth” NBER Working Paper, 21105.
Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson (2009) “The Origins of State Capacity: Property
Rights, Taxation and Politics,” American Economic Review, 99(4), 1218-44.
Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson (2011) The Pillars of Prosperity, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

43

Blanton, Richard and Lane Fargher (2008) Collective Action in the Formation of PreModern States, New York: Springer.
Blickel, Peter (1992) “Das Gesetz der Eidgenossen. Überlegungen zur Entstehung der Scweiz,
1200-1400,” Historiche Zeitschrift, 255, 13, 561-586.
Boehm, Christopher (1986) Blood Revenge: The Enactment and Management of Conflict in
Montenegro and Other Tribal Societies, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Bohannan, Paul (1958) “Extra-processual Events in Tiv Political Institutions”, American Anthropologist, 60, 1-12.
Braudel, Fernand (1996) The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip
II, Volume I, Berkeley: University of California Press.
Brewer, John (1990) The Sinews of Power: War, Money and the English State, 1688-1783,
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Cao, Dan (2014) “Racing under Uncertainty: Boundary Value Problem Approach” Journal of
Economic Theory, 151, 508-527.
Cartledge, Paul (2002) The Spartans, New York: Macmillan.
Che, Yeon-Koo and Ian Gale (2000) “Difference-Form Contests and the Robustness of AllPay Auctions,” Games and Economic Behavior, 30, 22–43.
Childe, V. Gordon (1942) What Happened in History, London: Penguin Books.
Church, Clive H. and Randolph C. Head (2013) A Concise History of Switzerland, New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, Christopher (2009) Iron Kingdom: The Rise and Downfall of Prussia, 1600-1947,
Cambridge: Bellknap Press.
Corchón, Luis (2007) “The Theory of Contests: A Survey,” Review of Economic Design, 11,
69–100.
Cornes, Richard and Roger Hartley (2005) “Asymmetric Contests with General Technologies,” Economic Theory, 26(4), 923-946.
Curtin, Philip, Steven Feierman, Leonard Thompson and Jan Vansina (1995) African
History: From Earliest Times to Independence, 2nd Edition, Edinburgh: Pearson.
Dechenaux, Emmanuel, Dan Kovenock, and Roman M. Sheremeta (2015) “A Survey
of Experimental Research on Contest, All-Pay Auctions and Ornaments” Experimental Economics
18(4), 609-669.
Dharmapalaa, Dhammika, Joel Slemrod and John D. Wilson (2011) “Tax Policy and
the Missing Middle: Optimal Tax Remittances with Firm-Level Administrative Costs” Journal of
Public Economics, 95, 9–10, 1036–1047.
Dixit, Avinash (1987) “Strategic Behavior in Contests,” American Economic Review, 77(5),
891–898.
Djilas, Milovan (1958) Land without Justice, New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Djilas, Milovan (1966) Njegoš, New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, Inc.
Durham, M. Edith (1928) Some Tribal Origins, Laws and Customs of the Balkans, London:
George Allen and Unwin.
Evans, Richard J. (2005) The Coming of the Third Reich, New York: Penguin.
44

Fawcett, Peter (2016) “When I Squeeze You with Eisphorai ”: Taxes and Tax Policy in Classical
Athens,” Hesperia: The Journal of the American School of Classical Studies at Athens, 85, 1, 153-199.
Fermor, Patrick Leigh (1958) Mani: Travels in the Southern Peloponnese, London: John
Murray.
Finley, Moses I. (1954) The World of Odysseus, New York: Chatto and Windus.
Finley, Moses I. (1982) “Sparta and Spartan Society,” in his Economy and Society in Ancient
Greece, New York: Viking.
Flannery, Kent V. (1999) “Process and Agency in Early State Formation,” Cambridge Archaeological Journal, 9(1), 3-21.
Flannery, Kent V. and Joyce Marcus (2014) The Creation of Inequality: How Our Prehistoric Ancestors Set the Stage for Monarchy, Slavery, and Empire, Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Forsdyke, Sara (2005) Exile, Ostracism and Democracy: The Politics of Expulsion in Ancient
Greece, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Forsdyke, Sara (2012) Slaves Tell Tales: And Other Episodes in the Politics of Popular Culture
in Ancient Greece, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Francois, Patrick (2002) Social Capital and Economic Development, New York: Routledge.
Fudenberg, Drew, Richard Gilbert, Joseph E. Stiglitz and Jean Tirole (1983) “Preemption, leapfrogging and competition in patent races,” European Economic Review, 22 (1), 3-31.
Fukuyama, Francis (2011) The Origins of Political Order: From Prehuman Times to the
French Revolution, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Fukuyama, Francis (2014) Political Order and Political Decay: From the Industrial Revolution
to the Globalization of Democracy, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Gauthier, Stéphane (2013) “Optimal Tax Base with Administrative Fixed,” International Tax
and Public Finance, 20, 6, 961–973.
Gennaioli, Nicola and Hans-Joachim Voth (2015) “State Capacity and Military Conflict,”
Review of Economic Studies, 82 (4), 1409-1448.
Gerschenkron, Alexander (1943) Bread and Democracy in Germany, Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Gottesman, Alex (2014) Politics and the Street in Democratic Athens, New York:Cambridge
University Press.
Grossman, Gene and Carl Shapiro (1987) “Dynamic R&D Competition,” Economic Journal,
97, 386, 372-87.
Grossman, Herschel I and Minseong Kim (1996) “Predation and Accumulation” Journal
of Economic Growth, 3, 333-350.
Habermas, Jürgen (1991) The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry
into a Category of Bourgeois Society, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Hall, Jonathan M. (2013) A History of the Archaic Greek World: Ca. 1200-479 BCE, 2nd
Edition.
Harris, Christopher and John Vickers (1985) “Perfect Equilibrium in a Model of a Race,”
Review of Economic Studies 52 (2), 193-209.
45

Harris, Christopher and John Vickers (1987) “Racing with Uncertainty,” Review of Economic Studies, 54 (1), 1-21.
Hechter, Michael and William Brustein (1980) “Regional Modes of Production and Patterns
of State Formation in Western Europe,” American Journal of Sociology, 85(5), 1061-1094.
Herodotus (2003) The Histories, Reissue Edition, New York: Penguin.
Herbst, Jeffrey I. (2000) States and Power in Africa, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Hirshleifer, Jack (1989) “Conflict and Rent-Seeking Success Functions: Ratio Versus Difference
Models of Relative Success,” Public Choice, 63, 101–112.
Hintze, Otto (1975) Historical Essays of Otto Hintze, F. Gilbert ed., New York: Oxford University Press.
Hodkinson, Stephen (1983) “Social Order and the Conflict of Values in Classical Sparta,”
Chiron, 13, 239-281.
Hodkinson, Stephen ed. (2009) Sparta: Comparative Approaches, Swansea: Classical Press
of Wales.
Huntington, Samuel (1968) Political Order in Changing Societies, New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Jones, N. F. (1999) The Associations of Classical Athens: The Response to Democracy, New
York: Oxford University Press.
Kierstead,
Democracy

in

James

(2013)

Classical

Athens,”

“A

Community

Unpublished

of

PhD

Communities:
dissertation,

Associations
Stanford

and

University,

https://purl.stanford.edu/vs820tt0644
Konrad, Kai (2009) Strategy and Dynamics in Contests, New York: Oxford University Press.
Konrad, Kai (2012) “Dynamic Contests and the Discouragement Effect,” Revue d’économie
politique, 122, 2, 233-256.
Krishna, Vijay and John Morgan (1997) “An Analysis of the War of Attrition and the
All-Pay Auction,” Journal of Economic Theory, 72, 343-362.
Levhari, David and Leonard J. Mirman (1980) “The Great Fish Were: An Example Using
Nash-Cournot Solution,” Bell Journal of Economics, 11(1), 322-334.
Lockwood, Benjamin and Jonathan Thomas (2002) “Gradualism Versus Irreversibility,”
Review of Economic Studies, 69(1), 339-356.
Loury, Glenn (1979) “Market Structure and Innovation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 93,
3, 395-410.
Mahdavy, Hossein (1970) “The Patterns and Problems of Economic Development in Rentier
States: the Case of Iran,” in M. A. Cook e.d. Studies in the Economic History of the Middle East,
London: Oxford University Press.
Mann, Michael (1986) The Sources of Social Power: Volume 1, A History of Power from the
Beginning to AD 1760, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mann, Michael (1993) The Sources of Social Power: Volume 2, The Rise of Classes and
Nation-States, 1760-1914, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Marchal, Guy (2006) “Die ‘alipine Gesellschaft’”, in Geschichte der Schweiz und der Schweizer,
Zurich: Schwabe.
46

Mayshar, Joram, Omer Moav and Zvika Neeman (2011) “Transparency, Appropriability
and the Early State”, CEPR Discussion Paper 8548.
Marwell, Gerald and Pamela Oliver (1993) The Critical Mass in Collective Action : A
Micro-social Theory, New York, Cambridge University Press.
Morerod, Jean-Daniel and Justin Favrod (2014) “Entstehung eines sozialen Raumes (5.-13.
Jahrhundert),” in Georg Kreis ed. Die Geschichte der Schweiz, Basel: Schwabe.
Mexis, Dimos N. (2006) Mani and the Maniates, Bloomington: Authorhouse.
Migdal, Joel (1988) Strong Societies and Weak States: State-Society Relations and State Capabilities in the Third World, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Migdal, Joel (2001) State-in-Society: Studying How States and Societies Transform and Constitute One Another, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Moore, Barrington (1966) Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Lord and Peasant
in the Making of the Modern World, Cambridge: Beacon Press.
Morris, Ian (1987) Burial and Ancient Society: The Rise of the Greek City State, New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Morris, Ian (1996) “The Strong Principle of Equality and the Archaic Origins of Greek Democracy,” in Joshua Ober and Charles Hedrick eds. Demokratia: A Conversation on Democracies,
Ancient and Modern, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Morris, Ian (2010) “The Greater Athenian State,” in Ian Morris and Walter Scheidel eds. The
Dynamics of Ancient Empires: State Power from Assyria to Byzantium, New York: Oxford University
Press.
Morris, Ian and Barry B. Powell (2006) The Greeks, Upper Saddle River: Pearson.
Ober, Josiah (2005) Athenian Legacies: Essays in the Politics of Going on Together, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Ober, Josiah (2015a) The Rise and Fall of Classical Greece, New York: Penguin.
Ober, Josiah (2015b) “Classical Athens [fiscal policy],” in Walter Scheidel and Andrew Monson
eds. Fiscal Regimes and Political Economy of Early States, New York: Cambridge University Press.
O’Brien, Patrick K. (2011) “The Nature and Historical Evolution of an Exceptional Fiscal
State and its Possible Significance for the Precocious Commercialization and Industrialization of the
British Economy from Cromwell to Nelson,” Economic History Review, 64, 408-46.
Osborne, Robin (2009) Greece in the Making 1200–479 BC, New York: Routledge.
Pearson, Paul T. (2000) “Increasing Returns, Path Dependence, and the Study of Politics,”
American Political Science Review, 94, 2, 251-267.
Pincus, Steven C.A. and James A. Robinson (2016) “Wars and State-Making Reconsidered:
The Rise of the Developmental State,” Annales, Histoire et Sciences Sociales, 71(1), 7-35.
Plutarch (2009) Greek Lives, New York: Oxford University Press.
Powell, Anton (2016) Athens and Sparta: Constructing Greek Political and Social History from
478 BC, 3rd Edition, New York: Routledge
Putnam, Robert H. (1993) Making Democracy Work, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Rhodes, Peter J. (2011) A History of the Classical Greek World: 478 - 323 BC, Oxford:
Wiley-Blackwell.
47

Robinson, Eric W. (2011) Democracy Beyond Athens, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Saylor, Ryan (2014) State Building in Boom Times: Commodities and Coalitions in Latin
America and Africa, New York: Oxford University Press.
Scott, James C. (2010) The Art of Not Being Governed, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Siegel, Ron (2009) “All-Pay Contests,” Econometrica, 77, 1, 71–92.
Simić, Andrei (1967) “The Blood Feud in Montenegro,” University of California at Berkeley,
Kroeber Anthropological Society Special Publications 1.
Skaperdas, Stergios (1992) “Cooperation, Conflict, and Power in the Absence of Property
Rights,” American Economic Review, 82, 4, 720-739.
Skaperdas, Stergios (1996) “Contest Success Functions,” Economic Theory, 7, 283–290.
Slater, Daniel (2010) Ordering Power: Contentious Politics and Authoritarian Leviathans in
Southeast Asia, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Snodgrass, Anthony M. (1980) Archaic Greece: The Age of Experiment, Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Spruyt, Hendrik (2009) “War, Trade and State Formation,” in Carles Boix and Susan C.
Stokes ed. The Oxford Handbook of Comparative Politics, New York: Oxford University Press.
Steinberg, Jonathan (2016) Why Switzerland? New York: Cambridge University Press.
Teegarden, David (2013) Death to Tyrants!: Ancient Greek Democracy and the Struggle against
Tyranny, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Thucydides (1972) History of the Peloponnesian War, Revised Edition, New York: Penguin.
Tilly, Charles ed. (1975) The Formation of National States in Western Europe, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Tilly, Charles (1990) Coercion, Capital and European States, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Tilly, Charles (1995) Popular Contention in Great Britain, 1758 to 1834, London: Paradigm
Publishers.
Tullock, Gordon (1980) “Efficient rent seeking,” in James M. Buchanan, Robert D. Tollison
and Gordon Tullock eds., Towards a Theory of the Rent Seeking Society, College Station: Texas A&M
University Press.
Walter, Wolfgang (1998) Ordinary Differential Equations, New York: Springer-Verlag.
van Wees, Hans (2013) Ships and Silver, Taxes and Tribute: A Fiscal History of Archaic
Athens, New York: I.B. Taurus.
Weber, Eugen (1976) Peasants into Frenchmen, Stanford: Stanford University Press.

48

Online Appendix
Proof of Proposition 4
Proof of Proposition 4. The proof of this proposition follows directly from the proofs of Propositions 1 and 3, with only minor changes to Lemma 4, which we provide next, ruling out the stability
of three different types of steady states. We again treat each type separately.
Type 1: x ∈ (0, γ x ) and s ∈ (0, γ s ).
The optimality conditions in such a steady state are
h(s − x)(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + H(s − x)φs = c0s (δ) + γ s − s
h(x − s)(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + H(x − s)φx = c0x (δ) + γ x − x.
Local dynamics are in turn given by
h(s − x)(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + H(s − x)φs = c0s (ṡ + δ) + γ s − s
h(x − s)(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + H(x − s)φx = c0x (ẋ + δ) + γ x − x.
Since the steady-state levels of state and civil society strength are defined by equality conditions
in this case, local dynamics can be determined from the linearized system, with characteristic matrix
given by
1
[h0 (·)(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + 2h(·)φs + 1]
c00
s (δ)
1
[h0 (·)(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + h(·)(φs − φx )]
c00
x (δ)

1
[−h0 (·)(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + h(·)(φx − φs )]
c00
s (δ)
1
[−h0 (·)(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + 2h(·)φx + 1]
c00
x (δ)

!
,

where we wrote h(·) or h0 (·) instead of h(s − x) and h0 (s − x) in order to save space (and we will adopt
this shorthand whenever we write matrices or long expressions below). From part 2 of Assumption
30 , we can show that the trace of this matrix is positive. In particular, the trace is given by
1
1
[h0 (·)(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + 2h(·)φs + 1] + 00 [−h0 (·)(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + 2h(·)φx + 1].
c00s (δ)
cx (δ)
Using Assumption 30 , this expression is positive if
h0 (s − x)(c00s (δ) − c00x (δ))(φ0 + φx x + φs s) ≤ (c00x (δ) + c00s (δ))(1 + 2h(s − x)(φs + φx )).

(20)

Assumption 20 ensures that
c00s (δ) − c00x (δ) ≤

c00x (δ)(1 + 2h(s − x)(φs + φx ))
,
|h0 (s − x)| (φ0 + φx + φs )

which is a sufficient condition for (20), establishing that at least one of the eigenvalues is positive,
and we have asymptotic instability.
Type 2: x ∈ (γ x , 1) and s ∈ (0, γ s ), or x ∈ (0, γ x ) and s ∈ (γ s , 1). Consider the first of these,
h(s − x)(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + H(s − x)φs = c0s (δ) + γ s − s
h(x − s)(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + H(x − s)φx = c0x (δ).

A-1

Now, once again, local dynamics can be determined from the linearized system, with characteristic
matrix
1
[h0 (·)(φ0
c00
s (δ)
1
[−h0 (·)(φ0
c00
x (δ)

+ φx x + φs s) + 2h(·)φs + 1]
+ φx x + φs s) + h(·)(φs − φx )]

1
[−h0 (·)(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + h(·)(φx − φs )]
c00
s (δ)
1
[h0 (·)(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + 2h(·)φx ]
c00
x (δ)

!
.

The trace of this matrix can now be computed as
1
c00s (δ)
+

[h0 (s − x)(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + 2hφs + 1]

1
c00x (δ)

[h0 (x − s)(φ0 + φx x + φs s) + 2h(x − s)φx ].

which is positive if
h0 (s − x)(c00s (δ) − c00x (δ))(φ0 + φx x + φs s) ≤ (c00x (δ) + c00s (δ))(2h(s − x)(φx + φs )) + c00x (δ).
The same argument as in the proof of Type 1 establishes that this condition follows from Assumption
2’, and thus at least one of the eigenvalues is positive and the steady state in question is asymptotically
unstable. The argument for the case where x ∈ (0, γ x ) and s ∈ (γ s , 1) is analogous.
Type 3: x = 1 and s < 1 or s = 1 and x < 1.
Let us prove the first case. Such a steady state would require
h(1 − s)(φ0 + φx + φs s) + H(1 − s)φx ≥ c0x (δ)
h(s − 1)(φ0 + φx + φs s) + H(s − 1)φs = c0s (δ) + max{0, γ s − s}.
We distinguish between s ≤ γ s and s > γ s . Consider the first one of these. Consider a perturbation
to s + εs for εs > 0 (it is sufficient to consider perturbations that maintain x constant). Then the
local dynamics of s are given by:
ṡ =

1
c00s (δ)

[h0 (s − 1)(φ0 + φx + φs s) + 2h(s − 1)φs + 1]εs .

From Assumption 30 , h0 (s − 1) > 0, the conflict capacity of the state locally diverges from this steady
state, establishing asymptotic instability. Consider next the second possibility. In this case, for s + εs ,
we have
ṡ =

1
c00s (δ)

[h0 (s − 1)(φ0 + φx + φs s) + 2h(s − 1)φs ]εs ,

which is also locally asymptotically unstable. The other case is proved identically.

A Model of Economic and Political Investments
In this part of the Appendix, we provide a more detailed model meant to clarify what the strength
of state and society stand for, and show that this model can be mapped to the more reduced-form
set up we use in our main analysis.
Suppose that society consists of a state (ruler) and a number of small producers, each with the
production function
F (gt , kit ),

A-2

where gt is a measure of public good provision (such as infrastructure, bureaucratic services or law
enforcement) at time t, and kit designates the capital investment of producer i.
The cost of public good investment by the state depends on what Mann (1986) refers to “infrastructural power” of the state, or simply the “presence” of the state, denoted by st . Suppressing time
indices when this causes no confusion, we write this cost as
Γg (g | s).
This dependence captures the fact that investing in public good provision will be much more difficult
for the state when it is not otherwise powerful. There is also a separate cost of increasing the
infrastructural power of the state as specified in the text. In addition, as we discuss below, this
infrastructural power of the state will also determine the state’s relationship with society.
The producers, on the other hand, individually choose their capital level, but also jointly choose
the extent to which they coordinate, which we denote by x. A higher degree of coordination among
the producers might (but need not) impact their costs of investing in capital, which we write as
Γk (k | x),
and this dependence might reflect the fact that a greater degree of coordination among the producers
enables them to help each other or develop greater trust in production relations or internalize some
externalities. More importantly, as discussed in the Introduction, such coordination impacts how
they can deal with the state’s demands. More broadly, this degree of coordination may also stand
for certain social norms that society develops for managing political hierarchy as our historical cases
also emphasize. We assume that the cost of investing in x is as specified in the text.
Note that the assumptions that only s and x, and not g and k, build on their non-depreciated
stock is for simplicity, and facilitate the comparison with our reduced-form model in the text.
The political game takes the following form: first, the state and civil society simultaneously choose
their investments, g and k. Then, the state announces a tax rate τ on the output of the producers.
If the producers accept this tax rate, it is collected and the remainder is kept by the producers. If
they refuse to recognize this tax rate, there will be a conflict between state and society, the outcome
of which will be determined by s and x in a manner similar to the conflict in the text. In particular,
the state will win this conflict if
s−x>σ
and can extract the entire output of producers, while if the inequality is reversed, society wins, and
the state will not be able to collect any taxes. We assume, as in the text, that σ has a distribution
given by the distribution function H.
Here we focus on the economy in discrete time for simplicity and discuss the equilibrium in a single
period. We also suppress time arguments to simplify the notation. The equilibrium can be solved by
backward induction within the period, starting from the tax decision of the state. Given the conflict
technology we have just specified, it is clear that if the tax rate τ is greater than the likelihood of the
state winning the conflict, H(s − x), then there will be a conflict. We may thus focus, without loss of
any generality, on the case in which τ = H(s − x).
A-3

Then the state’s maximization problem can be written as
H(s − x)F (g, k) − Γg (g | s) − C̃s (s, s−∆ ),
where C̃s is a cost function for the power of the state similar to the one specified in the text, s−∆
denotes last period’s state strength, and k is the common physical capital investment level of all
agents. The solution to this problem for g can be summarized as
g = g ∗ (x, k, s).
Note that even though s−∆ influences s, it does not directly impact the choice of g.
Similarly, recalling that 1 − H(s − x) = H(x − s), the maximization problem of citizens can be
written as
H(x − s)F (g, k) − Γk (k | x) − C̃x (x, x−∆ ),
with solution
k = k ∗ (x, g, s).
Solving this equation together with the equation for g, we can eliminate dependence on the economic
decision of the other party, and obtain an equilibrium (which may not be unique), expressed as
g = g ∗∗ (x, s),
and
k = k ∗∗ (x, s).
Substituting these into the payoff functions, we obtain a simplified maximization problem for both
players, essentially replicating our reduced-form model in the text, with the major difference that the
cost functions now also depend on the action of the other player. In particular, the relevant equations
become:
H(s − x)f (x, s) − Cs (s, s−∆ | x),
and
H(x − s)f (x, s) − Cx (x, x−∆ | s),
where
f (x, s) = F (g ∗∗ (x, s), k ∗∗ (x, s)),
Cs (s, s−∆ | x) = Γg (g ∗∗ (x, s) | s) + C̃s (s, s−∆ )
and
Cx (x, x−∆ | s) = Γk (k ∗∗ (x, s) | s) + C̃x (x, x−∆ ).
The only complication relative to the model in the text is that because the cost functions depend on
the equilibrium action choices of the other player, there may be non-uniqueness issues, and thus the
relevant statements now will have to be conditional on a particular equilibrium selection.

A-4

Alternative Contest Functions
As noted in the text, the specification of the contest between the state and citizens we have used
so far is not special, and its main properties are shared with general contest functions. To see this,
consider a contest function such that the payoff of the state is
k(s)
,
k(s) + k(x) + η
while that of society is
k(x)
,
k(s) + k(x) + η
where k(·) is an increasing, differentiable function, and η ≥ 0 is a constant. In this case, the marginal
return to increasing investment for the state is (going directly to the continuous time to economize
on space)
k 0 (st )(k(xt ) + η)
,
(k(s) + k(x) + η)2
and the expression for society is also similar. The cross-partial derivative of this expression, showing
us how this marginal return changes when society increases its investment, is
k 0 (xt )k 0 (st )(k(st ) − k(xt ) − η)
.
(k(s) + k(x) + η)3
Notice that when η = 0, this has the same property as our main specification; it is positive when
st > xt , and negative when st < xt . When η > 0, the same result holds provided that st is sufficiently
larger than xt .

A-5

